* 1300319
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Counteracting Stochastic Delays Using Anticipation and Memory in Connected Vehicle Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gabor Orosz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 440,237.00

The research objective of this award is to develop methods for modeling,
analysis, and design of dynamical systems with stochastic delays and apply these
to connected vehicle systems. Random delays arise due to intermittencies and
packet drops in wireless vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure
(V2I) communications and can lead to instabilities that degrade the performance
of multi-vehicle systems. Using a system-level approach the research will result
in mathematical tools for control design with stochastically delayed feedback
that can be executed by the vehicles in a decentralized way. This will allow the
realization of Lagrangian traffic control where the temporal responses of semi-
autonomous vehicles are shaped using spatial and temporal anticipation and
memory so that maximal traffic throughput is achieved without compromising
safety. Deliverables also include experimental realization of a connected
vehicle system in a scaled experiment using ground robots which will also be
used in engineering student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will provide opportunities to increase the efficiency
of road transportation by ensuring smooth vehicular flows. This will reduce
travel times, improve fuel-efficiency, and improve traffic safety. The design
principles established go beyond the specific problem of connected vehicles and
allow the design of network dynamics with stoshastically varying communication
delays. The results will be disseminated to allow the realization of full-size
vehicles that can exploit the connected vehicle environment given by wireless
communication. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will benefit from
experimental classroom demonstrations and involvement in the research. Outreach
activities will be used to inspire under-represented minority students from
urban school systems to learn science and engineering through challenging and
exciting hands-on experiences.