* 1300514
* Active Mechanics and Remodeling of Cytoskeletal Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Alexander Levine, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2018
* USD 397,000.00

The research objective of this award is to use a combination of numerical
simulation and analytic calculations to explore the nonequilibrium mechanics of
active cytoskeletal networks. The cytoskeleton of living cells is a chemically
complex network of filamentous proteins, cross-linking molecules, and molecular
motors, which drive the network into a complex and nonequilibrium steady state.
Studies conducted under this award will investigate how the state of motor
activity can tune the mechanical response of this filament network, and how the
binding and unbinding of cross linkers contributes to the structural
reorganization and viscoelasticity of the network. These network models will be
validated against simplified experimental systems and then applied to the study
of how cells interact mechanically with their environment.

If successful, these studies would generate new insight into a frontier problem
in the statistical mechanics of motor-driven filament networks concerning the
evolution of their structure and elastic moduli due to motor activity within
them. This new insight would have broad implications for understanding the
mechanics of living cells. Specifically, one would learn more about how cells
exert forces on and adhere to their surroundings. These properties are of prime
physiological relevance for elucidating cell motility and adhesion. The
numerical simulation packages produced over the course of these studies will
also benefit other researchers seeking simulation tools to explore the response
of the cytoskeleton to forces or changes in the evolution of the active network
due to the introduction of different cross linking molecules. The educational
plan focuses on course development in engineering and physics at the
undergraduate and graduate level in order to bring biomechanics more into the
mainstream at the awardees' institution.