* 1300361
* Stitching and Healing Graphene Flakes by Atomic-Layer-Deposition for Roll-to-Roll Printing of Transparent Conducting Electrodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Gary Rubloff, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 437,651.00

This grant supports the development of a new approach to nanotechnology-based
transparent conducting electrodes. Exploiting the exceptional electrical
conductivity and transparency of single or few-layer graphene, the research
focuses on a key nanomanufacturing challenge, which is how to electrically
connect small graphene flakes to form a large area continuous conductor. Atomic
layer deposition (ALD) will be employed to provide ultrathin conducting layers
that stitch or glue the graphene flakes together, with emphasis on selective
deposition nucleated at edges of the flakes and on defect sites within the
graphene flakes. Work will include continuous, roll-to-roll printing of
electronics with graphene ink, and model defects on graphene surfaces to
identify selective deposition processes. Tradeoffs between material distribution
on the nano- and micro-scales, electrical conductivity, and optical transparency
will serve as guidelines for prototype scale-up, and to assess manufacturing
viability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide prototype
demonstration of a novel manufacturing technology for transparent electrodes
based on low-cost graphene materials and scalable fabrication processes. The
project will create new knowledge in surface chemistry, nanofabrication, nano-
scale material transport and optoelectronics. It will underscore the critical
role of defect management in moving nanoscience to the marketplace. It will have
broad technological impact in areas of nanotechnology, such as displays, solar
cells, and flexible electronics. Research activities and other nanomanufacturing
?stories? will be used as the basis for development of a new senior/graduate
level course.