* 1300371
* Lewis acidic behavior of organoantimony compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Francois Gabbai, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2016
* USD 439,665.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor François Gabbaï of the Chemistry Department at Texas A&amp;M
University, will investigate novel Lewis acids based on antimony. The first
class of compounds targeted in this project are cationic antimony(V) species (or
stibonium ions) to be used in water for the detection of potentially toxic
anions including fluoride and cyanide. These stibonium ions will be incorporated
in conjugated and emissive frameworks to afford a family of compounds that will
respond to the presence of the anions via distinct photophysical changes. The
second class will be halogenated, electron-deficient organostiboranes which will
be designed to rival, if not exceed, the properties of perfluorinated
organoboranes. Unlike their boron analogs, these new organoelement Lewis acids
should be resistant to oxidative conditions and will be used to study the
complexation of reactive oxidizing anions such as peroxide and hypochlorite. In
addition, this award will contribute to the education of a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students, and allow Professor Gabbaï to maintain his
involvement in various services and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a broader perspective, this project will
have an impact on two main areas. The first area deals with the detection of
anions such as fluoride and cyanide, which can sometimes be found at toxic
levels in drinking water. The second important area that this project will
impact concerns the chemistry of high energy molecules that are intermediates in
important energy storage reactions. The advances made in this project will be
mostly fundamental but may contribute to the health of our society or to the
development of new energy storage technologies.