* 1300773
* Scalable Manufacturing of Size-controllable Structured Nanoparticles via Capillary Instabilities in Multimaterial Fibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Ayman Abouraddy, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,909.00

This grant provides funds for the investigation of a novel, scalable approach to
fabricating nanoparticles that takes as its starting point extended fibers of a
desired material. The process relies on the same instability that is witnessed
every day from a dripping faucet. Surface tension drives the fluid instability,
the so-called Plateau-Rayleigh capillary instability, which causes a waning jet
of water to break up into droplets. The same basic phenomenon is utilized here
to transform extended lengths of intact cylindrical nanowires of the material of
choice embedded inside a fiber into necklaces of spherical nanoparticles held
isolated from each other. The project will investigate the smallest particle
size that could be produced by this process and the materials compatible with
such a procedure. A variety of materials will be explored, ranging from soft
glasses to biocompatible polymers. In addition, this project will lay the
foundations for digitally designing the internal architecture of structured
nanoparticles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This methodology will provide a pathway to
large-scale production of nanoparticles with sophisticated sub-structure, a task
that remains a fundamental technological challenge at the nano-scale. The
intellectual merit of this interdisciplinary effort stems from addressing this
fundamental challenge by combining heat-induced fiber drawing and fluid
dynamics, which initially appear unrelated. The project also provides a new
physical implementation for fundamental studies of fluid dynamics at the nano-
scale. The broader impact of this project lies in the wide range of applications
for these nanostructures. Examples include the controlled-release of drugs from
biodegradable polymer particles, to paints and coatings with novel optical
properties. In addition, a multi-faceted outreach plan will be carried out,
including daylong summer events for Orange County (Florida) schools entitled
"Make Your Own Fiber Day", which will bring high school students to the wonders
of fiber production.