* 1300546
* Contactless Characterization of Distributed Damage in Concrete Using Diffuse Surface Wave Scattering
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Michael Oelze, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

It is proposed to develop contactless ultrasonic surface wave propagation
sensing system that can monitor structural health of large concrete structures,
such as containment structures in a nuclear power plant. Contactless systems
have high potential of being useful in characterizing damage in such structures
because many data can be collected efficiently over a large area. The goal of
the project is to impart and sense propagation of ultrasonic waves that can
detect surface and internal cracking damage inside the concrete. The results
will enable new capabilities for rapid testing, scanning and characterization of
critical large infrastructure systems. The research effort will be pursued by
creating new sensing and testing capability, and a more complete understanding
of wave propagation and scattering in such materials. Controlled concrete
samples will be tested in the laboratory to characterize and interpret wave
scattering features.

The objectives of this research are to improve fundamental understanding of
surface wave propagation and scattering in concrete with distributed damage
using a diffuse wave approach and to provide a new capability for completely
contactless ultrasonic interrogation of concrete. These objectives will be
accomplished through a coordinated set of experiments. In the course of this
effort, ultrasonic surface waves will be deployed in concrete using a
contactless scanning set up and the results will be interpreted using a new
'mid-frequency' diffuse scattering approach with a focus on cracking damage and
porosity. The research effort is divided into two tasks: (a) Create new sensing
and testing capability implementing new micro-electro-mechanical machine (MEMS)
sensors to detect leaky surface waves and (b) Characterize and interpret
observed wave scattering features using controlled concrete samples.
Collaboration with Oak Ridge National Laboratory will enhance multidisciplinary
graduate and undergraduate education.