* 1300779
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site:   Research Experiences in Mechatronics, Robotics, and Industrial Automation
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Sheng-Jen Hsieh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

This award provides funding for a three year continuing award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) entitled, "RET in Engineering and
Computer Science Site: Research Experiences in Mechatronics, Robotics, and
Industrial Automation", under the direction of Dr. Sheng-Jen ("Tony") Hsieh.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automation has a profound effect on the way we do work,
and mechatronics and robotics are the building blocks for industrial automation.
U.S. manufacturers are seeking highly skilled workers to hire in industrial
automation and control jobs. This RET Site will allow twelve high school and
two-year college faculty (36 over three years) involved in career and technology
education (CATE) to actively participate in Mechatronics, Robotics, and
Industrial Automation research and curriculum development at TAMU during a six
week summer research program with follow-up activities during the academic year.
During the summer the participants will: 1) engage in a research project with
faculty research mentors and develop a poster and presentation about their
project; 2) attend special topic presentations and site tours; 3) develop an
instructional module to teach a topic related to their research area; and 4)
participate in a weekly workshop series on how to write a proposal. During the
following academic year, they will 1) implement their instructional modules in
their classrooms and assess learning outcomes; 2) revise the modules and
summarize results from the assessment; 3) participate in a spring workshop to
present results, disseminate developed materials, and evaluate the program; and
4) give a presentation about their summer experience to other teachers. An
online community will be developed to allow participants to continue to
communicate with project staff and with one another during the academic year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Opportunities for CATE faculty to participate in
university research are relatively few. This proposed RET Site program will
provide opportunities for CATE faculty to collaborate and establish long-term
relationships with research faculty at TAMU, a Tier 1 research institution. The
integration of research and education, along with increased availability of high
quality curriculum materials and instructional resources will strengthen
education in mechatronics, robotics and automation and ultimately help the U.S.
workforce to be more competitive in these areas.