* 1300370
* RET Site: Research in Optics for K-14 Educators and Teachers (ROKET)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Robert Norwood, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2017
* USD 319,536.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program at the
University of Arizona (UA) entitled, "RET Site: Research in Optics for K-14
Educators and Teachers (ROKET)", under the direction of Dr. Supapan Seraphin.
This is a continuation of a successful RET Site program conducted during the
summers of 2010, 2011, and 2012.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The University of
Arizona, Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Integrated Access Networks (CIAN)
is partnering with UA's American Indian Language Development Institute (AILDI)
to create a program customized for science educators working in Native American
communities. CIAN's research addresses photonic materials and devices for
optical communication, which will replace current electronic technology. Eight
pre-college teachers and community college faculty in STEM disciplines (24 over
three years), working in a Native Community will actively particpate in the
ROKET program for six weeks in the summer where they will join research teams
working on improved fiber optics, waveguide materials, short-pulsed lasers,
micro-fabrication, and silicon photonics. Employing CIAN's systems-level
approach impresses upon beginning researchers the connection between innovative
experimental-based research and practical application to popular communication
devices. Consequently, great attention will be paid to collaborating with the
teachers on creating a lesson plan that relates to everyday experiences of
technology and inspires their students' curiosity to build upon their existing
knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training of science educators, from
primarily Native American communities, will promote ambitions to pursue science
and engineering education among Native American students and thus create
potential for local economic growth. The establishment of a cohesive program,
through partnerships with the UA's College of Optical Sciences, CIAN and AILDI,
a program dedicated to Native American language preservation, exhibits to the
academic community and local Indigenous communities nationwide that many
stakeholders are working to address the need for Native American students in
higher education.