* 1300501
* Characterizing Potential Energy Surfaces for Hydrocarbon Activation by Transition Metal, Metal Cluster and Metal Oxide Cations via Spectroscopy and Photofragment Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Ricardo Metz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* James Lisy
* 07/31/2016
* USD 478,100.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program-A of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Ricardo B. Metz from the
University of Massachusetts Amherst, will characterize the structure and bonding
of the molecular reactants, products and, especially, reaction intermediates of
the reactions of metal, metal cluster and metal oxide cations with hydrocarbons
using vibrational and electronic spectroscopy in a dual time-of-flight mass
spectrometer. Systems of interest include ions that convert methane to larger
hydrocarbons, methane to methanol, and ethylene to benzene. These systems will
be studied for several metals and as a function of cluster size, to measure
periodic trends in the structure and bonding of intermediates and to correlate
them to the measured size-dependent reactivities. Photofragment imaging will
also be used to study ions' photodissociation dynamics following electronic
excitation, measuring kinetic energy release and fragment anisotropy. This is a
detailed probe of excited state dynamics and the couplings between excited
electronic states and will also provide accurate bond strengths. These "half-
collision" experiments complement full-collision reaction studies by directly
probing the potential energy surface for the reaction and by initiating the
reaction from an intermediate with well-defined energy, geometry and angular
momentum.

The U.S. has large production and extensive reserves of natural gas, and it is
widely used for heating and to generate electricity. However, it is not
typically employed as a transportation fuel. This is because methane (natural
gas is 70-90% methane) is a gas that cannot be turned into a liquid at room
temperature. To use methane as a transportation fuel, it needs to be converted
into a liquid. Catalysts are used to convert one chemical into another, more
desirable chemical; new catalysts are needed to directly, selectively and
efficiently convert methane into useful liquids such as methanol. Understanding
the complex reactions involved in industrial catalysis, and improving catalysts,
requires combining fundamental studies, calculations, and studies of active
catalysts. Results from this study will contribute to this effort by expanding
our fundamental understanding of the detailed ways in which metal atoms and
metal clusters react with hydrocarbons by using spectroscopy to reveal the
structure and bonding in the intermediates these reactions pass through on the
way from reactants to products.