* 1300945
* Molecular Dynamics and Spectroscopy on Multiple Potential Energy Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Richard Dawes, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2017
* USD 433,843.00

Richard Dawes of the Missouri University of Science and Technology is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Chemistry division to develop theoretical methods to study molecular
dynamics and spectroscopy on multiple potential energy surfaces (PESs). Dawes
and his research group are working to develop robust methods and software to
construct accurate coupled multistate PESs. This involves systematic studies of
systems which include various non-adiabatic interactions between states such as
conical intersections, Renner-Teller, and spin-orbit coupling to assess the
importance of such effects. The study compares cases where non-adiabatic effects
provide an alternate mechanism (usually assumed to be a minor channel), with
cases such as the reaction of triplet oxygen atoms with carbon monoxide to form
carbon dioxide where the spin-forbidden channel is the only one available.

The potential energy surface (PES) is central to how chemists think about the
structure and dynamics of molecular systems, in terms of minima and asymptotes
connected by paths across landscapes or over energetic barriers. This project
investigates systems for which subtle details of the PES topography and
interactions between more than one of such surfaces have profound effects on
reaction kinetics and on understanding and interpreting the dynamics. The
project also focusses on making efficient use of many computer processors to
solve the problem of generating accurate PESs for radicals and species with
unusual bonding and electronic structures (particularly those of interest to
atmospheric and interstellar chemistry). This will make the complete development
of global PESs and subsequent quantum dynamics studies much more rapid and
routine than is currently possible.