* 1300322
* Towards a Computationally Efficient Recursive Model Reduction and Controller Design Approach for Spatially Distributed Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Antonios Armaou, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 339,500.00

The objective of this research project is to relax the requirements of data-
based nonlinear order reduction methods and extend their applicability towards
the control and optimization of dissipative partial differential equation (PDE)
systems arising in the context of spatially distributed processes. To achieve
this objective, the research will initially focus on creating a computationally
efficient data-driven algorithm for: a) the derivation of nonlinear low-order,
approximate models for dissipative PDE systems that are specifically tailored
for control and optimization purposes, and b) characterization of the error
between the low-order model and PDE system solutions. Subsequently, the research
will focus on the synthesis of practically implementable feedback control
structures that can deal with the issues of nonlinearity, model uncertainty,
constrains and limited measurement availability. Concurrently, computational
issues of optimization/optimal operation policies for spatially distributed
processes will be resolved. This will be achieved via the derivation of a
systematic scheme for the formulation of computationally efficient dynamic
optimization problems that are amenable to standard search
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research results will be
transferred into the industrial sector through the development and dissemination
of software with a transparent user-machine interaction interface. Analyzing,
optimizing and tightly controlling transport-reaction processes will benefit key
processes of a wide range of industries such as lithographic reactors for
microelectronics and photovoltaics fabrication and advanced catalytic reactors
and industrial glass furnaces. Moreover, numerous activities will be pursued to
integrate the research with education including incorporation of research
results in optimization and control courses, undergraduate student participation
in research through the honors program, and the development of educational tools
such as matlab add-ons, java applets and wikis.