* 1300613
* Heat-Pipe-Inspired Dynamic Windows Enabled by a Scalable Bottom-Up Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Peng Jiang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a novel dynamic window
technology for energy efficient buildings. Dynamic windows can accomplish three
essential functions. First, they can efficiently harvest visible light to
minimize electricity use during daylight. Second, they block solar heat from
entering buildings in the summertime and thus can lower energy use for cooling.
Third, in the wintertime, they let heat in to reduce heating costs. These
innovative windows are inspired by the mature heat pipe and novel photonic
crystal technologies. Heat pipes have been widely used in managing the flow of
heat in a wide range of products such as air conditioners and refrigerators.
Photonic crystal is a new class of optical materials designed for controlling
the flow of light. A scalable doctor blade coating nanomanufacturing platform
will also be developed for making large-area photonic crystal coatings on window
glass.

The results of this research will lead to significant breakthroughs in improving
energy efficiency of windows for both residential and commercial buildings.
Windows are one of the main sources of energy loss in buildings. On average,
they account for 36 percent of overall building heating and cooling loads.
Consequently, this research will contribute to reduce the consumption of oil,
natural gas, and electricity needed to power buildings. This could greatly
enhance the energy security of the United States. Buildings contribute about 40
percent of U.S. carbon emission. This novel dynamic window technology could
significantly reduce their impact on the environment. Moreover, the scalable
doctor blade coating nanomanufacturing platform will advance many other areas
ranging from high-speed optical computing to ultrasensitive bio-sensing, where
the inexpensive fabrication of large-area periodic nanostructures is important.