* 1300960
* Developing the Next Generation of Cost-Effective High Performance Damping Systems for Seismic and Wind Hazards Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Simon Laflamme, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2016
* USD 200,691.00

High performance damping devices for structural system should be robust,
reliable, and deliver large damping force to be effective at mitigating
earthquake and wind loading impact. A semi-active modified friction device using
technology of drum brakes has a potential of providing large damping force under
small velocity of the structural system movement. It is proposed to develop such
a device in a laboratory and assess its performance under dynamic loading. If
the laboratory model is found to be viable, a prototype can be fabricated in the
future to perform large scale testing for its efficacy in practice.

The research proposes to: (1) construct a laboratory scale modified friction
device; (2) characterize its dynamic behavior; and (3) assess its cost-
effectiveness for use as dampers in multi-story buildings. The key components of
the device are robust drum-brake technology and battery-based semi-active
control. The laboratory tests will involve assessing relationship between the
damping force at varying control inputs and movement of the structural system.
Effectiveness of the damping device in building frames under earthquake and wind
loading will be pursued numerically. In addition, analyses will be performed to
assess cost-effectiveness of the device. Mechanical fabrication and construction
expertise of an industrial company will assist in establishing efficacy of the
damping device.