* 1300313
* Mechanogenerated Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2016
* USD 465,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Jeffrey S. Moore of the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will develop new force-sensitive molecules
(mechanophores) that, under mechanical stress, undergo a series of chemical
reactions to produce acid. The research has three complementary components. In
the first part, the research will focus on the design and study of cascade
reactions, where a mechanochemical reaction leads to a high energy intermediate,
which will undergo one or several reactions, eventually producing acid. In the
second part, the acid production will be validated by developing analytical
methods to study the acid production and the physical and chemical changes in
the polymer structure concurrently. Finally, by combining selective
mechanochemical acid-generation to acid-catalyzed bond formation, autonomous
self-reinforcing materials will be developed. The broader impacts involve
training undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, the
development of mechanically adaptable polymers and composites with fundamental
implications in self-healing applications. The extended service life of
components made from these smart materials will contribute to reducing waste
generation.

Plastics and composites are ubiquitous in our lives, being the materials of
choice for small applications such as cell-phone screens to large ones such as
airplane hulls. These materials have a limited lifetime, which can be reduced
under mechanical stresses. This research seeks to improve the lifespan of these
materials by developing a self-healing system which harnesses the mechanical
stress these materials support to reinforce or heal the material. The specific
focus is to find a robust way to produce acid under mechanical stress and use
this acid for constructive chemistry. Through development of these new
processes, this research will lead to the development of intelligent materials
with the ability to self-reinforce or even self-heal when under mechanical
fatigue.