* 1300180
* Role of structure in chemical functionalization of oxide-free silicon surfaces and nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Yves Chabal, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 393,654.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms - B Program of the Division of
Chemistry supports Professor Yves J. Chabal from the University of Texas at
Dallas to develop a fundamental understanding and control of the chemistry
involved in making and modifying model hydrogen-terminated Si surfaces to
investigate the correlation between their optoelectronic properties and chemical
bonding. While hydrogen-terminated silicon surfaces have played a critical role
in microelectronics because of their simple synthesis, superior chemical
stability and excellent electrical properties, their transformative use
critically depends on the ability to chemically modify them without oxidizing
the Si substrate, since interfacial oxides typically have poor electrical
properties. By controlling the quality of the chemical and physical structure of
modified H/Si surfaces, it is then possible to address fundamental questions
such as the nature of interfacial defect states and the origin of
photoluminescence of Si nanoparticles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
provide the fundamental knowledge for applications such as silicon-based
chemical- and bio-sensors, fuel and photovoltaic cells, catalysis, selective
atomic layer deposition, ultra-shallow doping, and single electron devices.
Thus, this interdisciplinary approach is of interest to the chemical,
biomedical, energy and semiconductor processing industries and provides students
with the opportunity to learn about different fields and to connect to
industrial projects and international collaborators. The program will also
incorporate "Surface Chemical Functionalization" into two courses and several
modules for Materials Research Society tutorials, a Research Experience for
Undergraduates program, as well as graduate student seminars.