* 1300770
* New Concepts and Algorithms for Coarse-Graining in Self-Assembling Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* M. Scott Shell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2018
* USD 409,178.00

M. Scott Shell of the University of California Santa Barbara is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry division to develop broad-based multiscale algorithms for systematic
coarse-graining. The project is cofunded by the Interfacial Processes and
Thermodynamics program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET). Major advances in theoretical ideas
and numerical techniques are essential to enabling quantitative modeling of many
large length and time scale problems. This work leverages a new theoretical
concept called the relative entropy that quantifies the information lost during
coarse-graining and that provides a general statistical mechanical approach to
multiscale problems. This PI is using this framework to create robust algorithms
that offer new coarse-graining paradigms, including the ability to address high-
complexity many-parameter models, multi-body interactions, transferability, and
design of CG architectures. These algorithms are being implemented into a
freely-available, community-developed coarse-graining package. Dr. Shell is also
using this new generation of techniques to model and understand the early
structures, thermodynamics, and molecular mechanisms governing the self-assembly
of the diphenylalanine peptide into hollow nanotubes. The project is being
closely integrated with several educational activities targeting a range of
students.

Atomic-resolution simulations of biological molecules, materials, and many other
systems offer major insights into their behavior and useful predictions of their
properties. However, such approaches are severely limited by computational
expense to the smallest and simplest of systems. To extend modeling to more
complicated cases, it has long been customary to pursue coarse-grained models
that remove a fraction of atomic detail while greatly reducing the computational
demands. This strategy can be successful if one can identify, historically by
trial-and-error or rational insight, the "right" way to coarse-grain. Dr. Shell
has introduced a new approach that automates this process in a physically
insightful way, by quantifying and minimizing the information loss due to
coarse-graining. His group is developing powerful new and general algorithms
that produce optimized and accurate coarse-grained models, enabling a new level
of sophistication in simulating complex systems. In particular, he is using
these approaches to understand a recently discovered designer peptide that self-
assembles into hollow nanotubes with a fast-growing list of applications in
nanomaterials and energy.