* 1300638
* Robust and Dynamic Prototyping of Strategies for Sustainable Network Congestion Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Terry Friesz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The focus of this research project is to explore congestion management
strategies and new tactics for their deployment, with special attention given to
influencing the time-of-day and minute-to-minute actions of automobile drivers.
Significant congestion on roadways is encountered in every metropolitan region
of the United States. The time lost, energy resources wasted, and pollution
created by traffic congestion are staggering when their perpetual nature is
considered. As a consequence, many ideas and technologies for managing
congestion and its ills, especially emissions from internal combustion engines,
have been proposed and several have been put into practice around the globe.
Among the most familiar are high occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes, traffic signal
coordination, congestion pricing, and telecommuting. The innovative aspect of
this research is its exploration of new mathematical and computational tools to
quickly generate and rank sophisticated mixes of congestion management
strategies that vary by time and location across an entire metropolitan region.

If this research is successful, it will provide a heretofore missing capability
for rapidly prototyping and screening spatiotemporal congestion management
strategies that directly consider the impacts of emissions. Such a capability
may significantly influence the transportation planning process in that a single
engineer working with single decision leader will be able to generate and
preliminarily vet complex congestion management strategies without having to
perform a full time-consuming simulation of the network of interest. These
strategies might consider all-day congestion pricing for a subnetwork; a mix of
ramp metering and signal light timing on certain corridors; strict lane
assignments and speed controls for another sub-network. The researchers will
make use of the research findings to enhance the materials used in the
undergraduate and graduate courses related to traffic assignment, road
congestion management and transportation sustainability.