* 1300702
* Selective Catalysts with an Inward Facing N-Heterocyclic Carbene
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Steven Diver, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 02/28/2017
* USD 429,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports research led by Professor Steven T.
Diver at the State University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo on the synthesis of
a new macrocyclic N-heterocyclic carbene. This unique macrocycle design features
a versatile ligand pointing inward toward the inside of the molecular cavity.
N-Heterocyclic carbenes are powerful nucleophiles useful both for catalytic
carbon-carbon bond formation and as ligands for transition metals such as
ruthenium. The macrocyclic ligand is designed to hold transition metals firmly
in its interior where selective alkene metathesis reactions take place. Current
ruthenium carbene catalysts display high chemoselectivity (preference for
alkenes), but some of their key shortcomings are addressed by this research,
including decomposition, lifetime of a key catalytic intermediate, and
selectivity. The restrictive nature of the macrocycle is expected to limit
decomposition pathways and will display size selectivity for its chemical
reactants, an unknown type of selectivity in the alkene metathesis reaction.
Alkene metathesis is an important reaction for the synthesis of small molecules,
materials, and for energy applications and is used in large-scale industrial
applications, the synthesis of pharmaceuticals, and in medicinal chemistry for
drug discovery.

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation, Professor Steven T. Diver and his research team
access new chemical catalysts with a wide range of applications based on the
metal occupying the interior of the cavity. Fundamental properties of the strong
nucleophilic ligand are investigated in this controlled environment. The
investigation of new ruthenium carbene catalysts is expected to produce more
durable catalysts for applications in sustainable energy. For example, higher
lifetime ruthenium carbene catalysts are critical in producing biodiesel fuel
that are economically-viable. The outreach component seeks to increase awareness
of chemistry as an experimental science to youth through a catalysis project for
high school students and for K-12 students through a chemistry merit badge day,
relying on high school students and graduate students to lead activities.
Kinetics experiments are ideal to illustrate how natural phenomenon can be
controlled through experiment and how data can be presented. Catalysts that
display increased activities, longer lifetimes, and higher selectivities are in
demand and alkane metathesis, the reaction under scrutiny in this research
project, is used as a tool to make probes and dyes for chemical biology.
Encapsulation of ruthenium carbenes represents a new approach to controlling
selectivity and improving stability of a catalyst by limiting bimolecular
decomposition. This concept may prove broadly useful to other metal-catalyzed
applications.