* 1300548
* Local and global invariants in Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Henri Moscovici, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 180,000.00

The comprehensive goal of this project is to achieve a conceptual understanding
of the local invariants for noncommutative spaces and of the way the local and
global properties interact and condition each other. Of primary interest is the
concept of intrinsic curvature, which lies at the very core of the classical
geometry but remained for a long time intangible in noncommutative geometry. One
of the main thrusts of the present project is to build on the latest advances in
this direction, which led to the uncovering of the nonunimodular character of
the conformal geometry of the noncommutative torus. Other themes concern the
continuation of the development of new techniques for computing Hopf algebra
cyclic cohomology, and applying them to the determination of explicit
expressions for the transverse characteristic classes of a large class of
noncommutative spaces occurring in geometry and number theory; the investigation
of the invariants called higher indices for manifolds with boundary in order to
elucidate their role in detecting geometric and topological properties of these
spaces; the exploration of the potential arithmetic implications of the obtained
results in connection with several open problems at the interface between
noncommutative geometry and number theory.

In noncommutative geometry, the paradigm of space as a manifold formed of points
labeled by numerical coordinates is replaced by one of a much more general
nature, in which the coordinates are operator-valued and may no longer commute,
as in quantum physics. This new foundational principle allows for a substantial
enrichment of the class of objects that can be treated as geometric spaces and
has already found spectacular applications in both mathematics and theoretical
physics. While the most basic algebraic, topological, and analytical tools for
the global treatment of such spaces have been already successfully developed,
the local treatment, and even the meaning of locality in the absence of the
deeply ingrained spatial conceptualization, is still very much under
construction. Its truly conceptual understanding, which makes the primary object
of this project, engenders new applications to several central fields of
contemporary mathematics and is quite likely of considerable relevance for the
latest developments in particle and high-energy physics.