* 1300447
* Integration of Polyelectrolyte Contact Printing and Aryldiazonium Chemistry for Nanopatterning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Tao Liu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 399,801.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a novel contact printing
technique for surface patterning at the nanometer scale. Contact printing is a
cost-effective surface patterning technique that holds tremendous potential for
industrial adoption in advanced manufacturing processes. The technique relies on
transferring an ink material from a stamp to a substrate through intimate
contact. The ink is a water-soluble polymer that allows for a unique spectrum of
chemical reactions. The reactions can be readily used to pattern a wide range of
technologically important materials including biomolecules, metals and carbon
nanotubes. In this study, the inking and printing processes of the technique
will be systematically studied and optimized. The optimized processes will be
used to fabricate a variety of functional nanostructures for a variety of
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will deliver a
new surface patterning technique that has an unprecedented set of capabilities
and that is low cost. This technique will impact applications such as sensors,
flexible electronics and displays, and bio-chips. The knowledge acquired is also
valuable in developing other surface engineering nano-scale techniques. Research
resources and high-quality education will be provided to college students. In
addition, the successful implementation of the funded project will offer
research training to students from underrepresented groups, improve
undergraduate education, increase public awareness of nano-science/technology,
and foster interest in pursuing higher education and career in science and
engineering among K-12 students.