* 1300924
* Selected problems in perturbation theory, Schur multipliers, and Hankel and Toeplitz Operators in Noncommutative Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Vladimir Peller, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 330,000.00

This project is devoted to the study of various problems in noncommutative
analysis. In particular, it is concentrated on problems in perturbation theory.
One of the most important problems of the proposal is the problem to estimate
functions of perturbed noncommuting pairs of self-adjoint operators. This
problem is very important in many applications, in particular, in quantum
mechanics. Other important problems in perturbation theory deal with trace
formulas for functions of perturbed operators, functional calculus for almost
commuting self-adjoint operators, and estimates for operator and commutator
moduli of continuity. The project hopes to reveal new connections with Schur
multipliers, Hankel operators, and Hankel tensors; comprehend the role of Hankel
and Toeplitz operators in noncommutative analysis; develop techniques of Schur
multipliers in operator theory and harmonic analysis; find new applications in
mathematical physics, control theory, prediction theory, and approximation
theory.

The problems of perturbation theory that are the focus of this project are
important in applications in quantum mechanics, mathematical physics, electrical
engineering, and control theory, and in other fields of science. The importance
of perturbation theory in applications stems from the fact that if one is faced
with an equation that describes a given situation (say, a physical one), the
equation is often very complicated. One can replace it with a simpler
(perturbed) equation that is reasonably close to the original equation and solve
the new equation. Then it is time to invoke the latest results of perturbation
theory to find out whether the solutions of the perturbed equation are
reasonably close to the solutions of the initial equation that is needed for
applications. This project considers important problems in perturbation theory
that can help in such commonly occurring situations. Other problems described in
the proposal are also important in applications such as prediction theory,
control theory, and approximation theory.