* 1300918
* Valuation of Investments in Building Energy Improvements under Uncertainties
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Baabak Ashuri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

The objective of this research is to create an investment valuation model to
assess building energy-saving projects under uncertainty that takes into account
the future of energy prices and the cost and performance of energy-saving
technologies. This investment valuation model will determine the optimal time of
investment for the building energy-saving project. The proposed model is based
on a real options formulation. An alternative method will be developed to
estimate the volatility of the investment that captures the impact of the
uncertainty on the value of the energy-saving project. The proposed investment
valuation model will be used to examine how uncertainty potentially influences
the behavior of decision makers when dealing with energy-saving projects and in
this way provide some theoretical insights. Actual energy-saving projects will
be utilized to refine and validate the developed model.

If successful, this project will provide the research community with a well-
founded investment valuation model that will be tailored for energy-saving
investments. This research will assist investors to make hard energy-saving
decisions that increase the likelihood of achieving ambitious national energy
reduction goals over the long-term. By holding workshops, the research outcomes
will be communicated to building energy professionals. This research engages a
large number of underrepresented, economically disadvantaged students from the
joint program between the Georgia Tech Center for Education Integrating Science,
Mathematics and Computing (CEISMC) and the Rockdale High School (a high needs
Title I school) that focuses in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) learning activities. This activity is intended to raise
awareness about energy efficiency of high school students. High school students
and their teachers will be hosted in the Georgia Tech Economics of Sustainable
Built Environment Lab for a four-week research boot camp in energy-efficient
buildings.