* 1300007
* Identification and Control for Pattern Steering in Dynamical Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Timothy Sauer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop an infrastructure for the
identification and steering of complex dynamical patterns in networks and
spatiotemporal systems, tools for the goal of pattern steering include complex
attractor reconstruction, state identification, and appropriate control
protocols. Computational methods for changing the activity of a complex
dynamical network from one state to another will be investigated. Complicated
nonlinear networks appear to be multi-stable and multi-rhythmic, a mix of
chaotic and periodic stable attractors, together with other metastable
transients that may be effectively stable for the time interval of an
engineering application. Computational methods will be developed to enable
steering between these attractors, or dynamical patterns, and to perform this
switching quickly and automatically. The project includes theoretical,
computational, and experimental components. In particular, foundational work on
adaptive Kalman filtering will be carried out that was motivated by previous
exploratory work. Spiking networks with multiple attractors will be studied
theoretically and hypotheses tested by simulation, as a proof of concept of
steering techniques. Larger networks will be designed as a bridge to
experiments. A new data-driven computational method called Diffusion-Mapped
Delay Coordinates, a result of previous exploratory study, will be used for
steering between basins of attractors. The developed methodologies will be
tested in two different experimental platforms, neuronal cell cultures, and
convection rolls in nematic liquid crystals.

This work provides potentially pathbreaking contributions to the analysis and
effective control of dynamical and spiking biological, bio-inspired, and more
general engineering networks. Better understanding of this test case could be a
first step to new approaches to optimization of energy transfer and production.
The experimental examples have in common a lack of known equations of motion,
which severely limits the use of classical control theory and motivates
development of our new techniques. Throughout this study, emphasis will be
placed on development of methodologies that generalize widely to other
multistable dynamical networks. The project will provide concrete
interdisciplinary training for graduate and postdoctoral students, who will be
chosen from three different background areas, physics, mathematics, and
engineering.