* 1300272
* Robust Distributed Online Convex Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 03/31/2017
* USD 280,000.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate distributed algorithms
for online optimization over networked multi-agent systems. Online optimization
refers to the best use of limited agent resources in scenarios where information
is dynamic, not a priori available, and increasingly revealed over time. An
underlying assumption of present online optimization approaches is the
availability of information at a central location. This assumption becomes
problematic in networked scenarios, where information is distributed among
agents. Transmitting all data to a central location might be costly or
inefficient, and raises privacy concerns and the possibility of information
leakage. The research will result in the design of robust, distributed
strategies that can deal with multiple sources of disruption present in real-
world applications. The research approach progresses from the synthesis of
online distributed algorithms via saddle-point dynamics to the development of
rigorous mathematical analysis with provably correct guarantees. Deliverables
include a catalog of provably correct online distributed strategies, novel
concepts and tools for the evaluation of performance and complexity,
demonstration and validation via computer simulations, documentation of research
results, and engineering student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networked
robotic systems have an enormous impact in a wide range of modern applications,
including oceanographic exploration, disaster recovery, environmental
monitoring, and surveillance. The current trend in scientific and military
domains points towards the deployment of these systems in uncertain scenarios
where communication is limited and subject to failure and interference. A
successful outcome of this research will enable the robust and efficient
operation of networked systems in these highly decentralized scenarios. The
research will be broadly disseminated and positively impact a variety of
educational activities, including high-school, undergraduate, and graduate
education, involvement of undergraduates in research, supervision of graduate
students, and retention of minorities in STEM disciplines.