* 1300122
* SusChEM: Utilizing Iron-Coenzyme Oxygen Activation in Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,05/31/2017
* John Caradonna, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2017
* USD 441,704.00

Professor John P. Caradonna of Boston University is supported by the Chemical
Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of Chemistry to investigate new
oxidation processes that directly utilize dioxygen in sustainable metal-based
systems that preclude non-selective free-radical chain reactions. This research
develops and characterizes a family of mononuclear iron complexes that utilize
dioxygen (4-5 turnovers) in the production of an iron-based reactive species
that is capable of oxidizing carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bonds in the presence of
sacrificial two-electron donor ligands such as -keto acids. The research focuses
on two fundamentally different, although related aspects of alkane oxidation: 1)
the development of a molecular-level understanding of the mechanism by which
these mononuclear non-heme ferrous complexes activate dioxygen to form a metal-
based oxidant, and 2) the creation of second-generation complexes that will
support the general synthetic use of the formal oxygen-atom transfer reactivity
of these systems. The use of iron in these catalytic systems is particularly
attractive as this metal is earth-abundant and non-toxic and thus, this effort
opens new avenues in inexpensive and sustainable catalytic transformations of
interest to industry. Overall, the effort results in a deeper understanding of
fundamental reaction chemistry and leads to the development of useful reagents
for the controlled oxidation of substrates such as alkanes and arenes.

Professor Caradonna and his research group actively participate in the NSF-
funded PROSTARS Program in which community college students perform research in
biological/chemical oriented laboratories. His laboratory also offers research
opportunities to students at the earliest level possible, and annually
participates in the Boston University's High School Research Internship Program
in Science and Engineering. Finally, the investigator mentors and encourages
recent Ph.D. graduates whose graduate careers have shown their potential for
future excellence in both chemistry teaching and research though Boston
University's Postdoctoral Faculty Fellow (PFF) program. Together, the research
activities and educational projects generate a wide range of experiences, depth
of knowledge, environmental and industrial insights, and communications skills
necessary for the development of next generation scientists with interests in
sustainable chemistry.