* 1300632
* Nonlinear Dynamics and Bifurcations of Human Posture on Tunable Balance Boards
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Howard Zelaznik, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 12/31/2017
* USD 550,392.00

The goal of this research is to study the dynamics of human posture on a balance
board with tunable stiffness and time delay and exploit this understanding to
improve the early detection of neuromuscular disease and the rehabilitation of
balance compromised populations. The research will develop new mathematical
models of human posture coupled to an external system and study the emergent
dynamics therein; and develop a novel balance board with tunable board
rotational stiffness and time delay. This tunable device will be used to assess
the potential advantages of bifurcation-based approaches for the early detection
of neuromuscular disorder and improved rehabilitation of younger subjects, older
subjects and individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS), in collaboration with the
Indiana University School of Medicine. In addition an inter-generational
service-learning program focused on improving balance will be developed at a
local retirement home, a campus wide forum/seminar series on dynamical systems
in perception, cognition, and motor control will be created, senior
undergraduate students will be mentored in research projects, and the team will
reach out to local MS support groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
the tunable balance board could be a major improvement in rehabilitative devices
as it can manipulate and thus, explore the contribution of muscle stiffness and
time delay to balance. If successful the idea of using bifurcation thresholds on
the tunable balance boards as a means of indicating early stage neuromuscular
disease could lead to early diagnosis of fall-propensity in frail older adults
and adults with MS, Parkinson?s disease or persons suffering from traumatic
brain injury. New detection and training concepts using these tunable balance
boards delay could eventually be commercialized and improve quality of life of
balance-compromised individuals. In addition, the substantial economic cost
associated with falls, valued at over $19 billion in direct medical costs in
2000, may be reduced.