* 1300686
* Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Homo-Chiral and Hetero-Chiral Interactions in the Solid Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Erin Johnson, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/29/2016
* USD 385,000.00

This award supports the work of Professors Erin Johnson and Jason Hein at the
University of California-Merced. Isolation of chiral molecules as pure
enantiomers remains a challenge for synthetic chemistry. Highly stereoselective
reactions (eg. chiral catalysts or chiral auxiliaries) have been developed;
however, these represent only a subset of reactions and do not offer general
solutions. Methods relying on physical separations (eg. enantioselective
crystallizations) have the potential to be more broadly applicable. A combined
theoretical and experimental study of the phase equilibria of chiral compounds
will be employed to allow development of enatioselective crystallization
methods. This approach will use density-functional theory combined with the
exchange-hole dipole moment dispersion model to predict energy differences
between homochiral and heterochiral crystal forms. These results will be used to
guide the development of a coupled-vessel preferential crystallization method,
capable of resolving racemate-forming compounds and providing a new approach to
crystal-induced asymmetric synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most chemical
reactions produce products in their mirror images. However, many drugs are
active in only one ("chiral") form, and often the mirror images ("enantiomers")
of these molecules can themselves be toxic. Thus methods for either direct
synthesis, or more generally, for separation of the two enantiomers is
essential. This study will broaden the understanding of intermolecular
interactions between chiral molecules and represents a first step toward
establishing general, reliable methods for the synthesis and separation of
crystalline chiral molecules. Isolation of chiral molecules as individual
enantiomers is a critical goal for the fine-chemical and pharmaceutical
industries. This work has the potential to greatly expand synthetic strategies
to produce molecules of 100% enantiomeric purity.