* 1300497
* CDS&E: Theoretical Models for Potential Energy Landscapes of Challenging Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Charles Sherrill, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2016
* USD 449,999.00

David Sherrill is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division and the Computational
Science and Data-enabled Science and Engineering Program to develop
computational methods, algorithms and software for studying non-covalent
interactions. Non-covalent interactions are central to protein folding, drug
docking, crystal packing, and solvation. Recent experiments provide detailed
data on organic model systems meant to isolate and quantify individual non-
covalent interactions in solution, yet they remain hard to understand without
the aid of theory. This project seeks to unravel the various factors influencing
non-covalent interactions in these experimental organic systems. The Sherrill
group is (1) Developing faster algorithms for density functional theory (DFT)
geometry optimization and frequency analysis, using density fitting techniques.
(2) Expanding the available set of benchmark-quality non-covalent interaction
energies from a few hundred to several thousand, using test cases taken directly
from the Protein Data Bank (PDB). This data is critical for validating and
parameterizing theoretical models of non-covalent interactions. (3) Identifying
synergistic approximations in coupled-cluster theory to accelerate the
computations in Goal (2), using combinations of density-fitting, natural
orbitals, and rank-reduction techniques. (4) Performing detailed studies of
experimental model complexes of CH/pi and pi-pi interactions to better
understand these interactions, how they operate in solution, and how they might
be more effectively modeled.

The Sherrill group develops and uses computational methods to better understand
non-bonded interactions between molecules. Such interactions control how drugs
find their targets and how molecular crystals form. Hence, this research
provides knowledge useful for advances in rational drug design and crystal
engineering. This project provides improved theoretical and computational
methods for modeling such non-bonded interactions through (a) improved computer
algorithms to compute interactions more quickly, and (b) generation of a large
database of high-quality benchmark data that can be used to test and improve new
theoretical models of non-bonded contacts. The benchmark data will be made
publicly available through a web portal. The software developed will be freely
released under an open-source license. This project provides training for
students not only in how to use molecular modeling software, but also in how to
write molecular modeling software.