* 1300149
* Collaborative Research: Nexus of Simulation, Sensing and Actuation for Aerodynamic Vibration Reduction of Wind Turbine Blades
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Xiong Yu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 10/31/2017
* USD 148,531.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to advance the smart
blade system through innovations in areas of advanced computational models of
fluid-structure interactions, sensors and actuators. Wind energy, an important
source of clean and renewable energy, is becoming a major component of the U.S.
energy portfolio. The interest in large capacity wind turbines as an economical
way to harvest wind energy has significantly increased in recent years. Wind
turbine blades are over 100m in length and the trend of increasing the size of
the blades continues. However, increases in the size of wind turbine blades
means that aerodynamic vibrations need to be managed to prevent catastrophic
failures. The collaborative project team takes an innovative perspective to
advance the smart turbine blade technology. The hypothesis of this research is
that aerodynamic vibrations in wind turbine blades can be effectively mitigated
with bio-inspired strategies for flow sensing, surface morphological change and
fluid-structure interactions. The specific goals of this research project are 1)
to understand blade vibration dynamics with advanced modeling of fluid-structure
interactions; 2) to study the mechanism of bio-sensing for flow turbulence
determination and to implement a feasible sensor design strategy; and 3) to
understand and emulate the functions of "smart fins" and "smart denticles" for
aerodynamic vibration reductions. A systematic approach will be undertaken by
combining modeling, sensing and actuation strategies. The smart blade system
performance will also be validated via simulation-based virtual testing and
reduced-scale model experiments. All of these aim to advance the state of art in
the smart wind turbine blades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents a
great opportunity to advance smart blade technologies, which include intelligent
components for blade vibration reduction. A unique bio-inspired strategy will be
pursued to prevent catastrophic failures of wind turbine blades by effectively
mitigating the aerodynamic vibrations. The strategy will also improve the
operational efficiency of the wind energy system. All of these advances will
have important impacts on the safe and efficient production of wind energy.