* 1300684
* Diamagnetic-Levitation based Low-frequency Broadband Vibration Energy Harvester
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Fuh-Gwo Yuan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 299,998.00

The goal of this research is to provide a low-frequency broadband energy
harvester as a solution to the powering of wireless sensors for monitoring
structures. Preliminary studies have demonstrated a mono-stable low-frequency
energy harvester using diamagnetic levitation (DL). The key features of this
energy harvester are its inherent nonlinearity, weak restoring forces and
absence of mechanical friction. The proposed energy harvester is a bi-stable
horizontal DL system which can undergo large periodic inter-well oscillations
and chaotic motions from a range of input accelerations in all three directions.
Hence this system can extract output power orders of magnitude more than
traditional linear energy harvesters in a broadband frequency range. This
research will also involve developing near-optimal and power management
solutions for integrating the energy harvester with rechargeable batteries and
laboratory tests of the prototypes will be performed to evaluate its performance
in real ambient vibrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A promising high efficiency
energy harvesting system with no apparent mechanical friction and a wide
bandwidth in the low frequency range is envisioned to completely cater to the
needs of energy harvesting for many engineering applications. Fundamental limits
along with conflicting constraints imposed by the size of the harvester,
transduction efficiency of the harvester and the energy available for the
functioning of the structural health monitoring (SHM) systems will be addressed.
A significant advancement in the knowledge of energy harvesting using nonlinear
systems can be expected along with creating a framework for using DL in civil,
mechanical, and aerospace engineering applications as an interest for systems
with no mechanical damping persists for maximum efficiency. With the on-going
advances in sensors and sensor network technologies, the proposed research will
contribute greatly to the development of truly autonomous and self-sustained SHM
systems for monitoring infrastructures.