* 1300244
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evolution of Culture among Warning System Organizations
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Joseph Trainor, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2014
* USD 9,976.00

The purpose of this research is to improve our understanding of how current
warning systems work and provide an opportunity to make improvements. Many
weather events affect the United States each year and some of them lead to loss
of life, injuries, and damaged property. These problems call for better warning
systems. Such warnings systems are difficult to create since so many different
people, processes, and resources are involved in detecting, predicting, and
communicating the risks. Understanding how these warning systems work is
important if we want to know how to make them better. This research will look at
the differences between warning systems in different regions of the US. The
study will include in-depth qualitative interviews with warning system members
in three different areas. The interviews will address tasks and activities
associated with the warning system, communication within and between
organizations involved, roles and responsibilities, and the use of resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will not only improve our understanding of
how the current warning systems work, but it will present an opportunity to
explore the storm spotter network and their modern role in the warning system.
In addition, it will provide the basic information we need in order to improve
warning organizations and improve severe weather communications.