* 1300508
* SusChEM: RUI: Accessing Reactive, Unsaturated Co(I) Fragments for Stoichiometric and Catalytic C-H Bond Activation/Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Christopher Bradley, Mount St. Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 10/31/2016
* USD 146,231.00

Support from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division of the
National Science Foundation will allow Professor Christopher Bradley of Mount
St. Mary's University to investigate the ability of cyclopentadienyl (Cp)
cobalt(I) sources to mediate stoichiometric and catalytic carbon-hydrogen bond
activation. A combination of computational and synthetic studies will permit
structure/reactivity trends to be established for C-H activation in both
monomeric and aggregate [Cp-Co] fragments. Specifically, catalytic alkane
dehydrogenation will be targeted. The proposed research involves continued
mentoring of both high school and undergraduate students in a research
environment. In particular, economically disadvantaged high school students in
the Maryland and Washington D.C. metro area will have the opportunity to conduct
summer research in synthetic chemistry. The students will be encouraged to
continue their college education at Mount St. Mary's, through the Third Century
Scholar Program.

The conversion of aliphatic hydrocarbons to unsaturated products has great value
to a range of fields, including commodity chemical and polymer synthesis.
Performing this transformation using more abundant metals as catalysts under
milder conditions would therefore be ideal. The abilities developed by both high
school and undergraduate students supported by this award will prepare them well
for pursuit of advanced degrees in the chemical sciences.