* 1300267
* SusChEM: Stereoselective Polymerization of Biomass Monomers by Transition-Metal and Organic Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Eugene Chen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2016
* USD 447,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Eugene Y. Chen
of Colorado State University in the investigation of new stereoselective
polymerization systems by chiral transition-metal and organic catalysts for the
synthesis of high-value stereoregular and chiral polymers or optically-resolved
chemicals from biomass-derived acrylic monomers in a catalytic fashion.
Synthetic, catalytic, mechanistic, and computational methods are employed to
accomplish three specific objectives: (1) establishing stereoselective
polymerization of biomass acrylics through molecular engineering of chiral
transition-metal catalysts; (2) advancing hydride-shuttling polymerizations
promoted by chiral ion pairs to enable catalytic polymerization of biomass
acrylics and catalytic asymmetric polymerization of bulky acrylics; and (3)
developing catalytic and asymmetric organopolymerizations of acrylics via
internal and external chain transfer routes and utilization of chiral organic
catalysts. Diverse experimental techniques are coupled with international
collaborations that bring in complementary theoretical expertise. This project
falls under the SusChEM initiative as it utilizes non-petroleum based starting
materials (e.g., plant biomass) for the production of potential commodity-scale
products. This research provides educational opportunities for training and
teaching of students with a wide range of techniques in catalysis and polymeric
materials, areas central to the global economy. Students also learn about
sustainability, providing them with a strong basis to address global problems
and play leadership roles in their future professional workplaces.

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Eugene Y. Chen of
Colorado State University for the investigation of metal-and organically-
catalyzed polymerization of acrylics. The metal-catalyzed route departs from
conventional (anionic or radical) acrylic polymerizations in three ways: (a) it
is catalyst site-controlled so that molecular catalysts can be engineered for
the synthesis of a wide range of polymers with high precision at room
temperature; (b) it ensures the same degree of chiral induction for each monomer
to produce uniform chiral polymers; and (c) catalytic cycles can be constructed
by internal or external processes for catalytic production of stereoregular or
chiral polymers. The organocatalysis route exhibits characteristics that embody
several key principles of sustainable/green chemistry: it employs only a small
amount of the relatively non-toxic organic catalyst and rapidly converts all
monomers to high molecular weight bioplastics in less than 1 min of reaction at
room temperature. From a technological point of view, both polymerization
systems can be operated under economically viable conditions (e.g., at lower
temperatures and in a catalytic fashion) and produce technologically important
stereoregular or chiral polymers using renewable feedstocks, which offer not
only sustainable alternatives to petroleum-based polymers, but also superior
materials properties. Professor Chen is preparing a new textbook for senior
undergraduate and graduate level students on the "Chemistry of Sustainability".
This text is envisioned for use in educating chemistry and chemical engineering
students as well as the general public in the central role of chemistry in
sustainability.