* 1300805
* Collaborative Research: Fracture Toughness of Lithium-Ion Battery Electrodes:  An Integrative Experimental and Computational Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Huck Beng Chew, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 02/29/2016
* USD 181,345.00

The research objective of this award is to use an integrative experimental and
computational approach to investigate the fracture toughness and the underlying
fracture mechanisms of electrode materials in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). The
proposed research will develop and implement an in-situ experimental setup to
measure the constitutive behavior and extrinsic fracture properties of lithiated
electrodes under well-controlled mechanical and electrochemical conditions. A
numerical field-projection scheme will be used to extract the intrinsic cohesive
properties at the crack-tip process zone from experimental far-field
information. The coupled effects of mechanical and electrochemical processes on
the electrode fracture characteristics will be elucidated by a micromechanics
failure model, which incorporates the measured constitutive law and intrinsic
cohesive parameters.

If successful, the above studies will significantly advance the currently
limited understanding of electrode material fracture in LIBs. Findings from this
research will provide fundamental design criteria for microstructural
optimization of ultra-high-capacity electrode materials with improved cycle
life. The tightly integrated experimental and computational studies will expose
participating students to a new field of fracture mechanics, which lies at the
intersection of electrochemistry, physics, materials science and mechanics.
Research results will be rapidly disseminated via open-access web-based
resources, and will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate level courses.
Through live demonstrations enhanced with multimedia tools, the PIs will
actively educate elementary school students in the latest energy storage
technologies to inspire them towards careers in science and engineering.