* 1300096
* Physical and Photophysical Properties of Spin-Polarized Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* James McCusker, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2017
* USD 486,490.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program supports Professor
James K. McCusker of the Department of Chemistry at Michigan State University
for the design and development of chemical systems geared toward determining
whether there exists a cause-and-effect relationship between the physical and/or
photophysical properties of molecules and their innate spin properties, and if
so, to what extent that connection can be exploited in order to manipulate the
chemical reactivity of molecular systems. Building on the successful development
of a model that led to the first experimental demonstration of spin control of
dipolar energy transfer, specific projects being pursued are (1) elaboration of
this model to determine the limits of its applicability with regard to FÃ¶rster
theory, (2) extension of this model to exchange energy transfer (i.e., Dexter),
(3) the influence of zero-field spin polarization on photo-induced electron
transfer processes in spin-coupled transition metal clusters, and (4) the
synthesis and characterization of spin-coupled metal-semiquinone complexes
molecules in which a combination of synthetic design and theory is being used to
manipulate intramolecular spin polarization. In all of these projects, the
research is being carried out through a confluence of organic and inorganic
synthetic chemistries, steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopic measurements
including (but not limited to) emission, ultrafast time-resolved absorption, and
electron paramagnetic resonance, as well as theoretical efforts that include
density functional theory calculations to explore the incorporation of spin and
spin polarization into existing theories to describe electron and energy
transfer dynamics.

The concepts underpinning this research represent a new area of study concerning
the light-induced properties of molecules: this project will provide important
insights into an aspect of the electronic structure of an enormous class of
compounds for which there is little experimental information presently
available. Compounds possessing unique spin (angular momentum of electrons)
and/or magnetic properties, particularly those whose properties can be
manipulated synthetically in a predictable manner, hold promise as the basis for
molecular-based electronic materials. The knowledge gained through this work can
provide a foundation for the rational design of molecular systems for next-
generation electronic and photo-electronic devices for information storage,
energy conversion, and catalysis. The individuals involved in this work, which
include men and women at both the undergraduate and graduate level, are
receiving broad-based training in synthetic chemistry, state-of-the-art
spectroscopic methodology, the study of the magnetic properties of molecular
systems, as well as advanced theoretical methods.