* 1300976
* Collaborative Research:  The U.S. Environmental Risk Policy Network
* SBE,SES
* 08/16/2012,08/31/2014
* Adam Henry, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2014
* USD 106,578.00

Concepts of risk and formal tools such as risk analysis have become central to
environmental and technology policy. The use of risk concepts in environmental
policy is an activity carried out by members of a policy network focused in, but
not limited to, Washington, DC. This project surveys the members of the policy
network of risk analysts in order to address two central research questions:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* How is the U.S. environmental risk policy network
structured? Advances in network analysis allow the research team to identify the
boundaries of the network, the position of actors within it, and essential
structural features hypothesized to influence policy
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* What factors have influenced the structure of
the U.S. environmental risk policy network? Network models facilitate
determining the processes by which the observed network is generated. This lends
important, theoretically-relevant insights into the rationales that drive the
self-organization of policy networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
includes the merging of the new data to be collected with two prior datasets,
one collected during the early 1980s (when risk approaches to policy were
relatively new) and one smaller replication collected circa 2000. The enables an
analysis of changes over time in the same network, a subject that has not been
extensively studied in the risk or policy networks
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Risk analysis is a set of analytic tools that
has become a central feature in discussions of environmental and technology
policies. Risk is a key way in which scientific information enters into policy
debates. A network of risk professionals carries out the work of risk analysis
and engages in policy debates. By better understanding these professionals and
their networks, we can gain insights into how science contributes to shaping
policy. Moreover, understanding the flows of scientific and other kinds of
information through these professionals? networks will contribute to the
development of enhanced communication and the effective use of science in
decision making.