* 1300231
* Mimicking enzyme active sites in synthetic shape-programmable macromolecules to create enantioselective hydrogen-bond activated catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Christian Schafmeister, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 390,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
efforts of Professor Christian E. Schafmeister of Temple University to develop
molecules that mimic the rate enhancements and exquisite enantio-, diastereo-,
and regioselectivity of biological enzymes. The group has developed an efficient
and systematic approach to the synthesis of pre-organized and highly
functionalized macromolecules ("spiroligomers") that can create shape-
programmable pockets that resemble enzyme active sites. Spiroligomers are
stereochemically rich ladder molecules constructed from chiral, functionalized
bis-amino acids that are coupled through pairs of amide bonds. In collaboration
with Professor Kenneth Houk and his group at the University of California, Los
Angeles, the Schafmeister group combined theoretical enzyme design with
spiroligomer synthetic methodology to construct new catalysts. These catalysts
include an improved, modified proline aldol catalyst, a tri-functional acyl-
transfer catalyst that mimics serine esterases and accelerates
transesterification reactions, and a bifunctional hydrogen bond donating
catalyst that mimics Ketosteroid Isomerase and accelerates Claisen
rearrangements and Diels-Alder reactions. The research team is now developing
more active spiroligomer-based catalysts for these reactions by assembling
reactive groups within chiral pockets created by covalently locking three and
four spiroligomer segments together to create pre-organized macromolecules
(2,000 to 5,000 Daltons). Within these pockets, reactive groups are organized to
match transition state models. The pockets engender stereo- and regioselectivity
through shape complementary with their substrates. Unlike enzymes, spiroligomer-
based catalysts are extremely robust; They are immune to denaturation and
function in water or organic solvents and across a wide range of temperatures.
These catalysts are designed using in-house developed software called CANDO. The
CANDO program uses a modified "inside-out" design approach that the Houk
laboratory developed together with the laboratory of Professor David Baker at
the University of Washington to create artificial enzymes based on proteins.
First and second year undergraduate students are trained to use the CANDO
program to design their own catalysts and thus, are engaged in research prior to
finishing their laboratory courses. The techniques of molecular modeling,
transition state theory and scientific program are valuable in the technical job
market.

Biological enzymes are catalysts, molecules that alter other molecules without
being changed themselves. Biological enzymes operate at ambient temperature and
pressures while avoiding energy consumption and the generation of unwanted
byproducts that impair many current man-made catalysts. Professor Christian
Schafmeister and his group at Temple University develop systematic approaches
towards enzyme-like catalysts that are highly active and selective while being
much more robust than fragile biological enzymes. The team uses computer-aided
design to predict catalytic sites and then assembles molecular building blocks
(molecular Legos) to produce these reactive sites or pockets. The group enhances
the reactivity of their catalysts by building them into larger, more selective
and more active macromolecules. Undergraduate and graduate student researchers
are encouraged to participate in all levels of the research from using computer
programs to design their own catalysts to producing the catalyst in the
laboratory and testing the molecules for reactivity and selectivity.