* 1300808
* Exploring the Impact of Mechanical Force on Synaptic Functions Using Novel Approaches
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Rhanor Gillette, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 03/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

The research objective of this award is to understand how neurons develop
mechanical force (tension), and how this tension influences their functionality.
It is known that memory, learning and locomotion in animals are mediated by
neurotransmitters that are released from vesicles clustered at the synapse
(junction between two neurons, or between a neuron and muscle). Recent
experiments on the embryonic Drosophila (fruit fly) nervous system show that
vesicle clustering at the neuromuscular synapse requires mechanical tension
within the axons. Vesicle clustering vanishes upon severing the axon from the
cell body, but is restored simply by applying mechanical tension on the severed
axon. Using micro mechanical force sensors, it has been shown that embryonic
axons that form neuromuscular junctions maintain a rest tension of about 1 nN.
These results suggest that neuromuscular synapses employ mechanical tension as a
signal to modulate vesicle accumulation. In this project, the mechanism of force
generation in axons, as well as the mechanism by which tension modulates vesicle
clustering, transport and release will be explored using a combination of nano
scale force sensors, advanced imaging and mechanics
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the force paradigm of synaptic
function may lead to new treatments for neurological diseases. The findings of
this research will be disseminated to the broader audience through the web and
journal publications. The instruments to be developed will be made available to
others for mechanobiological studies. The knowledge gained through this project
will be integrated with education through development of a new course on neuro-
mechanics that incorporates neuroscience and engineering, as well as through
student seminars, involvement of undergraduate students from minorities in
research, and hands-on teaching modules at the local Children's Science Museum.