* 1300019
* Role of Nonuniformly Quantized Actuation in Biological Motion Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Jun Ueda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 05/31/2017
* USD 289,417.00

The goal of this award is to establish a physiologically inspired framework for
recruiting compliant modular actuators for biological movement generation. The
research will result in an in-depth understanding of how modularity and
variability in the neuromuscular system play key roles in coordinating multiple
muscles. The research studies a non-uniform recruitment method for compliant
actuator arrays. Floating point quantization (FPQ), a popular numbering scheme
in digital communications, appeared as a viable option which mimics aspects of
Henneman's size principle of motor unit recruitment. The research hypothesizes
that (1) variability in muscle forces and signal-dependency can be characterized
by quantized actuation profiles in non-uniform modular actuator system, (2) a
quantized actuator recruitment approach reproduces such signal-dependent
variability without introducing an artificial source of noise into robotic
architecture, and (3) optimization principles in muscle coordination can be
modeled mathematically by mapping the variability at the level of individual
muscles to the variability at an end-point from a stochastic control
perspective. Quantized control methods for recruiting muscle-type robotic
actuators for biological trajectory generation will be developed, and resultant
motor performance in artificial robotic limbs will be compared to performance in
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will advance the field
of biologically inspired robotics, rehabilitation robotics, computational
neuroscience, and character animation. A deeper understanding of neuromuscular
physiology will provide more sophisticated computational models, resulting in a
novel architecture for robotics that captures the advantages inherent in
biological motor systems. Research outcomes will be integrated into current
courses including offering a special topic for undergraduate design research.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be recruited from interdisciplinary and
multicultural groups including under-represented groups. Outreach activities for
K-12 students will be conducted through a Robotics Summer Camp program, Georgia
Tech the Student and Teacher Enhancement Partnership Program, and FIRST
Robotics.