* 1300280
* Multivariable Operator Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* John McCarthy, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 299,999.00

A holomorphic function of a single variable can easily be applied to matrices
whose spectra lie in the domain of the function, and this has developed into a
very successful and important theory. The Principal Investigator proposes to
study functions of several variables applied to matrices. The theory immediately
splits into the commutative and noncommutative cases. In the former, the project
will investigate when functions of several variables preserve the natural order
structure on matrices, and what happens when the size of the matrices becomes
infinite (the operator case). Conversely, the Principal Investigator proposes to
use tools from operator theory to understand functions of several variables,
such as characterizing asymptotic expansions of functions in the Pick class
(this is called the Hamburger problem in one variable). In the noncommutative
case, he will investigate how noncommutative holomorphic functions can be
obtained as limits of noncommutative polynomials. The description of
noncommutative holomorphic functions will be in terms of operator theoretic
realizations. He will also work on applying analytic techniques to improve
ultrasound imaging.

Virtually all imaging devices today function by collecting either
electromagnetic or acoustic waves and using the energy carried by these waves to
determine pixel values in order to build up what is basically an "energy"
picture. However, waves also carry information, and this can also be used to
determine the pixel values in an image. Various studies have shown that these
"information" images often reveal features that are completely missed by
conventional, energy images. This project will study how to improve these
images, using various different measures of information-theoretic entropy, both
to render them sharper, and to enable their calculation in real time. These
techniques will have applications in medical imaging and also in security
scanning. The Principal Investigator will also conduct basic research in areas
of pure mathematics related to control theory and signal processing.