* 1300619
* RUI:  Preparation and Characterization of New Heterogeneous Bimetallic Au-M Catalysts for Selective Oxidations and Hydrogenations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Bert Chandler, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation supports Professor Bert D. Chandler from Trinity University to
investigate the effects of adding heterometals to supported Au nanoparticle
catalysts. New nanoparticle and catalyst synthesis techniques will be employed
to prepare bimetallic nanoparticles on alumina and titania. Kinetics -based
analytical techniques including (1) intentional poisoning studies to evaluate
relative numbers of active sites, and (2) Hammett relationships to probe changes
in NP surface charge will be developed and employed. These studies will enable a
quantitative comparison of different catalysts, thus allowing for an assessment
of heterometals effect on Au NPs, and answering fundamental questions regarding
the nature of the catalytic active sites. Further, this program will provide
numerous research opportunities for undergraduate students, giving them hands on
experience in this nationally important area of research and training them to be
the next generation of scientists.

Improving our fundamental understanding of bimetallic nanoparticles and their
catalytic properties has the potential to positively impact both the U. S.
catalysis industry and the national economy by providing cheaper materials and
consumer products as well as reducing pollution and industrial waste. This
includes finding new ways to assemble a few hundred metal atoms, which can be a
difficult chemical synthesis problem. This project will expand the methods
developed by the PI to produce nanoparticles that have an inexpensive metal at
the core (Cu, Ni, Fe) and Au on the outside. These new nanoparticles will be
deposited onto a support and used to catalyze a variety of reactions.