* 1300167
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Cyclic Peptide-Based Nanorobots for In Vivo Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Mingjun Zhang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2014
* USD 288,948.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a nanomanufacturing platform
for fabricating cyclic peptide-based nanorobots for biomedical applications.
Cyclic peptides are protein chains. The nanomanufacturing will involve
assembling various types of cyclic peptide-based nanotubes conjugated or
connected with DNA-based aptamers. Aptamers are biological molecules that bind
to pre-selected targets. The core body of the nanorobots will be formed by self-
assembling individual cyclic peptide subunits under controlled reaction
conditions. After the core body has been formed, the conjugated aptamers will
serve as the sensing as well as actuating components. Upon binding of a targeted
biomarker to the aptamers, a conformational change takes place allowing the
nanorobots to release their payload. In an effort to optimize the design, a
library of cyclic peptides with varying diameters, controlled by the number of
peptide subunits will be fabricated. To further demonstrate the modularity of
the approach, aptamers for a variety of biomarkers related to specific diseases
will be conjugated to the nanorobots and tested. To scale-up the fabrication
process, phase equilibrium method, self-assembly in bulk solution, and layer-by-
layer assembly method will be examined. After prototype fabrication, the
nanomanufacturing process will be further optimized in terms of reliability,
yield and manufacturing efficiency.

The results of this research will lead to manufacturing of nano-enabled robots
for a variety of bio-medical applications, such as, in vivo (living subject)
sensing, disease diagnosis, and targeted drug delivery. The research will
advance the science of self-assembled bio-molecules, which will impact the field
of nanomanufacturing. The principles learned through this research will be
applicable to various nano-scale self-assembly processes which are a key step
for bottom-up nanomanufacturing. Once the fabrication process is optimized, the
medical community will benefit greatly from the nanorobots. The project will
develop several education and outreach programs, especially targeting female and
minority students.