* 1300562
* Higher Harmonic Ultrasonic Guided Waves for Structural Integrity Assessment of Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Cliff Lissenden, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2017
* USD 311,985.00

This research will relate the generation of higher harmonic ultrasonic guided
wave modes to the microstructural evolution that precedes macroscale damage
accumulation in many metals. The fundamental mechanics of materials issues to be
investigated are how and why microstructural evolution and higher harmonic
generation are correlated. Recent analysis of the interaction of ultrasonic
guided wave modes provides a framework for understanding the generation of
higher harmonics. It is conjectured that higher harmonic generation from two
interacting guided wave modes enables in situ characterization of
microstructural evolution for reliable structural health monitoring. The
research plan has four main components: (1) identify incident modes that
generate cumulative higher harmonics, (2) select actuation methods to activate
the desired incident modes, (3) investigate the correlation between
microstructure evolution and features of the higher harmonic modes,
(4)characterize microstructure evolution and the corresponding higher harmonic
modes in relation to state-of-the-art structural health monitoring modalities.

It is well documented that the infrastructure in the United States is aging, and
as that happens the load carrying materials degrade due to intended loads,
unexpected forces, as well as the environmental and operating conditions. Due to
concerns for public safety and the hundreds of billions of dollars necessary to
maintain the infrastructure, it is extremely important to assess the current
condition of structures, evaluate the current and expected future integrity of
structures, and then plan repairs and replacement. Given the enormity of the
infrastructure in this country, the use of autonomous sensory systems and the
development of methods to detect and characterize material damage as early as
possible are key components for this burgeoning field of structural health
monitoring, which will eventually transform the logistics of infrastructure
management. The proposed research investigates nonlinear ultrasonics, where
sound waves traveling in a structural component generate wave motion that would
not occur in a pristine linear material, to characterize changes in the material
that precede the formation of a fatigue crack. Fatigue cracks can lead to
catastrophic failure in many types of structures; this research applies directly
to pressure vessels, piping, and other structural components for power
generation, propulsion, and chemical plants.