* 1300774
* SusChEM: Copper Catalyzed C-H Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Timothy Warren, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 443,000.00

The NSF Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Timothy H.
Warren of Georgetown University in the design and development of new protocols
for carbon-nitrogen (C-N), carbon-oxygen (C-O), and carbon-carbon (C-C) bond
formation. This research is propelled by a detailed understanding of the key
carbon-hydrogen (C-H) activation and C-functional group (C-FG) bond forming
reactions to motivate new catalyst architectures for tunable selectivity. The
team develops C-H amination reactions with unactivated amines, C-H
etherification with alcohols and protected phenols, C-H nitroalkylation with
nitroalkanes, and C-H alkylation with ketones as well as C-FG forming reactions
via other H-FG substrates. They synthetically and mechanistically examine key
copper(II)-FG intermediates to understand their roles in C-FG bond formation and
H-atom abstraction reactions. These chemists examine new ligand variations to
enhance the lifetime of particularly reactive copper(II)-FG intermediates as
well as to direct the C-FG bond forming step. A wide range of synthetically
valuable, mechanistically related C-H functionalization reactions address
important challenges in sustainable chemical synthesis, such as the conversion
of hydrocarbons to amines using ammonia. This research falls under the "SusChEM"
initiative as it promotes the use of non-precious metal catalysts - copper -
over more rare and expensive alternatives. Collaboration with Merck allows
Georgetown students to access the Merck Catalysis and Automation Laboratory in
Rahway, NJ. At the Merck laboratories, the students employ high throughput
approaches to the discovery of new C-H functionalization catalysts and catalytic
transformations. Ongoing collaborations with Prof. Karsten Meyer (U. Erlangen,
Germany) and with Prof. Tom Cundari (U. North Texas) enable in depth
spectroscopic studies and computational insights, respectively. Through the
organization "Higher Achievement", Professor Warren connects with high-risk
middle school students from low income families in under-resourced communities,
providing fun science programming to their middle school scholars in a Chemistry
Show (90-100 students) held at Georgetown each summer as well as at least one
smaller visit (10-20 students) to Georgetown during each academic year when DC
public schools are closed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Chemical Catalysis
Program supports the efforts of Professor Timothy H. Warren of Georgetown
University in the design and development of new protocols for carbon-nitrogen
(C-N), carbon-oxygen (C-O), and carbon-carbon (C-C) bond formation. This work
addresses valuable and sustainable chemical synthesis, such as the conversion of
hydrocarbons to amines using ammonia. The development of new methodologies for
bond formation with carbon that eliminate the need for specific substrates and
protection / deprotection steps can accelerate organic chemical synthesis as
well as enhance industrial throughput - all while reducing the environmental
footprint and enhancing the sustainability of chemical synthesis. While many C-H
functionalization systems employ palladium and other noble metals, this approach
employs copper - an Earth-abundant metal of low cost and toxicity. Industrial
collaborations allow graduate students to explore high throughput approaches to
discovery while increasing their own job marketability. Ongoing collaborations
within the U.S. and in Germany also provide students with the broader
perspective of performing research in a global community, enhancing both their
technical and teamwork skills. Professor Warren and his group connect with high-
risk middle school students from low income families in under-resourced
communities, providing science programming via a Chemistry Show each summer as
well as during occasional smaller visits to Georgetown Univeristy held when
District of Columbia public schools are closed.