* 1300653
* Understanding the Stability and Reactivity of Radical Cations for Improved Overcharge Protection in Lithium-Ion Batteries
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Susan Odom, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2017
* USD 413,000.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms -
B Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Susan A. Odom from the University
of Kentucky will seek to improve the stability of radical cation forms of
aromatic molecules used as redox shuttle electrolyte additives for overcharge
protection in lithium-ion batteries. The lifetimes of the radical cations in a
variety of solvent environments, including carbonates used as battery
electrolytes will be characterized to determine decomposition products upon
oxidation. Analysis of these products will determine (i) how solvent environment
affects the reaction outcome, (ii) what features results in more stable radical
cations, and (iii) if there is a correlation in radical cation persistence vs.
the number of cycles overcharge protection in a lithium-ion battery before redox
shuttle decomposition. Higher oxidation potential shuttles for new cathode
materials will be synthesized and methods to stabilize the resulting radical
cations, by surrounding them in protective cages and extending electronic
delocalization, will be explored.

The results of this research project have potential to provide benefits to the
scientific community and our society in the development of new materials for the
improved performance and safety of energy storage materials, specifically
lithium-ion batteries. As the number of hybrid electric vehicles and the need
for storage of renewable energy sources continue to grow, it becomes more
important to have reliable energy storage. Electrolyte additives that improve
the safety and lifetimes of lithium-ion batteries are needed to expedite the
growth of this technology for use in multiple applications. This project will
expose students at different levels (high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students) to scientific research, in a growing area of social and practical
importance.