* 1300299
* Pincer-ligated catalysts for borylation of alkynes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Oleg Ozerov, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Oleg V. Ozerov
of Texas A&M University Main Campus to explore the potential of a new reaction
recently discovered in the investigator's laboratory: dehydrogenative borylation
of terminal alkynes (DHBTA). DHBTA is catalyzed by select iridium pincer
complexes and converts terminal alkynes directly into alkynylboronates under
mild conditions and with excellent selectivity. Alkynylboronates are very
attractive building blocks in organic chemistry that can be used as either
sources of the alkynyl group in coupling reactions or as alkynes in various
addition and cycloaddition reactions. The latter set of reactions leads to the
formation of new compounds with otherwise difficult to access carbon-boron bonds
that can be used for further elaboration into more complex molecules. This
research combines efforts in the design of new pincer ligands and their metal
complexes, exploration of the mechanism and scope of DHBTA, and demonstration of
the utility of alkynylboronates in alkyne-alkyne coupling to enynes and in
Pauson-Khand synthesis of borylated cyclopentenones. Prof. Ozerov and his
research group broaden the impact of their research activities via
collaborations with researchers at primarily undergraduate institutions and
outside of the US, through involvement of undergraduate students in research at
Texas A&M, as well as through outreach to local high schools. The molecular
assembly of high-value organic chemicals in the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries often relies on catalysis by transition metal compounds. This
research represents a new approach to using well-defined, molecular transition
metal complexes to catalyze the formation of compounds with carbon-boron bonds.
Organic compounds containing carbon-boron bonds are extremely versatile as
building blocks in the synthesis of complex organic structures. This project
provides new fundamental knowledge about the design and operation of successful
transition metal catalysts on the molecular level, explores select uses of the
newly accessible building blocks in synthesis, and provides training to a
diverse array of students in state-of-the-art chemistry of transition metals
and, most importantly, in the art of critical thinking and solving scientific
problems.