* 1300227
* Understanding the Chemical Activity of Oxide-supported Bimetallic Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Donna Chen, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 454,500.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professors Donna Chen and John Monnier will study titania-supported
Pt-Re clusters as model systems for developing new catalysts for the conversion
of bio-renewable fuels like ethanol to clean H2 for use in fuel cells. The
proposed studies will guide the development of superior Pt-Re/TiO2 catalysts by
providing fundamental understanding of how surface chemistry is controlled by:
bimetallic interactions, reactions occurring at the metal-cluster interface, the
activity of oxidized Re, and the dependence of these properties on cluster size.
In addition, the proposed work will provide detailed knowledge of reaction
kinetics, mechanisms and the nature of the active sites. Oxidative reforming of
ethanol with O2 and water (autothermal reforming) will be investigated on vapor-
deposited Pt, Re, and Pt-Re clusters prepared in ultrahigh vacuum. Partial
oxidation of ethanol and the water-gas shift reaction will be studied on the
model catalysts to independently investigate these two reactions, which both
occur in autothermal reforming. The bimetallic cluster surfaces will be fully
characterized using techniques such as scanning tunneling microscopy, low energy
ion scattering, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, temperature programmed
desorption and high resolution transmission electron microscopy. The catalytic
activities of the clusters will be investigated using a recirculation loop
reactor coupled to the UHV system, and surface intermediates will be studied
under catalytic conditions using infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy.
The PIs will train graduate and undergraduate students in the areas of surface
science and catalysis, and more importantly in the area of overlap between
surface science and catalyst performance. Furthermore, the PIs will actively
participate in efforts to promote understanding of nanoscience and
nanotechnology research in the local community via existing programs at USC.

Many commercial heterogeneous catalysts consist of bimetallic materials on oxide
support surfaces. This research project will lead to better understanding of how
catalytic activity can be tailored through interactions between the two metals
and interactions between the metals and the support. Specifically, this work
will contribute to the rational design of platinum and rhenium containing
catalysts for the decomposition of renewable biofuels like ethanol to clean
hydrogen for use in hydrogen fuel cells. Furthermore, the PIs will actively
participate in efforts to promote understanding of nanoscience and
nanotechnology research in the local community via existing programs at USC.