* 1300757
* Nanomanufacturing of Single Molecule Patterns Using a Microtubule Pen
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Zoica Cerasela Dinu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2018
* USD 301,325.00

This grant provides funding for research in creating a dip quill ?biological
pen? or ?biopen? capable of writing arrays of individual biomolecules or
?bioinks? with ultrahigh resolution (i.e., below 10 nm). User-controlled
charging of the biopen from a dye-labeled bio-inkwell is based on the molecular
recognition and assembly properties of the bioink onto the biopen. The biopen
recharge process permits control over the amount of bioink to be released in one
individual writing session. By adjusting the bioink properties (i.e.,
concentration in the inkwell), the speed, accuracy and frequency of writing will
be determined. Molecular biology and microscopy-based assays will be used to
investigate biopen recharging and assess its writing performance. Experiments
involving the analysis of the conditions that allow multiple writing sessions
using the same biopen will also be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will lead to advances in large-scale ?writing? of both
organic and inorganic materials such as quantum dots and nanotubes with
ultrahigh precision and at increased cost effectiveness. The applications of the
proposed approach include drug screening of individual compounds and
nanoelectronic systems miniaturization and integration. The primary goal of this
work is to determine the optimum conditions that allow biopen recharging and
assess its writing performance to ensure formation of bioink arrays in rapid
time and with high accuracy. The proposed work will also contribute to a more
fundamental understanding of the molecular recognition properties of the bioinks
on biopens and account for a dynamic view of the driving forces determining the
thermodynamic signatures for such recognition to occur.