* 1300544
* Synthesis, Characterization and Chemistry of Model Gamma Alumina Heterogeneous Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Judith Yang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 408,300.00

The NSF Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Judith C.
Yang to correlate experimental studies with first principles theoretical
simulations in developing a fundamental understanding of the structure/chemical
property relationship of a prototypical system based on platinum/gamma-alumina
(Pt/gamma-Al2O3). Pt/gamma-Al2O3 is an important heterogeneous catalysts system
used in oil refining, catalytic converters, and fuel cells. While much is known
about the system, a significant gap exists between experiment and theory because
commercially-available gamma-alumina is polycrystalline with ill-defined
morphologies, crystallography and impurities. To bridge the gap, Yang's research
group optimizes the oxidation conditions of single crystal nickel aluminum to
produce reasonably flat, defect-free, single crystal gamma-Al2O3 films that are
tens of nanometers thick (bulk-like). The characterization of size,
morphologies, facets, dispersion and interfaces as well as electronic and
chemical states under gas environments is accomplished by using the cutting-edge
facilities at the Center for Functional Nanomaterials at Brookhaven National
Laboratory. Direct comparison of the experimental data with theoretical modeling
is accomplished through collaboration with Drs. Linlin Wang and Duane Johnson
(Ames Laboratory and Iowa State University). This research project exposes
graduate students to cutting edge research environments through combined
university and national laboratory learning opportunities and collaborations.
Undergraduates are also mentored in a team environment. Finally, Professor Yang
serves and engages the local community via collaborations with the Pennsylvania
Junior Academy of Science and the Materials Research Society.