* 1300209
* Development of multi-scale models for enzyme catalysis in complex environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Qiang Cui, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

Qiang Cui of the University of Wisconsin is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to develop
novel computational methods such that enzyme catalysis in complex environments
can be effectively analyzed with theoretical techniques. The first development
targets chemical reactions that involve ligands of complex metal clusters in
enzymes. Cui and coworkers are developing a novel quantum mechanical/molecular
mechanical (QM/MM) framework in which only the reactive ligand and other groups
that explicitly participate the chemistry are treated with QM, while the rest of
the metal motif is treated at a MM level with an advanced valence-bond force
field. Variations in the interaction between the QM ligand and the MM metal
motif during the reaction are treated with a chemical potential equalization
approach, which avoids technical complications associated with explicitly
treating the QM region as an open system. The second subject concerns the
development of mixed-resolution simulations. This development takes advantage of
a coarse-grained (CG) model established in the Cui group for water, lipids and
amino acids that features a careful treatment of electrostatics. For the
calibration of atomistic/CG interactions, in addition to the common strategy of
using all-atom simulations as a reference, the unique aspect of this approach is
to also take advantage of experimental thermodynamic data for multi-component
solutions.

These developments meet the computational and theoretical challenges associated
with understanding how enzymes catalyze chemical reactions. By avoiding the
explicit treatment of the complex electronic structure of metal clusters, the
novel QM/MM framework allows computational chemists and biologists to study
chemical reactions in complex systems of biological relevance. It is
particularly powerful for modeling interesting and important complex processes
such as the proton-coupled-electron-transfers that occur in photosynthesis. The
mixed atomistic/CG approach is demanded in many applications that require a
high-resolution description of the protein and a realistic description of the
complex environment, such as a multi-component lipid bilayer with specific
curvature. These methods find applications in broad areas that go beyond
physical chemistry to include enzymology, biophysics/biochemistry and bio-
inorganic chemistry. Development of mixed-resolution models greatly expand the
scale and complexity of systems that can be meaningfully treated with
computations, and thus impact materials science and cellular biochemistry. The
computational methods developed in this project are implemented into the popular
molecular simulation package, CHARMM, and can be used to study a broad range of
problems in chemistry and biology. The outreach component of the project helps
emphasize the role of theoretical and computational chemistry in understanding
nature and stimulate young students to pursue careers in science.