* 1300965
* Riemann-Hilbert Problems, Integrable Systems and Random Matrix Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Percy Deift, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 425,999.00

The PI plans to work on a variety of problems, particularly asymptotic problems,
in the general area of integrable systems. Two key tools will play a prominent
role in the PI's work: Riemann-Hilbert Problems (RHP) and the non-linear, non-
commutative steepest descent method, on the one hand, and Random Matrix Theory
(RMT) on the other. RHPs can be viewed as the natural, non-commutative
generalization of the scalar integral representations of the classical special
functions, and just as the classical steepest descent method allows one to
evaluate the asymptotic behavior of the classical functions, so too the non-
linear, non-commutative steepest descent method allows one to evaluate the
asymptotic behavior of modern integrable systems such as the KdV equation and
the Painleve equations, amongst many others. RMT, and in particular, the
eigenvalues of random matrices, provide an extremely versatile tool to describe
the behavior of a wide variety of stochastic phenomena when the underlying
variables are no longer independent. Amongst the problems that the PI will
address with these tools are: the asymptotic behavior of the modes of a laser as
the Fresnel number goes to infinity; the behavior of random n-band matrices of
size N as n,N go to infinity; universality for general orthogonal and symplectic
matrix ensembles; the perturbation theory of the focusing Non-Linear
Schroedinger Equation on the line.

It is an extraordinary fact that the eigenvalues of random matrices provide a
quantitative model for a wide variety of statistical phenomena from physics,
pure and applied mathematics, and engineering. Applications of RMT range from
the analysis of resonances in nuclear scattering theory, to the analysis of the
zeroes of the Riemann zeta function on the critical line, in analytic number
theory.Quite spectacularly, and surprisingly, even the arrival times between
buses in the Mexican city of Cuernavaca, have been shown to obey random matrix
theory statistics! RMT as a discipline has two components: the development of
random matrix theory per se, and the application of the theory to new physical
and mathematical problems. The work of the PI will impact both components. In
the theory of integrable systems, two of the problems in particular proposed by
the PI, arise directly from technology, viz., laser mode asymptotics, and the
effect of perturbations on fiber optical transmission systems. The PI and his
collaborators are also writing basic texts on RHPs and RMT aimed at the
researchers as well as advanced graduate students entering the field.