* 1300818
* The investigation of chiral allenylidene complexes for catalytic applications
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Eike Bauer, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the National Science
Foundation, Professor Eike B. Bauer of the University of Missouri - St. Louis
will investigate chiral-at-metal allenylidene complexes as intermediates for
enantioselective catalytic propargylic substitution reactions, in which the -OR
functionality of propargylic alcohols or their derivatives is replaced by
nucleophiles. The chemistry of chiral-at-metal allenylidene complexes
[Ru*=C=C=CRR'] will be developed, which are potential intermediates in
propargylic substitutions. This approach will utilize stereogenic metal centers
as the source of chiral information for stereoinduction in these reactions. The
impact of varying electron densities at the metal center and of the oxidation of
stable Ru complex precursors on their catalytic reactivity will be studied. The
direct evidence for allenylidene intermediates by ESI-MS measurements will also
be sought. The research will add to our understanding of chiral-at-metal
allenylidene complexes and their use in organic transformations. The research
will be performed with the aid of graduate, undergraduate and local high school
students, which will educate the next generation of chemists (and related
professionals) to serve the needs of industry and the educational system on all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conservation of energy and resources has become
an important aim of chemical research and production. Catalysts are compounds
frequently employed in the synthesis of chemicals that can speed chemical
reactions and allow for reactions to be performed without employing heat,
thereby saving energy and resources, both in industrial and academic settings.
The project proposes the investigation of novel catalyst systems based on the
metal ruthenium that are designed to promote chemical reactions with potential
applications in pharmaceutical industry. The research is directed towards saving
resources and energy in chemical production while providing a new tool for the
synthesis of pharmaceuticals.