* 1300781
* A Geospatial Liquefaction Model for Rapid Response and Loss Estimation
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Laurie Baise, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/28/2017
* USD 264,927.00

Rapid response maps and loss estimates that are used immediately after an
earthquake to assess intensity and potential impact do not currently include
effects from liquefaction hazard. Thus, there is a critical need to develop new
methods of estimating the likelihood of liquefaction that can be rapidly and
broadly derived from both earthquake-specific intensity estimates and simple
geospatial features. A fundamental limitation of prior probabilistic
liquefaction models is that the liquefaction datasets contain few non-
liquefaction sites (a sampling bias). A second challenge to including
liquefaction effects in loss estimation and rapid response maps is that most
liquefaction models rely on site- and region-specific datasets (e.g. surficial
geology maps) that are time and cost intensive to collect. The preliminary
results for this project demonstrate how these problems have been solved by
developing logistic regression models from representative datasets of
liquefaction as a function of key input parameters that can easily be estimated
from global datasets (e.g. digital elevation models or DEM) and standard
earthquake-specific intensity data (e.g. peak ground acceleration). Candidate
explanatory variables include those derived from the DEM as well as indexes for
soil saturation, vegetation, climate, and hydrology. In preliminary work, a
logistic regression model was developed using data from two regions (Kobe, Japan
and Christchurch, New Zealand) which predicts probabilities of liquefaction
based on peak ground acceleration, elevation, distance to coast, and a
hydrologic parameter - compound topographic index - which is used as a proxy for
soil saturation. The model has been tested in Port-au-Prince, Haiti and provides
a consistent estimate of liquefaction probability. This demonstration shows that
the proposed new method of estimating the probability of liquefaction can be
rapidly and broadly derived from both earthquake-specific intensity estimates
and simple geospatial features. However, in order to develop a geospatial
liquefaction model that will be globally applicable, the database needs to be
extended to more geologic and climatic environments so that the model can
constrain regional variations in the geospatial proxies. In this project, a
geospatial liquefaction database will be developed from global earthquakes,
where the explanatory variables will be broadly available geospatial data.
Sampling bias will be addressed by developing the database from observations
that are representative of the true distribution of liquefaction. This marks a
shift in liquefaction potential model development, which to date has focused on
case history databases that are biased toward observations of liquefaction
occurrence. The goals of the project are to: &lt;br/&gt;1) Develop a global
database of liquefaction observations with geospatial variables. &lt;br/&gt;2)
Test first-order proxies for saturation and soil density &lt;br/&gt;3) Normalize
proxies for different geomorphic and climatic regions &lt;br/&gt;4) Develop a
probabilistic geospatial liquefaction model &lt;br/&gt;5) Train undergraduate
civil engineers in seismic hazard and loss estimation &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact and potentially transformative aspect of the proposed work is the
global applicability of the model which will enable liquefaction effects to be
included in future rapid response maps, loss estimates, and scenario simulations
for any future event anywhere in the world and, therefore improve disaster
response and reduce loss. In addition, undergraduate research and outreach
within the geographic information systems class at Tufts will be used to
introduce civil engineering undergraduate students to the importance of seismic
hazard and loss estimation for earthquakes.