* 1300518
* CPT-Based Characterization of Intermediate Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ross Boulanger, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2017
* USD 498,032.00

Evaluating properties and strengths of intermediate soils, such as silty sands,
clayey sands, sandy silts, sandy clays, and low-plasticity silts, remains one of
the most pervasive and uncertain challenges in geotechnical and geological
engineering. Technical literature is full of procedures for estimating strengths
(e.g., drained and undrained, monotonic and cyclic) of clean sands and
sedimentary clays, but their extension to intermediate soils often lacks a sound
theoretical basis and involves empirical interpolation of data from sands and
clays with little direct data for intermediate soils. This research will
directly address this deficiency by developing and validating a mechanics-based
framework for establishing inter-relationships between cone penetration
resistance, in-situ stresses, state parameter, and specific soil properties such
as monotonic strengths and cyclic resistance ratios (CRR) using a combination of
laboratory element tests, numerical simulations of cone penetration, and
centrifuge model testing. Laboratory tests, including limiting compression,
direct simple shear, and triaxial, will be used to characterize the properties
of nine different soil mixtures spanning a broad range of soil gradations and
fines plasticity. The large-strain process of cone penetration will be modeled
in FLAC by implementing an Arbitrary Langrangian-Eulerian (ALE) remeshing
technique and using the generalized constitutive model MIT-S1, the latter of
which has been shown to accurately model the behavior of soils ranging from
sands, to intermediate soils, to clays. Numerical simulations will be performed
for all soil mixtures, after validation against published data sets. Centrifuge
model tests with in-flight cone soundings and dynamic shaking will enable
further validation of the numerical simulations of cone penetration, provide
independent confirmation of cyclic strengths expected on the basis of the
laboratory element tests, and provide data on dynamic site response and the
associated dynamic and permanent ground deformations. The experimental and
numerical simulation data will then be used to develop and evaluate various
functional inter-relationships between the cone penetration test data and soil
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will directly address the
essential need for a mechanics-based framework to advance and transform the way
intermediate soil strengths and other properties are estimated from cone
penetration test data. The work will advance understanding and knowledge by
integrating laboratory, centrifuge, and numerical simulation components to
address a topic that has not previously been systematically addressed. The
potential findings will be applicable across a broad spectrum of geotechnical
and geological problems, including issues associated with the static and seismic
responses of any earth structure or civil infrastructure system founded on, or
constructed of, intermediate soils. A science-based generalized cone
interpretation method has the potential to transform the technical training
provided in graduate schools and professional courses, and reduce costly
conservatisms adopted in the face of engineering uncertainty in practice. The
study will contribute to the development of graduate students with broad
integrative training that equips them for successful careers in academia or
industry, exposure K-12 students to aspects of geotechnical and earthquake
engineering, and provide training for a group of high school teachers on earth
science modules that address their curricular needs.