* 1300208
* SusChEM: Rigid and Flexible Linker Systems for Superior Immobilized Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Janet Bluemel, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

The NSF Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Janet
Bluemel of Texas A&amp;M University to investigate homogeneous and immobilized
molecular nickel catalysts in order to clarify the processes by which metal
complexes decompose to form nanoparticles. Nickel(0) catalysts are immobilized
on surfaces via phosphine linkers chosen from a broad range of mono-, di-, and
tridentate ligands that incorporate flexible alkyl chains or rigid
tetraphenylelement cores. Strategic ligand selection helps discriminate between
dimerization on the surface and agglomeration as the crucial step in the
eventual nanoparticle formation. The cyclotrimerization of phenylacetylene is
used as a model reaction to study the selectivity and activity of the
immobilized catalysts and to monitor potential nanoparticle formation. The
dynamics of metal complex migration from one uncoordinated phosphine linker to
the next on the surface is quantified using 31P T1 relaxation times and HRMAS
NMR data. Metal complexes other than Ni(0) and different catalytic reactions are
also investigated to probe the general applicability of the insights gained with
the model catalytic system. Immobilized catalysts have the potential to improve
industrial scale chemical processes and thus, this project may improve the
environmental sustainability of large scale chemical synthesis by providing
general methodologies for the preparation and use of non-precious metal
catalysts with superior activities, selectivities, and lifetimes. Graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the project receive interdisciplinary
training and gain experience in advanced techniques for the characterization of
amorphous materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemical Catalysis Program
supports the efforts of Professor Janet Bluemel of the Texas A&amp;M University
to compare differences in homogeneous and immobilized catalysts. During
homogeneous catalysis, nanoparticles can form from the metal catalyst resulting
in a suspension of heterogeneous catalysts in solution. Starting from
immobilized catalysts, the same process leads to nanoparticle formation on the
surface. This uncontrollable scenario is undesirable because it is not
predictable, not generally preventable, and may change the selectivity of the
catalyst or shorten its lifetime, diminishing the recyclability of the catalyst.
This research project investigates homogeneous and immobilized molecular nickel
catalysts in order to clarify the processes associated with metal catalyst
decomposition (e.g. decomposition on the surface or agglomeration in solution)
to form nanoparticles. This project has the potential to improve the
environmental sustainability of large scale chemical synthesis by providing
general methodologies for the preparation and use of non-precious metal
catalysts with superior activities, selectivities, and lifetimes. Graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the project receive interdisciplinary
training, collaborate internationally, and gain experience in advanced
analytical techniques.