* 1300158
* Electrochemistry on the nanoscale
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Michael Mirkin, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 12/31/2017
* USD 484,560.00

In this project co-funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program-A and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Michael Mirkin of the City University of New York, Queens
College is developing new methodologies and employing them for studying
electrochemical reactions on the nanoscale. Single gold nanoparticles are
dispensed from a glass or carbon nanopipette and delivered precisely to the
desired location on the sample surface. This methodology is useful for
applications ranging from surface patterning to controlled reagent delivery to
biological cells. This project will provide research opportunities to high
school students and undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
proposed research is on the combining resistive-pulse technique with the
scanning electrochemical microscope (SECM) for controlled delivery of
nanoparticles. The resistive-pulse setup enables monitoring of single particles
passing through the pipette orifice, and the SECM is used for pipette
positioning and surface patterning. The particles are immobilized on the carbon
surface modified with a polyphenylene layer. The developed methodology is also
employed to study the dynamics of oxidative stress in activated macrophages.
Interferon-coated fluorescent nanoparticles and platinized carbon nanoelectrodes
are inserted in activated macrophages and their vacuoles to characterize and
quantify the reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. The broader impacts of this
work include the development of useful research tools for nanotechnology and
cell biology. The experiments with macrophages may help elucidate the mechanisms
of oxidative stress, which are of great significance for the immune system and
related diseases, including cancer.