* 1300603
* New methods for describing electronic excitation, ionization,  and electrostatics of complex systems in aqueous environments
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2017
* John Herbert, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 01/31/2017
* USD 419,647.00

John Herbert of the Ohio State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop improved
electronic structure-based methods for simulating electronic excitation and
ionization in condensed-phase systems, specifically macromolecules and aqueous
solutions. Herbert and his research group develop algorithms to locate minimum-
energy crossing points along conical seams, based on spin-flip time-dependent
density functional theory, which allows them to explore and characterize
excited-state potential energy surfaces in large systems such as fully-solvated
DNA with multiple nucleobases described quantum-mechanically. A major goal is to
make contact with femtosecond laser spectroscopic measurements in DNA. Quantum
Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics (QM/MM) methods that are compatible with an
arbitrary description of the QM region are being developed for this purpose as
well. QM/MM methods, with various descriptions of the solvent's polarization
response following ionization, are being developed and tested for calculation of
vertical ionization energies of molecules in liquid solution; such quantities
can now be measured via liquid microjet photoelectron spectroscopy. Improved,
numerically-robust versions of continuum electrostatics are being developed as
low-cost boundary conditions for these simulations.

Time-resolved (femtosecond) laser spectroscopy is an important tool for
interrogating the molecular-level chemical dynamics of complex systems, but
often these experiments need assistance from detailed quantum-mechanical
calculations and molecular dynamics simulations in order to assign a mechanistic
interpretation to the time constants and/or energy gaps that are measured
experimentally. The Herbert research group is developing the computational tools
to simulate these experiments at the molecular level. Although the computational
machinery and software that they develop is quite general, Herbert and his
coworkers focus on a few important chemical problems. These include the
photophysics following UV excitation of DNA, where they seek to understand where
the input energy goes, how can it damage the molecule, and what sorts of "traps"
exist to prevent such damage. They are also interested in the ionization of
liquid water and other aqueous systemsas a means of understanding the dynamics
and energetics of the water radiolysis process.