* 1300917
* The Effect of Alumina Substitution on Viscoelasticity of Calcium Silicate Hydrate
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Leslie Struble, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this project is to link the chemical composition and molecular
structure of calcium silicate hydrate (C-S-H) to the viscoelastic mechanical
properties of the material. C-S-H is the main binding hydration product of
portland cement that governs properties of concrete. If alumina is available
during the production of C-S-H, typically from alumino-silicate supplementary
cementitious materials, C-S-H is able to incorporate aluminum as a guest ion,
producing a calcium aluminosilicate hydrate (C-A-S-H). Alumina incorporation is
seen to alter its molecular structure by increasing the tetrahedral chain
length, a change that is seen to promote crosslinking between C-S-H layers. By
applying a multiscale static and dynamic mechanical testing that include a novel
nanomechanical characterization technique of dynamic nanoindentation, the main
hypothesis that will be tested during this project is to determine whether C-A-
S-H is less viscoelastic than C-S-H due to this increased polymerization. To
relate chemical composition and molecular structure with viscoelastic
properties, phase-pure C-S-H and C-A-S-H will be synthesized in the lab with
varying composition and characterized using advanced techniques such as nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) for local atomic environment, X-ray diffraction (XRD)
for detection of crystalline phases, and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) for bulk
chemical composition. Furthermore, a combination of NMR characterization before
and after mechanical testing will indicate if there are any changes in molecular
structure during viscoelastic deformation, knowledge that will be
transformative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the hypothesis that alumina substitution
in C-S-H reduces creep is proved right, this research will lead to a new method
of controlling the viscoelasticity of concrete that can ultimately lead to
longer life of concrete structures. Concrete is the most widely used
construction material in the world and production of it is associated with
approximately 5% of the global CO2 emissions. Thus, any increase in the
longevity of concrete structure will mean reduction in the amount of concrete
produced and associated greenhouse gas emission. In addition, the main source of
alumina in C-S-H is usually fly ash, a waste material that also reduces the
portland cement content in concrete and thereby reduces its greenhouse gas
emission. The research is well integrated with educational plans, including (a)
training graduate student in advanced chemo-mechanical characterization of
materials at multiscale, (b) incorporating research findings into graduate level
classes, and (c) generating enthusiasm for engineering and sustainable
construction among talented middle school students.