* 1300212
* Manufacture of Strong, Tough Hybrid Hydrogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Robert Weiss, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2017
* USD 330,769.00

This grant provides funding for the manufacture of hybrid hydrogels, wherein
physical and cross-linked networks are incorporated into a single multi-
component polymer. Hydrogels are three-dimensional networks composed of
chemically and/or physically-crosslinked hydrophilic polymers that have
applications in diverse technologies such as drug or agrochemical delivery, food
and personal care products, optics, fluidics, wound healing and tissue
engineering. Chemical hydrogels formed from covalent bonds have permanent
shapes, but they generally exhibit poor mechanical strength and toughness, while
physical hydrogels exhibit good toughness, but lack the creep resistance of
covalent gels. The research includes the synthesis of hybrid hydrogels and the
characterization of the microstructure, swelling behavior, flow and viscoelastic
properties and mechanical properties of neutral and charged materials. The
objectives are to develop strong, tough hydrogels, understand the mechanism of
toughening in hybrid hydrogels and the development of manufacturing methods for
producing shaped gel objects by solvent or melt injection, melt shaping and
electrospinning of nanofibers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research will lead to improvements in the mechanical properties and
manufacturing methods for producing hydrogel products. The development of an
understanding of the mechanism by which strong, tough materials that are mostly
water (i.e., hydrogels) are achieved will lead to the design of improved soft
materials for existing applications and expand the application of hydrogels into
technologies for which they are currently unsuitable, because of poor stiffness,
strength and/or fracture toughness. In addition to the expansion of commercial
applications of hydrogels, the substitution of hydrogels for many existing
material applications should also have positive environmental implications, in
that most hydrogels are environmentally benign. The nano-structured morphology
expected for hybrid hydrogels may also lead to smart applications of these
materials, such as shape memory and/or self-healing behavior.