* 1300024
* Collaborative Research: Coupling System Chemistry and Time-Dependent Deformation of Cementitious Materials through Evolving Thermodynamic States
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* M. Tyler Ley, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

Recent research indicates that stress induced dissolution is a primary time-
dependent deformation mechanism of various minerals. Based on recent modeling
efforts, there is reason to believe that stress induced dissolution is also a
significant deformation mechanism in cementitious materials. Thus, there is an
expected coupling between the evolution of chemistry, microstructure
development, and stress and strain states within cementitious materials. A
primary objective of this project is to develop a fundamental thermodynamic
model framework that links evolving system chemistry and mechanics of
cementitious materials, and to implement the model through a computational
method that predicts the fully coupled evolution of microstructure and
viscoelastic/viscoplastic properties of the materials. In synergy with the
fundamental modeling, novel experiments using time-stepping micro-computed
tomography of stressed specimens will be performed to test the hypothesis that
stress induces dissolution in cementitious materials. The results of this
project will lead to important advances in understanding the evolution of
constitutive properties and the underlying deformation mechanisms; this will
ultimately help enable design of concrete with greater strength, toughness,
durability, and sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concrete, the second most
used commodity in the world, suffers from many structural and durability issues
that result in substantial economic and environmental costs. The drawbacks of
cementitious materials such as concrete may be attributed in part to design
limitations associated with the lack of available modeling tools for effectively
predicting the evolution of the material structure and properties. The results
of this project will provide societal benefit by providing advanced modeling,
experimental, and computational tools to help improve the economy, durability
and sustainability of cementitious materials. Furthermore, other researchers
will ultimately be able to freely implement the tools developed in this project
to address a host of important issues with respect to concrete, such as
degradation due to freeze-thaw cycling and chemical attack. A modeling approach
that involves fundamental theory and coupling between chemistry and mechanical
processes (such as deformation) has the capability to ultimately transform our
understanding of the behavior of cementitious materials such as concrete.