* 1300088
* RUI: Synthesis of New P-Metallated Nucleosides
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Robert Stockland, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 03/31/2018
* USD 163,534.00

With this award from the Chemical Synthesis Program, Prof. Robert A. Stockland
Jr. from Bucknell University will synthesize unique P-metallated nucleosides
through phosphorus-hydrogen (P-H) activation of hydrogen phosphonates and
related compounds using organometallic complexes as precursors. These metallated
nucleosides will serve as transfer agents in a new base-free cross-coupling
reaction that will be developed for the synthesis of P-arylated derivatives. The
cross-coupling chemistry will be expanded to include heteroaryl substrates
through the incorporation of nitrogen, sulfur, and oxygen-containing aromatic
heterocycles. Detailed mechanistic studies will shed light on key reaction
intermediates as well as the electronic and steric scope of the reaction.
Furthermore, the synthesis of new derivatives through the exchange of one metal
center for another will be investigated in order to expand the scope of the
chemistry and incorporate metal centers that have a rich history in
electrochemistry or photophysics. The metallated nucleosides will also be used
as building blocks in the synthesis of unique metal-organic
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will lead to the development of
new synthetic methodology for the preparation of functionalized nucleosides.
These new compounds are high-value targets due to their potential applications
in medicine and chemical biology. Furthermore, this work will generate
strategies for the synthesis of compounds with unique geometries and reactivity
profiles that are not accessible with current methods. Experiments designed to
probe the importance of specific structural motifs will be carried out to refine
the synthetic procedures and design second-generation catalysts. The
undergraduate researchers involved in these projects will gain valuable
laboratory experience in several areas of chemistry and will hone their critical
thinking and problem solving skills.