* 1300466
* GOALI: Polarized Infrared Imaging for the Mechanics of Photovoltaic Wafers
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Harley Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 06/30/2017
* USD 398,407.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to investigate the mechanics of stress, defects, and
failure in thin silicon photovoltaic wafers using a combination of infrared
photoelasticity and polarized photoluminescence inspection techniques. Silicon
wafers are the most common base material in solar cells, but due to stress and
defects that arise during the crystal growth process, material losses during
manufacturing remain a significant problem. Under support from this award, the
relationship between stress and defects in photovoltaic wafers will be studied
directly using lock-in infrared photoelasticity. Also, a new class of inspection
techniques based on a lock-in polarized photoluminescence method, in which both
intensity and polarization of emitted light is measured, will be developed and
used to study the interaction of stress and defects with light absorbed or
emitted by the material. Finally, the relationship between stress and failure in
these materials will be investigated using a series of imaging and fracture
experiments.

The award will support a collaborative effort between university and industry
researchers. The research could have significant impact in the solar energy
industry, as it will help to explain the role of stress and defects in
photovoltaic wafer failure, and could enable a pathway to rapid inspection and
sorting of silicon photovoltaic wafers based on the probability of mechanical
failure. The results will also add to the fundamental understanding of the
interaction of light with defects in crystalline materials. In addition to the
research objectives, the award will support graduate and undergraduate education
and training. The academic/industry partnership will be highlighted by the
annual summer placement of a graduate research assistant in the industry
facility to learn characterization and manufacturing methods. Undergraduate
students will be involved through an engineering outreach event at the
University of Illinois, and through research in the laboratory of the Principle
Investigator.