* 1300787
* Theoretical Studies of Inorganic, Organometallic, and Bioinorganic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Hall, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Through this award funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael B. Hall at Texas A&M
University, College Station, will solve problems of current interest in
catalytic reactions or in fundamental steps of catalytic cycles involving the
activation of alkanes and dihydrogen by using modern quantum mechanical
calculations. Full-gradient geometry optimizations with non-local density-
functional theory and ab initio energy calculations, primarily coupled cluster
and multireference configuration interaction, will be the primary computational
tools. The research will study both natural enzymatic systems, particularly the
hydrogenase enzymes, and totally synthetic systems, including model complexes
for the hydrogenase systems and both thermal and photochemical activation of the
systems that activate alkanes and dihydrogen. The project will involve close
collaborations with experimental groups. These frontier problems also provide a
testing ground for new functional and methodological developments. In that
regard two developments are planned: one on the generalized molecular orbital
method, which is a restricted-active-space self-consistent-field method to
initialize multireference configuration interaction, and another on the "Fenske-
Hall" approximate molecular orbital method. The Fenske-Hall method will be
expanded to explore its applicability to combined quantum-mechanical/molecular-
mechanical calculations. Its development will be particularly useful in modeling
metalloenzymes and in metallo-clusters possibly as large as small nanocrystals.
The close coupling of theory and experiment through collaborative arrangements
will stimulate rapid progress on these important chemical problems.

Alkane activation can play a role in making better use of these basic raw
materials, and understanding how nature and artificial systems cleave and
reassemble hydrogen can help in the development of a hydrogen economy. In
addition to the education of students and postdoctoral associates at Texas A&M
University, the large number of collaborators now associated with the laboratory
brings the educational aspects to a much broader audience. In addition to the
intellectual value in the development of the Fenske-Hall method, its simple
graphical users interface (GUI) will be expanded to allow the method to be
easily used by a wider audience and to be incorporated into teaching both
undergraduate and graduate students about chemical bonding concepts.