* 1300903
* Theoretical Studies in Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Stuart Shapiro, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Funding for the three-year project to the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign (UIUC) supports the research in general relativity and theoretical
astrophysics of the PI, Professor Stuart L. Shapiro. In addition to the PI, the
funding supports one postdoctoral research associate and two undergraduate (REU)
students to assist in the research. The intellectual scope of this research
program spans several problems involving general relativity, the generation of
gravitational radiation, relativistic hydrodynamics, and relativistic
magnetohydrodynamics. A common thread uniting the different theoretical topics
is the crucial role of gravitation, especially relativistic gravitation. Compact
objects provide the principal forum, and the dynamics of matter in a strong
gravitational field is a major theme. Some of the topics for investigation
include the inspiral and coalescence of compact binaries (binary black holes,
binary neutron stars, binary black hole--neutron stars and binary white dwarf--
neutron stars), the generation of gravitational waves from binaries and other
promising astrophysical sources and the accompanying electromagnetic signals,
gravitational collapse, the stability of rotating, relativistic stars and the
evolution and final fate of unstable stars, gamma-ray burst sources, and
circumbinary disks around merging supermassive black holes in the cores of
galaxies and quasars. Most of these topics represent long-standing, fundamental
problems in theoretical physics requiring large-scale computation for solution.
Hence the approach involves to a significant degree large-scale computations on
parallel machines, as well as analytical modeling. Many of the numerical
calculations employ the state-of-the-art computational and visualization
resources of the UIUC's National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA).
They comprise both initial value and evolution computations and treat vacuum
spacetimes containing black holes as well as spacetimes containing realistic
matter sources, magnetic fields and both electromagnetic and neutrino radiation.
The results have important implications for astronomical observations, including
those planned for gravitational wave interferometers, such as the Advanced
LIGO/VIRGO network, GEO, KAGRA and eLISA/NGO.

This project has broader impacts beyond the solutions to the specific research
problems that it tackles. The planned research bridges the fields of general
relativity and astrophysics. It provides the main funding for research in
general relativity at UIUC and a significant component of the total support in
theoretical astrophysics to that institution. An appreciable portion of the
funding is devoted to the education, training and support of undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students. These students collaborate with the PI on
the majority of research topics funded by the project. The grant supports the
activities of the PI's Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) team at
UIUC in computational astrophysics and general relativity theory. The training
that each of the PI's undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students
receives in large-scale computations and scientific visualization, as well as in
several different areas of theoretical physics and astrophysics, prepares them
to pursue professional careers in a broad range of scientific and technical
fields. The computer algorithms and numerical codes that are developed are
useful to other groups working in computational physics and astrophysics.
Through the research and outreach activities of the PI and his group, the grant
helps promote the use of computers and visualization tools at all levels of
education, as well as the public awareness of some the latest and most exciting
developments in gravitation physics and astrophysics.