* 1300912
* SusChEM: Selective C-H Functionalization by Highly Tunable Metalloporphyrin Carbenoid: A Mechanistic Investigation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Yong Zhang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports the efforts of Professor Yong Zhang of the
Stevens Institute of Technology towards selective carbon-hydrogen (C-H)
functionalization using metalloporphyrin carbenoids. Metalloporphyrin carbenoids
have been found to be among the most efficient and selective catalysts for C-H
insertions however, mechanistic studies on these catalysts are relatively scarce
and the origins of molecular reactivity and selectivity have not been well
characterized. Such information is critical for the future development of these
catalysts, especially since most reported C-H insertion yields are modest. Dr.
Zhang's research provides systematic profiles of the origins of reactivity for
key metalloporphyrin carbenes as well as reactivity and selectivity trends of
various structural factors to facilitate the development of highly selective
metalloporphyrin-based C-H insertion catalysts with metal centers that are
earth-abundant, minimally toxic, and relatively inexpensive. Dr. Zhang's
research is broadly integrated with teaching and learning. Students in his lab
are actively involved in classes and outreach programs that incorporate their
research results. Dr. Zhang continues his vigorous efforts to have broad
participation of students from different groups at various levels, particularly
including students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic
synthesis is of vital importance in modern society to provide drugs and
materials. Selective carbon-hydrogen (C-H) functionalization represents a
powerful, potentially sustainable strategy for organic synthesis. As models of
broadly interesting and useful heme protein reaction intermediates,
metalloporphyrin carbenoids have been found to be among the most efficient and
highly selective catalysts for C-H insertions into organic molecules, even
though few mechanistic studies have been done and their origin of the catalyst's
reactivity and selectivity are not clear. Such information is critical for
future development, especially since most C-H insertion yields using these
catalysts are modest. Dr. Zhang's research provides systematic profiles of
needed information such as molecular design guidelines to facilitate the
development of highly selective metalloporphyrin-based C-H insertion catalysts
that use earth-abundant metals (such as iron). Such insights may lead to
improvements sustainable and "green" chemistry in the pharmaceutical and
materials syntheses industries. Dr. Zhang's research is broadly integrated with
teaching and learning. Several channels are employed by his students to broadly
disseminate their research to the scientific community and general public. For
example, students involved in this NSF-supported project are required to give
presentations/reports in their classes, and within their department, university,
K-12 institutions, museums, news media, and/or other venues, enhancing the
scientific understanding of the impacts of this project.