* 1300590
* Lithographically Patterned Heteromolecular Arrays with Single-Molecule Resolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Michael Sheetz, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2017
* USD 410,918.00

This nanomanufacturing research program aims to engineer arrays of dissimilar
biomolecules for the purpose of studying increasingly complex biomolecular
interactions. Advanced lithographic patterning will be used to create molecular-
scale binding posts on solid surfaces. Different biomolecules, such as proteins
and peptides, will be chemically assembled on the posts. The biomolecules will
be organized in a variety of geometric arrangements, and the position of each
molecule will be precisely determined. The arrays will be characterized by
different microscopy techniques in order to optimize the placement accuracy and
chemical selectivity of the process. A range of molecular densities, nanometer-
scale spacings and geometric arrangements will be explored, and their effects on
binding interactions between different biomolecules will be measured and
quantified. The arrays will then be applied to the study of cellular response to
the geometric organization of different proteins that are part of a cell's
environment.

The ability to control the placement and organization of individual molecules is
a key challenge in nanoscience and nanotechnology. The types of nano-scale
arrayed surfaces developed in this program represent an important step towards
manufacturing with molecular precision. They can be applied to a broad
assortment of cellular and biomolecular systems and can be used for assembly of
heterogeneous molecular species over a wide range of length scales. Applications
in medical diagnostics, tissue engineering and therapeutic treatment are
possible. Notably, the research in this program is highly interdisciplinary. It
integrates tools and techniques originally developed by the semiconductor
industry for the manufacture of electronic devices with biosystems in order to
create new functionality at the nanoscale. The students and post-docs who train
in this program will represent a new class of scientists who are comfortable
working across traditional scientific boundaries.