* 1300010
* Optical Characterization of Intrinsic Properties and Fabric of Coarse-Grained Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Roman Hryciw, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 408,194.00

This research project aims to bring intrinsic soil properties including particle
shape, angularity and surface roughness as well as soil fabric into wider common
practice and research through development of optical methods for rapidly
quantifying them at no extra time or cost than required to develop grain size
distributions. To accomplish this, a sediment imaging (Sedimaging) system will
be used for particles smaller than 2 mm and a translucent segregation table
(TST) will be used for the coarser fraction. Both systems rapidly sort a
statistically representative soil specimen prior to image capture. Most
importantly, although the particles are sorted, they need not be separated from
contact with each other. This allows for a large number of particles to be
rapidly evaluated. Furthermore, because of the recent introduction of high
resolution cameras approaching 40 MPix, only one high resolution photograph is
needed in each test. The major research tasks include: development of advanced
Sedimaging and TST systems; segmentation of particles from images of 3D
assemblies and selection of segmented particles for shape analysis;
quantification of particle shape of segmented particles; comparison of particle
Roundness and Sphericity obtained from Sedimaging and TST images with
traditionally obtained (ex-situ) measures; determination of typical shape
distributions as a function of particle size within specimens; establishing
minimum particle size for which shape descriptors should be determined;
evaluation of surface roughness by corner detection methods; development of a
wavelet-based index for soil fabric potential; performance of laboratory tests
for confirmation of previous findings on particle shape and fabric effects; and
extension of methods to images collected in-situ by the vision cone
penetrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts will be addressed on three
distinct fronts. First, the Sedimaging and TST tests will become regular and
distinct laboratory exercises in the undergraduate Introductory Geotechnical
Engineering course at the University of Michigan. This will demonstrate that
research findings and developments do transfer into engineering practice.
Secondly, working with the University of Michigan Ergonomics Research Center and
three local sand and aggregate producers, the geotechnical laboratory work
environment will be evaluated with emphasis on improvements created by the
Sedimaging and TST systems that relieve workers from the tedium of particle size
and aspect ratio testing. Finally, the impediments to technology transfer (from
research to practice) in geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering will be
investigated and documented by geotechnical specialty area (i.e soil
improvement, deep foundations, retaining structures, etc.).