* 1300476
* Alpha II-Spectrin: Mechanical Spring and Structural Scaffold for the Nucleoskeleton
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Kris Dahl, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2017
* USD 345,000.00

The research objective of this award is to determine how opposing mechanical
elements of the nucleus help maintain proper shape of the organelle which houses
the DNA. The nucleus of mammalian cells has a peripheral network of lamin
filaments that provides stiffness. Preliminary results show that alpha II-
spectrin provides mechanical resilience or recoil, which may be described as a
"spring". Studies conducted under this award will test the mechanisms of this
spring hypothesis by quantifying recovery of nuclei in cells under force. The
force responsiveness of the lamin network and subnuclear components including
the DNA will be observed during mechanical testing in cells that have been
depleted of alpha II-spectrin. Also, binding partners will be determined for
alpha II-spectrin using purified proteins and protein fragments so that a more
accurate description of the architecture can be identified.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although strength and stiffness is important at every
level of physiology, mechanical recoil and resilience also plays an important
role in maintaining proper homeostasis. Here, the discovery and investigation of
alpha II-spectrin as a nuclear mechanical spring will allow a thorough
understanding of integrated cellular mechanics and mechanobiology. If
successful, these studies will advance the understanding of nuclear structure,
gene expression and mechanical responsiveness of cells. Also, results may
provide insights into the large number of human diseases and progressive
dystrophies associated with lamins and other nuclear structural proteins. The
education plan focuses on enhancing ethics training for undergraduate
researchers. To directly impact students from underrepresented groups nationally
and internationally, advanced online learning initiatives in Anatomy and
Physiology are being developed as a supplement for community college education
in pre-medicine.