* 1300794
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site:  Robotics Engineering for Better Life and Sustainable Future
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Andrew Kim, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This award renews an exemplary Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site on
Robotics Engineering for Better Life and Sustainable Future at Michigan State
University. The renewed site will continue to develop a strong partnership
between MSU and schools in the greater Lansing-Detroit-Grand Rapids area on
advancing pre-college science and engineering education by training a cadre of
leaders of middle and high school teachers in the areas of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). The program will recruit teachers from
schools in Mid- and Southeast Michigan with a focus on those serving
socioeconomically challenged populations and students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in science and engineering. RET participants will attend a
6-week summer institute, to participate in cutting-edge research on robotics
engineering, with mentoring from engineering faculty who lead vibrant robotics
related research programs. Working with PIs, faculty mentors, a curriculum
development specialist and an editor of TeachEngineering.org, teachers will
develop innovative, standards-compliant curriculum modules and participate in a
number of professional development activities. Extensive follow-up activities
are planned throughout the academic year to ensure the translation of lab
experience into classroom practice, and to foster and strengthen long-term
partnership between engineering faculty and teachers. A third-party professional
program evaluator will track and evaluate the program and provide feedback for
improvement. The evaluator will also conduct longitudinal studies on
participants to assess the longer-term impact of the RET program.

Intellectual Merit. Under the coherent theme of Robotics Engineering for Better
Life and Sustainable Future, the proposed RET Site will expose teachers to
leading robotics research spanning biorobotics, evolutionary robotics,
nanorobotics, brain-machine interface, biomechanics, and human-robot
interaction, and to the profound changes robotic technologies will bring to
personal care, medical procedures, environmental monitoring and exploration, and
entertainment and gaming. The interdisciplinary nature of robotics engineering
will provide a fertile ground for developing creative course modules in biology,
physics, chemistry, and technology that align with state and national standards,
which will excite pre-college students and liven up classroom learning.

Broader Impacts. The proposed RET Site project is expected to enrich the
professional development of a number of future leaders in STEM education, about
half being females with a similar ratio for minorities. It will also result in
innovative curriculum for science and technology courses, and pique the interest
of middle and high school students in scientific inquiry. Through the
partnership with schools in Lansing, Detroit, and Grand Rapids, and the all-
girls Regina High School, the proposed project will positively influence the
learning and career paths of young students, especially students from
underserved districts and underrepresented groups in Michigan and beyond for
years to come, thus contributing to a technology-savvy workforce that is much
needed by America.