* 1300504
* Quantum Monte Carlo studies of rovibrational dynamics and quantum solvation in ultracold bosonic clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* David Farrelly, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2017
* USD 368,066.00

David Farrelly of Utah State University is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to develop a
new theoretical and computational approach to the quantum Diffusion Monte Carlo
(DMC) method. Application will be made to molecular and cluster dynamics. In the
proposed algorithm, the nodal hypersurfaces of wave functions - a key input to
DMC calculations - are computed and improved on-the-fly throughout the
calculation. The nodal search is formulated as a multi-dimensional optimization
problem, and is solved using genetic algorithms. Both methodological and
algorithmic developments are underway and these will allow efficient utilization
of current and future high-end parallel computers. Simulations of problems of
current interest are being performed: these include the spectroscopy and
dynamics of molecules and molecular clusters doped into small bosonic droplets
of helium-4 atoms or para-hydrogen molecules. Bosonic solvent droplets have been
used experimentally as nanocryostats to form exotic species and aggregates, as
chemical nanoreactors to isolate otherwise unstable reaction intermediates, and
as spectroscopic matrices to study large organic molecules and
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Farrelly and his coworkers are developing a
new theoretical and computational approach to Quantum Monte Carlo algorithms
used for investigating the quantum dynamics of complex molecular systems,
including clusters of atoms. Usually one of the inputs to these algorithms is
the nodal structure of the quantum wavefunctions, i.e., the places where the
wavefunction is zero. Unfortunately, this structure is not usually known prior
to the calculation so it must be "guessed at". In this project, the nodal
structure is computed "on the fly" during the calculation using state-of-the art
optimization methods, leading to a more accurate calculation. Quantum Monte
Carlo methods are widely used in fields such as the rational design of advanced
new materials, simulations of processes important in atmospheric chemistry
(e.g., aerosol formation), and cold-atom physics (e.g., quantum computing and
developing essentially noise-free atomic analogs of electronics using cold
atoms). Undergraduate and graduate students, including those from
underrepresented groups, are being trained in state-of-the art computational
methods. The resulting computer program is being designed so as to be useful and
broadly accessible to other researchers.