* 1300223
* Strain-Induced Ordering, Assembly, and Defects in Nanoscale Thin-Film Heterostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Yanfei Gao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 01/31/2019
* USD 268,000.00

The research objective of this award is to identify and investigate fundamental
modeling issues in a simultaneous thin film growth and self-assembly process, in
which phase separation as well as self-assembly of nanoscale heterostructure
occur simultaneously during the growth of thin film. A successful fabrication
process for ordered arrays of nanostructures in multi-phase thin films would
find applications in a wide variety of material systems such as superconductors
and multiferroics. Key hypotheses underpinning the fundamental behavior will be
investigated including (1) vertical/lateral ordering and self-assembly is strain
mediated; (2) control of these nanostructures relies on the competition between
several kinetic processes; and (3) resulting functional properties depend on
defects in thin film heterostructures. The proposed work will develop a
theoretical model and phase-field simulations that consider the evolution of
composition (phase separation), morphology (film growth), defects, and
polarization (domain switching). The predicative capabilities will be tested by
close collaborations with experimental groups.

The grand challenge arising from the synthesis and applications of multi-
functional materials is how to achieve patterned and ordered nanostructures with
one or multiple length scales that are commensurate with the designed functional
properties. As a critical step towards this direction, this program helps
establish a centralized platform for focused research and education activities
in the fields of novel materials processing, reliability, and multifunctional
properties at small scales, which are beyond the current curricula and
educational means in materials science and applied mechanics. The educational
plan focuses on new curriculum development in nanomaterials and active
participation in the UT Math and Science Center (targeting high school students
from rural counties in East Tennessee) and the UT Pre-Collegiate Research
Scholars program (targeting high school students in Knox County). These
activities will have a particular emphasis on educating students from
underrepresented groups.