* 1300720
* A Crowdsourced Knowledge Base for the Damage Assessment of Extreme Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Thomas Oommen, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 06/30/2018
* USD 335,030.00

The use of crowdsourced volunteers to analyze remote sensing imagery is a
relatively new damage assessment approach, developed in the wake of the 2008
Sichuan earthquake, and formalized during the 2010 Haiti and 2011 New Zealand
earthquakes. This approach is enabled by the advent of Web 2.0 technologies and
the ubiquity of free remote sensing images that are synoptic with high spatial-,
spectral- and temporal-resolutions. The demonstrated benefit was a speedup by a
factor of two or three in the delivery of damage estimates. However, the success
of this manual crowdsourced approach for damage assessment is dependent upon the
size and reliability of the crowd. This research will focus on a new framework
called BACKBOnE (Building A Crowdsourced Knowledge Base of Extreme Events) for
extreme event damage assessment utilizing remotely sensed images that
automatically finds and classifies damages, and builds a data-driven knowledge
base of damage characteristics that can be reused during future events. BACKBOnE
is a transformation of the manual crowdsourced approach for damage assessment
and is unprecedented in the disasters community, combining the power of
crowdsourcing with state-of-the-art methods from computer science and image
processing. It replaces the manual effort with automated methods for object-
based change detection and classification that increase the speed, reduce the
cost of damage assessment, and scale well to increases in data volume. It shifts
the crowd from its task of manual annotation to quality assurance feedback on
the performance of automated methods via crowdsourced active learning. This
improves assessment accuracy, while decoupling the framework's success from the
size and reliability of the crowd because feedback is solicited from annotators
scored favorably, and only on difficult cases. It also incorporates a multitude
of remote sensing products and performs data fusion to unify their outputs into
a common map of damage. This is a must-have characteristic of next-generation
damage assessment as data volumes and products proliferate. The use of diverse
data products, particularly imagery from high spatial resolutions and non-
visible bands that are less sensitive to weather and solar illumination, will
better discriminate certain damage types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the research is the reduction of the overall human and financial cost
of extreme events by contributing new methods for rapid and accurate damage
estimates used for Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA). The curation of a
knowledge base builds effective models quickly when a disaster strikes, refines
damage predictions in event simulations that assess vulnerability, and fosters
better land-use planning that encourages the growth of disaster resilient
communities. The work also includes a web-based damage assessment simulator that
maps remotely sensed earthquake images from recent earthquake events to engage
the greater public in disaster mitigation. In addition, the investigators will
actively recruit graduate and undergraduate students from under-represented
groups and mentor them within a multi-disciplinary collaboration. Machine
learning students will learn about remote sensing and damage assessment, and
geoengineering students will learn fundamentals of machine learning and
statistical data analysis.