* 1300659
* N-Heterocyclic Carbenes in the Synthesis of Reactive Small Clusters of Group 11 Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Joseph Sadighi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 436,346.00

With this award from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program, Professor Joseph
Sadighi at the Georgia Institute of Technology will study reactive
N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) compounds having dinuclear and trinuclear copper,
silver and gold species. The NHC ligand will support a trinuclear gold cation,
in which metal-metal bonding results primarily from s-orbital interactions, as
well as hydride-bridged dinuclear cations displaying varying degrees of metal-
metal bonding. This research will include the tuning of trigold clusters to
develop multielectron redox reactions, and the synthesis of analogous complexes
such as tricopper and trisilver cations with the ultimate goal of having such
compounds serve as platforms for the development of catalytic reactions.
Dinuclear and trinuclear metal-element clusters, formed through atom- or group-
transfer reactions, will be studied, and the synthesis of reactive metal hydride
complexes through dihydrogen activation will be developed. Finally, the
stabilization of odd-electron complexes with fractional metal-metal bonding will
be explored.

This research is designed to afford insight into unusual types of bonding among
metal centers, or between metals and main group elements. Unusual bonding motifs
can be tailored to enable normally difficult bond-breaking and bond-forming
processes. Control of these processes is crucial to the development of new
catalysts for such important and challenging reactions as the controlled
oxidation of hydrocarbons, using oxygen from the atmosphere, or the conversion
of carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide into liquid fuels. This is expected to
contribute to sustainable chemistry. The graduate and undergraduate students who
carry out this research will be prepared to contribute to the future of science
in the United States as academic researchers and teachers, or as research
scientists in chemical industry or in government laboratories. The research team
will reach out to local high schools, to identify interested students from
Atlanta's diverse student body and to give them the experience of research in
the university setting.