* 1300907
* GOALI: Operational Reconfigurability of Constrained Moving-Boundary Processes through Agile Motion Planning with Application to Steel Continuous Casting
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Joseph Bentsman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 383,211.00

The research effort supported by this award is aimed at providing operational
flexibility of controlled systems with moving boundaries, such as those
involving melting and/or solidification, to meet changing production demands.
The objective, referred to as motion planning, is a timely generation of
commands to the closed loop, the latter being composed of a process coupled to a
model-based feedback control law, to guarantee process motions that provide
optimal product quality. Focusing on continuous steel casting, the research
approach is to start from the improvement of process model and clear delineation
of static and dynamic constraints on its behavior and progress to creation of
motion planning algorithms that satisfy the constraints. Deliverables include
fundamental control-theoretic results, fast optimal motion planning tools for
moving boundary systems, software/hardware demonstration and validation on an
industrial caster at Nucor Steel, documentation of research results in
publications, and engineering student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will offer widely applicable motion
planning tools that rigorously optimize operation of moving boundary processes,
providing significant economic and environmental impacts. Example applications
include crystal growth, solid and liquid burning, and multiple forms of melting
and solidification. For example, a one percent reduction in yield loss in
continuous steel casting would save about $150 million per year, while
optimizing cooling conditions to conserve just 10% more of the cast steel
internal energy would produce $350 million per year savings during reheating.
Student researchers will master and broadly disseminate expertise and
commercialize the results. The research and educational infrastructure will be
significantly enhanced through student involvement, international collaboration,
and broad dissemination of knowledge.