* 1300193
* Efficiently Computable Convex Approximation Methods for Non-Convex Optimization Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Luis Zuluaga, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2017
* USD 275,000.00

This research project takes on the challenge of closing the large gap between
the current ability to solve convex or integer-linear optimization problems and
the capacity to solve non-convex optimization problems by introducing novel
methodologies to solve this class of problems using polynomial optimization
techniques. In particular, the research will be focused on the following three
main directions. The first direction is the introduction of new polynomial
optimization techniques that instead of solving non-convex problems
exhaustively, do so dynamically. The second one is the introduction and
effective use of polynomial optimization results that beyond semidefinite
programming tools make full use of the powerful convex optimization toolkit. The
third one is the use of polynomial optimization results, related to the convex
reformulation of low-dimensional or low-degree non-convex problems, as the
foundation to obtain better reformulations for general non-convex problems. This
project's practically oriented research is aimed at solving key and difficult
decision-making problems that are now regularly faced in the communications,
healthcare, electricity, and oil and gas industries. Many times, the difficulty
to solve these problems arises from the use of polynomials to closely model the
behavior of real-world systems. Modeling real-world systems more accurately is
an overarching need in today's competitive and resource-constrained environment.

The results of this research will substantially improve computer-based solvers
for this class of problems. The software developed to achieve this goal will use
open source software tools that will be made available to the public. The
corresponding positive impact on profits, safety, resource management, client
satisfaction, etc., will further broaden the practical successes that make
Operations Research the "Science of the Better". Furthermore, the challenging
nature of this research will provide ample opportunity to the participating
graduate students to excel, and its results will be incorporated into
appropriate graduate level courses.