* 1300236
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: A System-Level Framework for Operation and Maintenance: Synergizing Near and Long Term Cares for Wind Turbines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jiong Tang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 198,455.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) collaborative research project is to understand how a systems approach
to operations and maintenance can enhance the effectiveness and profitability of
wind turbines. Currently, operation and maintenance concepts and methods are
predominantly components-oriented. This project will show that a system-level
approach can yield a better trade-off between risks and costs, thereby
optimizing an engineered system for overall economic value. The team will
develop a way to measure a wind turbine system's holistic performance and tracks
its decline over time at a system level. Establishing a system-level metric
enables us to actively adjust a turbine's operation and realize a trade-off
between near-term power production and system reliability. It also allows the
PIs to weigh cost of maintenance against loss in power efficiency, leading to
cost-effective decisions of maintenance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful
development of this new methodology ought to lead to cost-effective operation
and maintenance of renewable energy productions, and reduce its overall cost and
enhances their marketability (a key to the wind energy's 20percent-by-2030 goal
and long-term sustainability). General Electric, a leading enterprise in wind
energy, is a research partner of this project. GE's direct participation
accelerates the application of the resulting methodologies to actual wind energy
operational systems. The collaborative nature of this research and industrial
involvement brings industrial perspective to the universities and is training
our next-generation workforce in the new energy economy. The system-level
concepts and methodologies, once demonstrated in wind energy applications, can
go beyond and be applied to other power production systems, as well as
automobile systems, aerospace systems, and marine systems.