* 1300886
* Gas Phase Ion Chemistry, Reactivity, and Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Veronica Bierbaum, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 555,000.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms -
A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Veronica Bierbaum from the
University of Colorado, Boulder, will characterize the gas phase ion chemistry,
reactivity, and mechanisms of two important classes of chemical systems, alpha-
nucleophiles and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Studies will be carried out
with a flowing afterglow-selected ion flow tube coupled with laser-induced
acoustic desorption and with an ion trap mass spectrometer. Alpha-nucleophiles,
which contain lone electron pairs on the atom adjacent to the nucleophilic site,
are known to exhibit enhanced reactivity in solution. These gas phase studies
will probe the effect of micro-solvation, the extent of solvation, and the
nature of the solvent, nucleophile, and substrate. Reactions of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons and their cations and anions will be characterized with a
wide array of reagents. This work will provide fundamental kinetic and
thermodynamic data on these compounds that are relevant to combustion processes,
atmospheric and interstellar chemistry, as well as human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical processes vary dramatically in their
rates, from rapid, explosive reactions to the slow process of human aging. This
work will study and correlate reactivity with chemical structures and energies
for two important classes of compounds. Highly reactive chemical species will be
studied that are important in chemical decontamination, environmental cleanup,
and biochemical processes. The reactivity of large derivatives of benzene will
be characterized due to their relevance to combustion and human health. A
complete understanding of the factors that govern the rates of chemical
reactions allows control and optimization of these processes. This work will
train graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, including women and
underrepresented groups, in the development, execution, and communication of
laboratory research, and prepare them for leadership positions in education,
research, and other segments of society. The results will be widely disseminated
by publication in scientific journals and databases, and integrated into several
educational outreach programs.