* 1300993
* Solvation and structure for systems with strong Coulomb interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* John Weeks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2016
* USD 428,000.00

John D. Weeks of the University of Maryland, College Park, is supported by an
award from the Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to carry out theoretical research on solvation in dielectric fluids
like water and in charged ionic fluids as well. The principal investigator and
coworkers have developed a new local molecular field (LMF) theory that relates
the structure of a nonuniform system with long-ranged Coulomb interactions in an
arbitrary external field to that of a simpler "mimic system" with short ranged
interactions but in an effective or renormalized field that accounts for the
averaged effects of the long ranged interactions. The external field can
represent the interaction of the solvent with a fixed, arbitrarily complicated,
and possibly charged solute, and the solvation free energy is determined as the
field is gradually turned on. The solvation process in the short ranged mimic
system avoids computationally expensive methods used in conventional treatments
of Coulomb interactions and a very simple and analytic expression for the
difference in solvation free energy between the full and mimic systems has been
derived. LMF theory gives exceptionally accurate results for solvation of simple
spherical models of hydrophobic and hydrophilic solutes of varying sizes in
water, the most important solvent. Ongoing research will focus on theoretical
generalizations of these ideas, along with applications to more complex
solvation problems of interest in biophysics and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An accurate determination of free energy changes
during solvation is required for a quantitative understanding of a vast array of
chemical and biophysical processes in solution, ranging from protein folding to
drug partitioning across cell membranes. The new solvation theory developed by
the investigator and coworkers is simple, physically motivated, and very
accurate, so the results of this research should be accessible to
experimentalists and theorists with diverse backgrounds and may provide a common
language for work in overlapping areas of chemistry, physics, and biology. The
research in this proposal contributes directly to the interdisciplinary training
of graduate students and postdocs, who gain experience in a unique combination
of analytical thinking, numerical solutions of newly derived equations, and
computer simulations using both in house programs and state of the art
simulation packages.