* 1300239
* Ultrafast Dynamics of Electronic Excited States: Photocatalysis and Photomagnetism
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Kevin Kubarych, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2016
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program-A (CSDM-A) and the Chemical Instrumentation Program of Division of
Chemistry, Professor Kevin J. Kubarych of the University of Michigan and his
graduate and undergraduate students are addressing the fundamental relationships
between structure, dynamics and function in molecules that, powered by light,
are poised to dramatically reshape approaches to transforming carbon dioxide and
to storing information. In both classes of system, photocatalysts for reduction
of carbon dioxide, and photomagnets, the key chemical starting point involves
molecules that have absorbed light, carrying out their initial functional steps
in excited electronic states. Using novel experimental techniques based on
ultrafast two-dimensional infrared (2D-IR) spectroscopy and related methods,
Professor Kubarych and his group will obtain the level of detailed dynamical
information on the active excited states that is presently only possible on
ground state molecules. By employing novel pulse sequences that combine
different spectral ranges such as the visible and infrared, including multiple
laser sources permitting access to timescales ranging from femtoseconds to
seconds, Professor Kubarych's team will be able to disentangle complex
photocycles and identify transient intermediate species using the powerful
resolution of 2D-IR spectroscopy. With the addition of low-temperature
capabilities, the group will gain access to the cooperative ultrafast dynamics
of photoswitchable magnetic molecules and materials, which they will examine
using novel hybrid electronic/vibrational spectroscopy methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of this research project is to address
the clear societal need to develop new approaches for energy conversion,
storage, as well as the removal of greenhouse gases. Results of this project
will guide development of new chemical systems as well as macromolecular
constructs by elucidating the fundamental design principles. Professor Kubarych
will leverage the widespread interest in energy, technology, and climate change
to appeal to the next generation of women and minority scientists by developing
hands-on demonstrations of dye-sensitized solar cells for middle and high school
students in the southeast Michigan area. To dramatically broaden his reach, he
will produce videos and a web resource describing basic challenges in solar
energy conversion, highlighting the role of physical chemistry in the
development of new solutions.