* 1300271
* Reduce Energy Consumption Through Integrated Design:  How Do Engineers Translate and Teams Synthesize Energy Modeling in Successful High Performance Building Design?
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Gina Neff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2016
* USD 432,009.00

The objective of this research project is to help scientists and practitioners
understand how teams of engineers, architects and builders can design buildings
that have better energy performance and are more habitable. Using a healthcare
project as a test case, this research seeks to explain under what conditions
engineers best translate technical analysis of potential energy performance to
support decision making that leads to higher performance buildings. The research
combines observation of design analytics and decision-making in one healthcare
project, interviews with 50 experts, and assessment of 50 completed projects.
Working with industry partners, via workshops, this project will disseminate
best practices found in the research. The project will also develop curriculum
to foster underrepresented participation through problem based collaborative
learning and train US engineering students in translation and synthesis so that
they may become better industry leaders who are able to collaborate across
engineering disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance our
understanding of collaboration, especially in the new interdisciplinary and
iterative design processes that use energy modeling software. This project will
advance knowledge of human-software-organizational interaction and contribute to
the fields of architecture, engineering design and management, communication,
and organizational behavior. Healthcare infrastructure such as hospitals and
clinics consumes more than 5 percent of the total energy used in the US. Energy
conserving buildings require integrated design, whereas today analysis is done
separately by different engineering specialties. By better use of analytical
modeling and organizational innovation, this project seeks to improve the
building process and maximize the ecological efficiency of buildings.