* 1300815
* GOALI: Developing an Injury Assessment Methodology for Evaluating Safety Designs Focusing on Various Vulnerable Populations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Mark Neal, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2016
* USD 298,601.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project is to create a general methodology for developing and using
parametric human finite element models that can represent a wide range of
attributes of people that are important to automobile safety, such as size,
shape, age, and tissue characteristics. When designing cars for safety, these
models can be used for population-based simulations to predict reductions in
injuries. We are linking a statistical human body geometry model based on
medical image, body scan, and sitting posture data with a baseline human finite
element model through an automated mesh morphing algorithm. The resulted
parametric human models are being validated against cadaver tests and used in a
feasibility study to optimize a restraint system for a selected General Motors
vehicle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this work will address the specific
challenges posed by the changing demographics observed in the US population,
such as the increased prevalence of obese and older people, and also will lead
to development of tools and methods that are useful for many other engineering
designs interacting with humans, such as medical devices, aircraft, blast
protection system, sports gear, and heavy-duty equipment. The concept of
developing injury assessment tools for population-based simulations will lead to
safety designs that provide better protection for millions of individuals who
are elderly, obese or in other special conditions, which will provide extremely
high societal benefits. The project will also include a wide range of
educational and outreach activities, including hiring undergraduate students
through UM's Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program, create summer intern
positions at UM for undergraduate students and intern positions at GM for PhD
students. The project activities entail collaborative research between the
university and General Motors, which will significantly broaden the scientific
and technical knowledge of all the students involved.