* 1300118
* Time-Domain Atomistic Theory and Simulation of Excitation Dynamics on the Nanoscale
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Oleg Prezhdo, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2015
* USD 480,000.00

Oleg Prezhdo of the University of Rochester is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program for the development of
novel simulations approaches for nonadiabatic and semiclassical molecular
dynamics, their implementation within time-domain density functional theory and
the investigation of the fundamental questions posed in the recent time-resolved
experiments performed on nanoscale materials. This work provides a detailed,
atomistic picture of photo excitation dynamics in real-time and in direct
connection with experiment. The research focuses on the quantum properties of
condensed phase environments at the nanoscale, such as decoherence, state-
specific dynamics, zero-point energy, and non-adiabatic transitions, providing
more rigorous treatments of ultrafast phenomena. These methods are applied to
the excitation dynamics in novel nanomaterials, including wet-electrons, carbon
nanotubes and nanoribbons, and metallic particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
and his coworkers develop methods to study many important features of nanoscale
systems. These studies are the first to provide the highly desirable details and
understanding of many experimentally observed phenomena, generating the
theoretical basis for the development of novel materials and devices. These
include solar cells that enhance light harvesting and charge generation due to
nanoscale features of the proposed architectures, batteries capable of high
power storage as a result of large surface area of the nanoscale materials used,
miniature electronic and spintronics devices approaching one atom thickness, and
tools for biological imaging, drug delivery and DNA sequencing. The PI also
develops novel teaching approaches for use both in introductory and advanced
chemistry courses.