* 1300301
* Estimation and Control Using Sensor Vehicle Networks for Approximation and Learning Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrew Kurdila, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 279,999.00

The research objective of this award is to derive, develop, implement and test a
theoretical framework for control and estimation methods for sensor networks
that enables the derivation of near optimal rates of approximation of the
vehicles' environment. The theoretical framework will serve as the foundation
for deriving encoding and decoding schemes that are essential to high-bandwidth
mobile sensor networks. The approach relies on the synthesis of techniques from
several disparate technical fields including control theory, estimation theory,
approximation theory and statistical learning theory. The work extends recent
efforts that study the fidelity of approximation in distribution free learning
theory, a sub-problem of statistical learning theory, to include classes of
decentralized and dependent measurement processes. The algorithms developed
under this project will be validated using multi-vehicle network that host three
dimensional laser-ranging sensors to map unknown
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of the research
will enable novel and efficient algorithms for the mapping of unknown fields
over complex environments by decentralized, autonomous robotic vehicle teams.
The successful completion of the research will enable large-scale, multivehicle
sensor networks to be employed in a host of environmental monitoring and mapping
applications including contaminant dispersal in a marine environment, chemical
plume dispersal in urban environments, wildfire evolution in forests, and crop
density in automated agribusiness. This research project will build human and
institutional infrastructure for science and technology via the creation of new
graduate courses that treat the synthesis of estimation, control and
approximation theory. The research program will create an outreach program that
engages K-12 students in robotics and environmental mapping. The results of this
research will be disseminated through presentation and publication at national
and international conferences, as well as through top-notch peer-reviewed
journals. The dissemination of the research will enable industry to implement
and field scalable and general algorithms for decentralized mapping using
robotic vehicle sensor networks.