* 1300206
* SusChEM: Metal Complexes Containing New Tin Ligands for Applications in Homogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Burjor Captain, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 03/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Burjor Captain of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Miami will explore the structures and reactivity of transition
metal complexes containing bulky tin ligands. The main drive is to indice
activation of hydrogen and small molecules as well as to investigate their
potential as hydroformylation and hydrogenation catalysts. The work will consist
of incorporating sterically encumbered tin ligands to bring about electronic
and/or coordinative unsaturation around the metal atoms in transition metal
complexes. This work will begin by exploring synthetic, structural, and
catalytic chemistry on platinum-tin systems and then be extended to include
complexes of non-precious transition metals such as Ni and Fe. The central theme
is the use of tin which offers significant advantages and is largely untested.
There is precedent for the potential scope and effectiveness of this strategy in
the widely investigated use of phosphine ligands to modify both binding sites
and catalytic properties. However, bulky tin ligands offer additional incentives
for their investigation compared to phosphine ligands. Because the stannyl group
is a radical with an odd number of electrons, its utilization at a metal site
changes formal oxidation numbers, but more importantly electron densities at the
metal center, in ways quite different from that of coordinated phosphines. The
long range goal of this work is development of robust, economic, and efficient
catalysts of use to chemical industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of this project is that it calls for synthesis of a new class of materials in a
relatively unexplored area of inorganic chemistry. This provides the opportunity
to discover new binding patterns of small molecules. Some of these may be
predictable, but some may be unanticipated and lead to new insights of broad
impact in fundamental chemical science. There has been a renaissance in main
group chemistry, and this work combines main group with transition metal
chemistry in an exciting and potentially breakthrough area. The proposed small
molecule activation studies center on hydrogen- by trying to understand how it
behaves in a main group metal-transition group metal setting. Transition metal
complexes have and always will play the crucial part in the chemistry of
hydrogen, but this may be modified by the presence of the added bulky tin
ligand. The question is how and to what extent it will be modified. The long
term impact of this work will be in helping to better utilize this important
resource in binding and catalytic reactivity. A final area of impact is in
student training (undergraduate and graduate) to be scientists and
professionals. Students will be trained to prepare and handle air-sensitive
compounds, and will learn various methods such as X-Ray crystallography, Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, mass
spectrometry, calorimetry and computational analysis. The results will be
broadly disseminated in refereed research journals and through presentations at
meetings. Due to the diversity of the proposed research, students trained in
this program will have the skill set and creative attitude needed to find viable
solutions for the emerging energy crisis and contribute to sustainability.