* 1301160
* SusChEM/Collaborative Research: Fundamental Understanding of Foaming Process towards a New Warm Mix Asphalt Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Huiming Yin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 296,155.00

The objective of this award is to understand the foaming process using several
foaming agents to guide us in the design of a new warm mix asphalt (WMA)
technology. In the proposed project, researchers from Columbia University and
Michigan Technological University will investigate three foaming agents as
potential candidates, including soda as a chemical foaming agent, CO2/N2 gas and
ethanol as physical blowing agents. Multiphase characterization and viscoelastic
modeling studies will be conducted to investigate how the microstructure of
asphalt materials evolves with time, temperatures, and proportion of material
constituents, and in doing so study any differences and relative benefits from
chemical vs. physical blowing agents. A single or the combination of foaming
agents will be determined for optimal end-results. The fatigue strength, the
long-term performance and life cycle cost of the WMA based on the foaming
process will be characterized with accelerated test methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates state-of-the-art rheological and
accelerated aging tests, thermodynamics, poromechanics, chemical changes and
multi-scale modeling to identify the physical and mechanical properties of
foamed asphalt materials. The proposed studies will advance the understanding of
the foaming process and establish a theoretical framework to predict the
material behavior for material design, which will lead to new theories and
models of sustainable engineering materials in energy and environmental aspects.
This project provides a unique opportunity for conducting interdisciplinary
research in sustainable engineering to reduce energy consumption, greenhouse gas
emission, to facilitate recycling of asphalt materials, and improve life-cycle
performance. The technologies developed in this program will be rapidly
transferred to industry.