* 1301305
* PHOTODYNAMICS OF NUCLEOBASES
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Mattanjah de Vries, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2018
* USD 511,250.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms -
A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Mattanjah S. de Vries from the
University California Santa Barbara and his team, will measure photochemical
properties in clusters of stacked, hydrogen bonded, and microsolvated
nucleobases. These studies will constitute a new step in the reductionist
approach to understanding nucleobase photodynamics. Gas phase spectroscopy will
be compared with quantum computations in collaboration with Dr. Nachtigallov√° at
the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic. This approach, so far applied to
isolated nucleobases, suggests a general process in which, following absorption
of UV light, DNA bases can avoid chemical transformation by very rapidly
diffusing the excitation energy to heat (in a process called internal
conversion) which can safely be transferred to the environment. This process
strongly depends on molecular structure and is remarkably prevalent in the
specific forms in which nucleobases occur in biological contexts. However,
intermolecular interactions also affect these processes. Compared to single
bases, pi-stacking opens new possible excited state decay pathways, involving
exciplex states, which will be studied in the picosecond time domain, as a
function of precise intermolecular structure. Understanding the precise role of
these interactions, which is the objective of this study, is crucial for fully
understanding the way light interacts with biological
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the response of DNA bases to
ultraviolet (UV) radiation is critical for both practical and fundamental
reasons. Nucleobase photochemistry following UV absorption constitutes a
fundamental step in radiation-induced DNA damage. It appears that DNA bases are
especially stable against damage caused by UV light. This unique property may
have played a role in the selection of the building blocks of life four billion
year ago. The bases that make up today's DNA may be the molecules that were most
suited to survive harsh UV radiation on an early earth. This work will study the
details of the molecular properties that make our genetic material so robust
against photochemical damage. The work employs techniques of ultrafast laser
spectroscopy, mass spectrometry and computational chemistry. In addition to
training graduate students in these advanced methods, undergraduate students and
high school students will also be exposed to this work as part of a number of
outreach programs, including an ongoing collaboration with Jackson State
University.