* 1301489
* Bijel Processing for the Synthesis of Co-continuous Electrochemical Composites with Tunable Microstructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ali Mohraz, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 319,586.00

Composite materials with co-continuous arrangement of their constituent phases
are highly valuable for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Particularly in batteries, the need to simultaneously maximize the storage
capacity and power delivery of the system requires the electrodes to be made of
electrochemically active composites with co-continuous morphology that is
tunable at length scales relevant to their electrochemical function (nano- to
tens of micrometers). To this end, the proposed program will seek to develop a
new platform for the synthesis of bulk electrochemical composites with tunable
co-continuous microstructure using a soft matter templating technique recently
developed in the Principal Investigator?s laboratory. The approach will be based
on the self-assembly of solid-stabilized emulsions that inherently have a
tunable co-continuous microstructure, and subsequent chemical transformations of
their different phases. The required processing conditions to convert these co-
continuous soft materials into electrochemically functional composites will be
systematically investigated, and the fundamental roles of the physicochemical
and processing parameters in controlling their morphology and electrochemical
performance will be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed
program will institute a new approach to the design of composite electrodes that
meet the design criteria for efficient storage and rapid delivery of
electrochemical energy, made possible by their unique microstructure. Because
the synthesis protocol is based on self-assembly in multi-phase mixtures, it
allows such materials to be readily prepared in macroscopic dimensions with co-
continuous morphology that is tunable at the microscopic level. Understanding
the fundamental parameters that govern the processing of these soft material
templates into co-continuous composites can also have a strong impact in a
diverse array of other applications including catalysis, tissue engineering,
separations, and fundamental studies of transport through porous media.