* 1301926
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Transactional Software Infrastructures: Making the Most of Hardware Transactions
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Nir Shavit, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2016
* USD 599,928.00

Modern computer systems are undergoing a pervasive change. They are becoming
increasingly parallel, meaning that multiple processing units, or cores, work
together to carry out tasks. To facilitate the kinds of synchronization and
coordination needed to exploit these new architectures, leading hardware vendors
have developed a new generation of processor architectures that provide hardware
transactional memory, a synchronization structure that promises to avoid many of
the well-known pitfalls and limitations of conventional approaches to
synchronization. The move to hardware transactions will bring about a
fundamental positive change in the way multicore machines are
programmed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will redesign basic
synchronization structures such as locks, memory management, and a range of
concurrent data structures such as heaps, hash tables, and skip lists. These new
structures will be embodied in an open-source C++ library. The project's goal is
to create better performing, more reliable, and less expensive parallel
software, scalable to larger systems, while at the same time making code simpler
and more reliable. Moreover, this project will enhance understanding of how
hardware transactional memory can be used effectively, a benefit to both users
and manufacturers of future processors.