* 1301779
* OK-LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate-OSU-Cohort VII
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Jean Van Delinder, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 12/31/2016
* USD 987,000.00

Oklahoma State University (OSU) proposes to support twelve (12) LSAMP scholars,
who have completed baccalaureate STEM degrees, as they pursue and complete Ph.D.
programs in STEM disciplines. Following two years of initial funding by the NSF
LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) program, OSU will ensure Fellows continue to
receive sufficient financial and academic support to complete terminal degrees
within five years. OSU will provide extensive academic support specific to this
group. This proposal accords with NSF?s goal to increase the number of LSAMP
students successfully completing terminal degrees in STEM fields and gives
particular attention to the recruitment and support of underrepresented groups.
The State of Oklahoma has one of the largest Native American populations in the
U.S. and is home to 39 federally recognized tribal nation headquarters.
Additionally, the Hispanic population in Oklahoma is rapidly increasing. OSU not
only has the largest Native American student enrollment in the United States,
but also serves a wide of range of traditional underrepresented student
populations. Alliance institutions rank in the top ten for degrees awarded to
Native American students. The long term goal of this Bridge to the Doctorate
program is to increase the number of underrepresented students who successfully
complete doctoral degrees in STEM fields. STEM options at OSU include doctoral
granting degrees in Agricultural Sciences, Chemistry, Computer Science,
Engineering, Environmental Sciences, Life Sciences, Mathematics and related
fields, and Physics/Astronomical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The program
objectives are to recruit 12 LSAMP scholars in a range of STEM fields; to
support students academically and professionally, ensuring they build the
connections and skills needed to excel; and to ensure financial support for the
fellows in all years of their doctoral programs. Program activities in support
of these objectives include, but are not limited to: (1) Mentoring and
networking programs across STEM departments; (2) Links to other NSF-funded
programs (i.e., Graduate Research Fellowship Program); (3) Student development
workshops and counseling; and (4) Enhanced recruitment strategies, newsletters,
and community outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts will address
the underrepresentation of minorities and women at the graduate level in STEM
fields. OSU expects to increase recruitment and retention of the Fellows in
faculty positions as well as in government, business, and other STEM career
areas. By addressing the specific needs of unique populations, this program will
provide an important national model for wider applications in promoting the
success of Native Americans ? one of the least represented groups in
professional STEM careers today, as well as providing copious support for
African Americans, Hispanics, Pacific Islanders, veterans, and first generation
students. The BD program will continue to build on established relationships
with educators, administrators, tribal members, and other minority leaders. This
program has the potential to exert a transformative impact by diversifying the
scientific workforce of the United States and by ensuring that the widest
possible range of underrepresented students assumes positions of leadership in
STEM fields across the United States. OSU has already shown accomplishment in
these areas. Ninety-two percent of current and past Fellows are on track or have
completed at least one graduate degree in the STEM disciplines and are moving
forward.