* 1301019
* SusChEM: Mechanistic examination and design of multifunctional heterogeneous photocatalysts for artificial photosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Phillip Christopher, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 315,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program (CAT) of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports
Professor Phillip Christopher of the University of California, Riverside in
efforts to elucidate the elementary mechanisms that control performance for the
solar driven artificial photosynthesis (AP) reaction, CO2 + H2O conversion to
fuels. Specifically, the kinetics associated with H2O splitting, CO2 methanation
and H2O formation will be studied on metal loaded semiconductors (Rh, Ru and Ni
deposited on TiO2 and GaN:ZnO) as a function of catalyst characteristics and
process variables. Catalytically active sites will be engineered to optimize AP
performance and nano-scale mass transfer control will be utilized to manipulate
concentrations of reaction intermediate at active sites. The effect of adding a
thermal stimulus to the reacting system will be explored, which is hypothesized
to significantly enhance reaction rates. The overall objective is to identify
materials and conditions that maximize the rates of H2O splitting and CO2
methanation while minimizing H2O formation to facilitate the overall AP process
through a unique reaction pathway that exploits thermo- and photo-catalytic
steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global reliance on unsustainable fossil resources
for energy and chemical industries has resulted in the release of massive
quantities of CO2 and H2O into the atmosphere. The development of strategies
that harness solar energy for direct CO2 and H2O conversion to fuels and
chemicals (artificial photosynthesis, AP) are the most appealing solutions for
environmental and energy sustainability. Professor Christopher and coworkers
will combine fundamental insights into the reaction mechanism with nano-scale
reaction engineering to design more efficient AP catalysts. Students from UC
Riverside, Riverside community college and local middle schools will
significantly benefit from hands on education in this multidisciplinary research
effort.