* 1301609
* Collaborative Research: An Experimental Study of Relativistic, Stochastic Heating of Electrons During the Irradiation of  Wavelength-Scale Plasmas by a Strong-Laser Field
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Todd Ditmire, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 195,000.00

Collaborative Research: An Experimental Study of Relativistic, Stochastic
Heating of Electrons During the Irradiation of Wavelength-scale Plasmas by a
Strong-Laser Field&lt;br/&gt;A renewal proposal from PIs T. Ditmire (University
of Texas) and T. Donnelly (Harvey Mudd College)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a collaboration between Prof.
Ditmire at the University of Texas at Austin (UT) and Prof. Donnelly at Harvey
Mudd College (HMC), an undergraduate institution. We will investigate mechanisms
by which high-intensity laser pulses deposit energy into matter. While the
nature of intense laser interactions with atoms, molecules, and solids has been
studied for many years, exactly how intense laser pulses interact with objects
that are of a spatial scale comparable to the light's wavelength (less than a
millionth of a meter) is largely unexplored. We will focus a 20 TW laser - a
laser with nearly ten times the power of that on the entire US electrical grid -
onto wavelength-scale targets and study the resulting electron and ions energies
to study the mechanisms by which laser energy is absorbed by the target. The
scientific merit of this work rests in filling this gap in our knowledge of
physics, and in developing improved x-ray and neutron sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader scientific
impacts of this research rest in advancing the understanding of high-intensity
laser interactions with a class of targets not previously well explored.
Application of these studies may aid in the development of improved x-ray
sources for radiography and time-resolved diffraction, or compact neutron
sources for imaging other systems. The broader educational impact of this work
is found in the training that both graduate and undergraduate students will
receive. Our work represents a unique collaboration in which an undergraduate
group is directly and critically involved in strong-field-physics research, a
field which is prohibitively resource intensive for an undergraduate research
program to pursue alone. The undergraduates funded by this grant will have the
opportunity to do research at HMC, travel to UT in the summers to participate in
research using equipment they have developed, and travel to conferences to
present their work to the scientific community. Our collaboration will continue
to be an effective way to motivate undergraduates to seek advanced degrees in
science.