* 1301089
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: Data Analysis and Mining, Image Processing and Visualization at Appalachian State University
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Rahman Tashakkori, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2016
* USD 499,702.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Teachers Site at
Appalachian State University. High school teachers and community college faculty
from a ten county region surrounding the university will work on summer research
with their university faculty mentors. The research covers a range of computing
disciplines including data analysis and mining, image processing and
visualization. The educators will also develop inquiry-based classroom modules
and curricular materials related to their research and then implement the models
in their classes during the academic year. Workshops will be held to train
additional teachers to use the materials. The program hopes to build a community
of educators that can work together to integrate computing concepts into STEM
education in the participating school districts and to establish partnerships
that continue to thrive and provide leadership to ensure quality computing
education in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is in the research focus on data mining and visualization, two areas
that are current and of importance to the computing disciplines. The university
faculty has outstanding expertise and resources to lead the site. The project
team has significant related research and experience in educational applications
and K-12 school outreach. The projects are compelling and current and of
interest to the teachers and their students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the project include providing a quality research experience to
teachers and the infusion of sound instructional models into the K-12 schools
and community colleges. The project includes outreach to a large community of
teachers in Appalachian region and should impact a student population in a rural
area where there are limited opportunities for students. The materials will be
broadly disseminated for use by others. The project has the potential to create
a sustainable partnership between the university and schools thus benefiting the
area for years to come.