* 1301604
* Banach Space and Metric Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* William Johnson, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 293,000.00

The problems in Banach space and metric geometry to be considered fall into
several subcategories: commutators of operators on Banach spaces, approximation
properties of Banach spaces, the structure of finite and infinite dimensional
spaces of p-integrable functions, the non linear classification of Banach
spaces, discrete metric geometry, quantitative linear algebra, and cluster value
problems in an infinite dimensional setting. These topics are at the heart of
the geometries of Banach spaces and of metric spaces and make contact with many
other areas within mathematics, including operator theory, group theory,
geometric analysis, and linear algebra.

Metric spaces, especially Banach spaces, form the conceptual framework in which
mathematicians, scientists, and engineers work when investigating problems that
involve estimation or approximation. Discrete metric geometry, including
dimensional reduction results which have been established by the PI, is
important in the design of algorithms and in compressed sensing. Work on the
classification of operators which are commuters was originally motivated by the
uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics (which, from a mathematical point of
view, arises because certain operators do not commute). Non linear phenomena
often occurs in nature but is difficult to deal with. This makes it important to
understand when non linearity actually conceals underlying linear structure, and
this is central to the non linear study of Banach spaces. Parts of this research
project are coordinated with the Workshop in Analysis and Probability Theory at
Texas A&M University, which is directed by the PI. The Workshop encourages
interactions among researchers and apprentices in different mathematical fields
by bringing together graduate students and junior and senior postdoctoral
participants in several areas of analysis. Activities of the Workshop include
seminars, Concentration Weeks, introductory lectures, and an annual conference.
The efforts of the principal investigators and other participants in the
Workshop are helping to break down barriers between different areas of
mathematics and also promote the outreach of pure mathematics to other sciences,
especially to computer science.