* 1301346
* Energize New Mexico
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2018
* William Michener, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 11/30/2018
* USD 20,000,000.00

In this five-year project, New Mexico Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (NM EPSCoR) addresses one overarching question that has
great potential to transform research in NM and to promote sustainable energy
development: How can NM realize its energy development potential in a
sustainable manner? The vision for the project is two-fold: first, to build and
strengthen the scientific enterprise that will enable NM to harness its abundant
renewable energy resources (e.g., solar energy and biofuels), and sustainably
capitalize on other resources such as geothermal and uranium reserves, without
adversely affecting the environment and water resources; and, second, to improve
the state's science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) pipeline and
research and development capacity, thus creating new businesses and industry
that build upon the state's human and geographic diversity and intellectual
capital. The major participants in this proposal are the University of New
Mexico, New Mexico Institute of Mining &amp; Technology, and New Mexico State
University. Other partners include: Eastern New Mexico University Main Campus,
Santa Fe Community College, Santa Fe Institute, Explora!, the Global Center for
Creative &amp; Cultural Entrepreneurship, the National Museum of Nuclear Science
and History, and the New Mexico Museum of Natural History
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to further NM's energy development, integrating basic and applied science and
engineering. The research is enabling new technologies to be expanded to
commercially viable enterprise scales. Resource utilization research focuses on:
(1) generating new knowledge in algal ecology, physiology, agriculture and
biomass process engineering that supports next generation biofuel production;
(2) creating more efficient solar energy harvesting and photovoltaic devices, as
well as developing methanol as a transportable fuel alternative to conventional
fossil fuel-derived hydrocarbons; and (3) solving scientific and engineering
challenges related to membrane properties and fouling that currently prevent
osmotic pressure systems from becoming commercially viable. Results are enabling
industry to make better use of NM's abundant sunshine, large brackish water
aquifers, and vast quantities of high salinity produced waters from the oil and
gas industry. Achieving a sustainable energy future for NM requires a complete
and balanced suite of extractive and renewable energy sources that are socially
adoptable, water-resource achievable, and environmentally
benign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The Energize NM project
supports diverse, interdisciplinary, and inter-institutional partnerships that
include national laboratories, industry, education (including community and
tribal colleges), and other stakeholders. Additionally, the project activities
holistically address clean energy challenges. Research results are communicated
via user-friendly cyberinfrastructure, innovative education and workforce
development programs, and broad-ranging stakeholder engagement activities.
Project activities are designed to engage faculty from research universities,
and tribal and community colleges, and support the STEM pipeline by training
teachers, undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows.
Project outcomes are communicated broadly through new partnerships with NM's
museum network, a citizen-centric web portal, and experiential programs
targeting K-12 students.