* 1301800
* Arithmetic and Zariski-dense subgroups in algebraic groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrei Rapinchuk, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2017
* USD 153,024.00

The project addresses several important problems in the investigation of
arithmetic and general Zariski-dense subgroups of semisimple algebraic groups.
One of the central themes in the project is the analysis of weakly commensurable
Zariski-dense subgroups. The notion of weak commensurability was introduced
earlier in a joint work of the PI and G. Prasad, and its analysis for arithmetic
groups has led to a resolution of several problems in differential geometry
dealing with length-commensurable and isospectral arithmetically defined locally
symmetric spaces. In the current project, some finiteness results which were
previously known only for arithmetic groups are expected to be generalized to
arbitrary Zariski-dense subgroups. This work is likely to have interesting
consequences for non-arithmetically defined locally symmetric spaces. It is also
related to the problem in the theory of algebraic groups of to what extent an
absolutely almost simple algebraic group over a field K is determined by the
isomorphism classes of its maximal K-tori. This part of the project will build
on the PI's recent results analyzing division algebras having the same maximal
subfields. The PI also intends to continue the investigation of the congruence
subgroup problem.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Generally speaking, the project focuses
on the analysis of a very broad class of matrix groups (Zariski-dense subgroups
of semisimple algebraic groups) based on the information about the eigenvalues
of their elements. This approach is fundamental in the representation theory of
finite groups, but as was discovered by the PI and G. Prasad it can also be used
to characterize many arithmetic groups (which are special groups whose elements
are matrices with integer matrices). The goal of the project is to extend some
of these results to groups much more general than arithmetic. This work has
applications to the famous question ''Can one hear the shape of a drum?'' in the
context of some special spaces called locally symmetric spaces.