* 1301745
* Sustainability: Building Teams to Tackle Complex Problems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Martin Green, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 11/30/2013
* USD 44,486.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a workshop, entitled Sustainability:
Building Teams to Tackle Complex Problems, to be held November 25-26, 2012 at
the Materials Research Society (MRS) Fall Meeting in Boston. The workshop is
supported by the Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry, Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS. The primary objective of this workshop is
to present a broader view of sustainable development to the MRS audience.
Specifically, the highly interdisciplinary nature of the sustainable development
field will be emphasized, with particular attention to practical issues, such as
generating serious interactions between scientists, engineers, industrial
ecologists, economists and other practitioners in the diverse sustainable
development arena. The forum goals are well aligned with the Science,
Engineering, and Education for Sustainability (SEES) initiative and many other
sustainability and disciplinary programs across NSF, including the new
Sustainable Chemistry, Engineering, and Materials (SusChEM)
investment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will have
broader impacts by fostering a holistic approach toward the science and
engineering of sustainable development, and by addressing the practical
challenges associated with successful interdisciplinary research and training
for the next generation workforce in these techniques. The workshop will feature
a diverse set of speakers and panelists, including women, underrepresented
minorities, and early-career scientists, and it will expose a national and
international group of researchers to the field of sustainable development. This
group includes academic faculty, undergraduate and graduate students, post docs,
and industrial and government researchers in all fields of science and
engineering. In particular, the workshop will feature virtual contributions from
student groups based at Stanford University and KAUST in Saudi Arabia (MRS's
first university chapter outside of the U.S.). The workshop will foster new
interdisciplinary, and potentially transformative, collaborations in this
important research area, and will help researchers make their interdisciplinary
research more effective. Thus, the broader impact on education, research and
training of faculty members as well as graduate and undergraduate students will
be substantial. Additional broader impacts will be created through disseminating
information via the MRS Bulletin, Materials360, and using LinkedIn (MRS group
and group on Materials for Energy and Sustainable Development), and through
video capture and two-way streaming, as part of an MRS experiment toward virtual
meeting activities. The workshop will also be held in conjunction with a four-
day symposium entitled "Materials as Tools for Sustainability," which should
bring a large audience to the workshop and educate them not only in the
materials aspects of sustainability, but also in the broader, interdisciplinary
nature of the field. Upon completion of the workshop, an evaluation will be sent
to workshop participants to gauge the impact of the event, and a short document
will be written to summarize best practices and challenges remaining for
successful interdisciplinary sustainability research.