* 1301235
* Uncertainty Propagation Methods for Networked Complex Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Tarunraj Singh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 07/31/2018
* USD 415,643.00

The objective of this research is development of a novel class of uncertainty
quantification methods for networked complex systems. The fundamental and
challenging uncertainty quantification problems remain unsolved, in particular
combating the curse of dimensionality and solving uncertainty quantification
problems related to large and multi-scale dynamic networks underlying modern day
complex systems. The main challenge that lies at the core of analyzing and
synthesizing the dynamic networks at the crux of modern day complex systems is:
How do a collection of dynamical systems coupled through a dense wiring topology
behave as a unit in the presence of uncertainty? The UB-SUNY team is developing
of a suite of novel computational uncertainty quantification methods to tackle
the main challenge and to enable accelerated design and deployment of complex
systems.

This project will have far reaching impacts on research and the practice of
complex system design and management across a wide variety of industries.
Development of these methods will have an immediate impact on the community at
large with beneficiaries ranging from ordinary users to system design teams in
industrial, and academic environments. Our research is being integrated into the
education of graduate, undergraduate and high-school students including under-
represented minorities in science and engineering fields. These educational
activities involve: 1) developing workshops and short course for researchers and
professionals working in the area of systems engineering and uncertainty
quantification, 2) developing seminar courses for undergraduates, and 3)
incorporation of research results in graduate/undergraduate courses.