* 1301099
* Printing Embedded Sensors for Turbine Blades by Electro-spraying Polymer Derived Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Linan An, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2017
* USD 433,186.00

This award provides funding for the realization of a new technology for direct
printing of low-profile ceramic sensors onto curved surfaces such as turbine
blades. In the proposed process a liquid phase polymer precursor ink will be
electrosprayed, cured, and pyrolyzed to yield a surface-conformed ceramic sensor
element. To be amenable to printing, special consideration of the ink rheology
and electrical conductivity is required. The research plan is a combination of
experiments and modeling of the electrospray process with consideration of
sensor functionality, device resolution and durability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research results could find broad use where surface conformance and low profile
are needed for sensor applications in harsh environments such as power plants,
nuclear reactors, coal mines and aircraft. The proposed printing method has the
potential manufacturing advantages of being rapid and low-cost. The focus here
will be on turbine blades and successful completion would enable real time, in
situ thermal and mechanical measurements in turbines which operate at
increasingly higher temperatures. Acquired data would enable enhanced engine
control, health monitoring, and design optimization as well as contribute to
improved efficiency and reliability during operation. Graduate students will be
directly involved in the project and K-12 students will benefit from classroom
demonstration of advanced printing process concepts.