* 1301156
* Competing Pathways in Reactions of Oxygen-Containing Free Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2016
* H. Floyd Davis, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 11/30/2016
* USD 398,750.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms -
A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. H. Floyd Davis and students at
Cornell University will study photoinduced and bimolecular reactions involving
atmospherically important oxygen-containing free radicals. Using the crossed
laser- molecular beam method, the branching ratios for competing bromine dioxide
and iodine dioxide photodissociation pathways will be determined. Elementary
radical-radical reactions involving diatomic halogen oxide free radicals (e.g.,
ClO + BrO) will be studied in crossed molecular beams. A method involving
photodepletion of highly-reactive neutral halogen oxide molecules with near-
threshold photoionization detection will be developed to determine wavelength-
dependent absorption cross sections for species that cannot be prepared in pure
form. The proposed studies will provide experimental benchmarks, including
ionization energies, bond dissociation energies, and branching ratios for key
atmospheric reactions induced by absorption of solar radiation or bimolecular
collisions. These quantities should help facilitate direct tests of quantum
theoretical models for reactions, and should be of use in atmospheric models for
ozone-depleting processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halogen atoms (chlorine,
bromine, and iodine) undergo reactions in the Earth's atmosphere that destroy
ozone, an important molecule that provides protection from harmful ultraviolet
solar radiation. The ozone-destroying reactions involve molecules with unpaired
electrons known as free radicals. Because of their extremely reactive nature,
most free radicals cannot be prepared in pure form, making their study
difficult. In this research project, laboratory techniques involving laser beams
(collimated beams of light) and molecular beams (collimated beams of molecules),
are used to study chemical reactions involving atmospheric free radicals. In
addition, the Davis group will establish a high-school lending program for
newly-developed low-cost ($25) absorption spectrometers. This will help bring
hands-on laboratory experiments, usually requiring high-cost equipment, to the
high school classroom. Exposing high school students to the design,
construction, and use of scientific instruments can be used to teach critical
thinking skills and help students understand and appreciate science.