* 1301917
* Greater Philadelphia Region LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort XI) Program
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Stephen Cox, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2016
* USD 987,000.00

Drexel University, as a representative of the Greater Philadelphia Region Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Philadelphia AMP), requests Bridge
to the Doctorate funding for a two-year period for a Cohort XI program, to
expand and intensify the consortium's on-going efforts to substantially increase
the number of qualified African American, Hispanic and Native American
(hereafter referred to as "minority") students entering graduate study in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), attaining doctoral
degrees, and moving into the professoriate. The Philadelphia AMP represents a
diverse alliance of nine institutions consisting of public and private, 2- and
4-year research and nonresearch, Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and majority institutions.

The goals of Philadelphia AMP's Bridge to the Doctorate (Cohort XI) project are
to: (1) recruit twelve students into Master's or Ph.D. degree programs at Drexel
University; (2) retain these students through the completion of the Master's or
Ph.D. program, providing the Master?s students with full qualifications for
admission into a highly regarded Ph.D. program in their chosen STEM specialty
with full financial support; (3) enable the Master's student' admission and
smooth transition into a Ph.D. program; and (4) monitor all student progress
through Ph.D. completion into the professoriate and beyond. We aim to have 100%
of these students successfully complete their graduate study and enter a STEM
career, with many progressing into the professoriate at institutions of higher
education.