* 1301436
* NSF EUV ERC RET in Engineering & Computer Science Site Program
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2014,09/30/2019
* Jorge Rocca, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 09/30/2019
* USD 328,681.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the Colorado State University (CSU) entitled, "NSF Center for Extreme
Ultraviolet Science and Technology (EUV ERC): Research Experience for Teachers
in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program", under the direction of Dr.
Jorge J. Rocca. The focus of this RET Site program, which will be located at
CSU, the University of Colorado, Boulder (CU), and the University of California,
Berkeley (UC Berkeley) is to immerse teachers in research and engineering
applications of Extreme Ultraviolet light (EUV), science and technology that
includes; laser development and design, ultra-high resolution microscopy,
metrology, lithography for the manufacture fabrication of the next generation of
computer chips, as well as element- and chemically-specific materials
fabrication for new nano-scale devices. Through participation in scientific and
engineering research, teachers will gain new knowledge and insights into how
scientific and engineering core concepts are applied to the design and creation
of engineered systems. This new content knowledge will enable them modify and
build new classroom curriculum. Few places in the world offer this unique
research focus area in the EUV sciences. The collaborative ERC research model
offers a unique opportunity for teachers to truly experience the benefits of
collaboration and networking for sustainability. In this multi-institution
research Center approach teachers gain experience in collaborative learning,
research, and experimentation involving more people, resources, and research
techniques than they would if they were contained at a single research site.

The EUV Center is one of the few academic and research centers that exist in the
world that can support the training of a new generation of STEM teachers (pre-
service and high school) proficient in EUV science core concepts. This RET Site
program builds on the strength of the existing infrastructure of the Center to
offer world-class opportunities for teachers to gain research experience that
will prepare them to teach and translate new learned content into the classroom.
The RET site will improve STEM teaching and learning for a total of 30 teachers
(10 per year for 3 years). The experiences will be reinforced and sustained by
continued development and reflection during the academic year, with connections
to all three Center sites. Each teacher participant will impact over 125
students in the school year following the RET, which means that each year
approximately 1125 students will experience hands-on learning of optics, lasers,
and EUV science and technology.