* 1301501
* Tunable VUV pump and tunable VUV probe experiments on the photodissociation dynamics of atmospheric molecules using slice velocity imaging for detection
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* William Jackson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2017
* USD 376,834.00

With this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms - A
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Prof. William M. Jackson from the
University of California, Davis will characterize the photochemical channels of
molecules important in planetary atmospheres, comets, and the interstellar
medium in the spectral region between 190.8 and 73.8 nm. The initial studies
will be done with the nitrogen, oxygen, nitric oxide, and carbon monoxide
molecules. The first three molecules are important for the chemistry of the
upper atmosphere, while the last, carbon monoxide is the second most abundant
molecule in the interstellar medium and is important in the early development of
solar systems. A unique apparatus has been developed with two tunable VUV lasers
based on resonance enhanced four wave mixing that has a bandwidth of 0.4
wavenumbers and is tunable between 190.8 and 73.8 nm. One of these tunable
lasers can be used to excite the molecule to a particular energy state
characterized by the electronic, vibrational, and rotational energy in the
molecule and the other can be used to ionize the product atoms that are formed
in the dissociation. These lasers are connected to a slice imaging apparatus
that can determine the mass as well as the velocity and angular distributions of
the product atoms. This information provides critical information about how the
specific internal energy of an excited molecule affects the conservation of spin
and the fine structure distributions of the product atoms and it provides a
critical test for the best theoretical calculations for excited state potential
energy curves as well as the dissociation process that occurs on these
curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simple molecules such as nitrogen, oxygen, nitric
oxide, and carbon monoxide only absorb high-energy solar light. This light
cannot be seen by the naked eye and it will not travel in air. Yet this light
from the sun determines how long molecules such as nitrogen, oxygen and NO can
exist in the earth's and other planets atmospheres. It provides the energy for
the chemical reactions occurring in these regions as well as those that occurred
during the early years of planet formation in this and other solar systems. To
truly understand the chemical reactions that do occur in the atmosphere, it is
important to understand how this solar light forms the reactive atoms and
fragments. These reactive species, in turn, undergo chemical reactions with
stable trace species such as carbon dioxide that help determine the climate here
on earth. Solar light with different amounts of energy can form nitrogen and
oxygen atoms from nitrogen and oxygen molecules that can react differently with
both the trace species such as carbon dioxide as well as with the oxygen and
nitrogen molecules themselves. The work that will be performed on this grant
will provide the information about how the energy of the atoms that is formed
changes with the solar energy of the solar light that is absorbed. This
information can then be put in the models that are used to predict the future
behavior of trace components in our atmosphere as well as the atmospheres of
other planets and astronomical bodies.