* 1301830
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Meaning of Place Recovery on the Mississippi Coast
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Susan Cutter, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2015
* USD 13,032.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates long-term recovery
following a catastrophic disaster and how such recovery is represented through
personal accounts and quantitative indicators. Recovery, especially in the long-
term, is the least understood phase in the disaster cycle. Current research
often equates recovery with the rebuilding of infrastructure, the repopulation
of affected areas, or the return of regional economic activity. Assessment
techniques that rely solely on aggregate metrics, while valid, could potentially
mask small-scale differences in the recovery experiences and outcomes of local
neighborhoods and social groups. Place plays a substantial role in mediating the
recovery process for disaster survivors. It serves as a governing entity that
establishes recovery guidelines, but also provides a social community and a
symbolic landscape containing individual and group histories. This study uses
the Mississippi Coast as a site for exploring the long-term recovery process
over an eight-year period since Hurricane Katrina. The study first examines what
recovery means to local residents, and whether or not differences exist on the
basis of social position and geographic background. Second, the study explores
whether there are differences between these experiential perspectives on
recovery and empirically-based assessments. Semi-structured interviews, photo
elicitation, and a participatory mapping exercise will document perceptions of
residents about the spatial, functional, and symbolic recovery of their
community. Thematic comparisons of these qualitative data and spatial
comparisons of participant maps performed in a geographic information system
(GIS) isolate differences in perspectives of residents. Quantitative indicators
based on long-term population, economic, and housing reconstruction data are
then constructed. A spatial clustering algorithm is used to compare the timing,
degree, and spatial extent of recovery described by the indicators with
perspectives of residents gleaned through qualitative methods. The aim of this
research is to develop a theoretical model of place recovery and a methodology
for integrating multiple types of place-based
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will enhance recovery
research, planning, and policy in a variety of ways. The generation of a
nuanced, place-based recovery model sensitive to a diversity of recovery
experiences will advance interdisciplinary instruction and research on this
phase of the disaster cycle. The inclusion of local recovery knowledge as part
of a larger-scale benchmarking procedure will assist state and local recovery
leaders in more efficiently targeting the unmet needs of traditionally
underrepresented groups, in particular, women, the elderly, and people of color,
who are targeted in this study. The development of such a participatory
methodology in which residents define and assess local recovery is widely
applicable to other disaster-impacted locations. Engaging residents in action
research also has the potential to empower participants and enhance community
resilience by bolstering efficacy in the recovery process. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research career.