* 1301037
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: Biomechanics from molecular to organismal scales
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2019
* John Socha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,670.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at Virginia Polytechnic Institute, entitled, ": RET in Engineering and
Computer Science Site: Biomechanics from Molecular to Organismal Scales, under
the direction of Dr. Daniel M. Dudek. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomechanics is a
field that aims to understand and explain the mechanical basis of biological
processes in organisms from single-celled paramecia to humans. This field
requires contributions from engineering, biology, chemistry, physics, and
mathematics with crosscutting concepts that unify the study of science and
engineering. In this program, a total of 30 in-service high school STEM
teachers, from school districts throughout the Appalachian region of
southwestern Virginia and Southern West Virginia, with an emphasis on serving
under-resourced schools and low income student populations, will engage in
original research in areas of biomechanics ranging from the gliding locomotion
of flying snakes to the design of highly efficient, biological rubber materials,
to human balance and fall prevention. The program will run for seven summer
weeks on site at Virginia Tech, with teacher faculty interaction throughout the
academic year. Each teacher will be paired on a one-to-one basis with a
biomechanics research laboratory, conducting research and developing new
educational materials. Teachers will work alongside faculty and graduate
students, developing new skills towards addressing specific biomechanics
research questions using a hypothesis driven approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program will facilitate the development of new educational content that is
inquiry-based and focuses on open-ended problem solving, which will address a
national need for improving deeper student understanding of fundamental STEM
concepts. Research examples from biomechanics lie at the intersection of STEM
fields and therefore provide diverse mechanisms for integration of examples and
applications in traditionally separated high school courses. The program will
train teachers in high-needs rural school districts in Appalachia (Va and WVa).
The new educational modules developed collaboratively between teacher and
faculty will be made freely available via the web, extending the impact of this
program across the country by offering teachers new opportunities to incorporate
and adapt interdisciplinary lessons into their curricula. This will not only
improve the quality&lt;br/&gt;of secondary school STEM education, but motivate
secondary students towards careers in engineering and science.