* 1301821
* EAGER: Developing an Experimental Technique for Measuring Very Slow Crack Velocities in Rock Using the Atomic Force Microscope
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2012,04/30/2014
* John Kemeny, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2014
* USD 48,188.00

Subcritical crack growth is one of the dominant mechanisms for time-dependent
rock degradation and failure. In spite of the substantial amount of work that
has been conducted on subcritical crack growth in rocks, some very important
issues still remain. The double torsion test and other conventional techniques
for subcritical crack growth testing measure crack velocities between 10-8 and
10-3 m/s. Within this range, it is not possible to determine the shape of the
crack velocity vs. KI curve for very low crack velocities, which is needed in
order to accurately predict the long term behavior of geologic structures
subjected to low stresses. Also, there is controversy about the origin of shear
crack growth in rocks that cannot be adequately resolved with traditional
microscopy. To address these issues, experimental techniques based the Atomic
Force Microscope (AFM) will be developed. The resolution of the AFM for crack
growth measurements is less than 4 nanometers, which allow crack velocities as
small as 10-13 m/s to be measured. This will provide fundamental information on
the shape of the crack velocity vs. KI curve and the subcritical cutoff for
rocks. The experimental procedure developed will involve periodic mechanical
loading of small rock samples to create very small amounts of crack growth,
followed by AFM investigations to measure the amount and pattern of crack
growth. Laboratory and AFM techniques developed for mode I crack growth in glass
will initially be used for the rock specimens, and modifications will be made to
account for the complex rock microstructure and also to investigate both tensile
and shear crack growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will increase our
ability to predict the long-term stability of critical geologic structures such
as dam foundations, tunnels, underground nuclear waste storage facilities,
underground CO2 sequestration sties, highway slopes, and many other structures.
Also, the results could impact other science and engineering fields that are
interested in environmentally assisted crack growth and failure, such as
material science, fracture mechanics, mining, and civil and mechanical
engineering. By disseminating the results of this research through international
publications and distance courses, this research will be part of the training
for undergraduate and graduate students worldwide.