* 1301789
* Adapting Socio-ecological Systems to Increased Climate Variability
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2020
* Alicia Knoedler, Oklahoma State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 11/30/2020
* USD 20,997,330.00

In this five-year project, Oklahoma Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) seeks to advance understanding of how socio-
ecological systems can adapt sustainably to increased climate variability caused
by a changing climate. This knowledge will be used to empower managers to
effectively adapt socio-ecological systems to climate variability and educate
Oklahomans about the expected consequences of regional environmental change.
Three interlinked research focus areas are proposed to examine complex human,
climate, and natural resource systems. These are: a socio-ecological observatory
network; a socio-ecological forecasting system, and a decision support system.
Each of the three components is linked with feedback loops, providing
integration among the constituent parts. The major participants in this proposal
are: Oklahoma State University (OSU), the University of Oklahoma (OU), the
Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation (SRNF), and the University of Tulsa (TU). OSU
and OU are the state?s public Ph.D. granting institutions serving 23,500 and
22,600 students respectively , TU is a Ph.D. granting private institution
serving approximately 4,000 students and SRNF is an independent non-profit
institute that moves science and innovation from the laboratory to agricultural
producers. The project also involves additional collaborations with Langston
University (LU), a historically black university that serves 3,000 students,
four tribal colleges, state and federal agencies/laboratories, and K-12 schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma has been subject to
many climate-related events that have caused significant economic hardship and
damage. The proposed activities enable Oklahoma to examine socio-ecological
feedback loops, to study the connections between different scales of analysis
(e.g., community, landscape), and to consider whether proposed solutions for
sustainability can be applied at levels where effective social or ecological
changes can occur. Research activities support the development of decision
support systems that provide information for stakeholders regarding their
vulnerability and options to respond to an increasingly variable and changing
climate. The majority of activities are focused on drought, complementing
existing State activities within the areas of hydrology, ecology, and
meteorological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma EPSCoR develops research and education activities to
engage a wide number of constituents. STEM activities are directed at providing
research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students, STEM activity kits
for girls through the girl scouts of America, and summer internships among other
activities. Some of these activities specifically recruite females, Native
Americans, and other minorities, while K-12 activities focus on rural
populations. Education pedagogy specialists will assist K-12 teachers in
translating thematic science content into classroom lessons that are shared
virtually across the state. The Oklahoma EPSCoR website and social media are
used to provide a clearinghouse for information such as climate-related
brochures, videos, and classroom resources, event information, and funding
opportunities. The activities particularly focus on engaging Native Americans in
both research and education. Tribal liaisons (federal, state, and tribal
employees) and anthropologists will be engaged to ensure that research questions
are inclusive of the views and needs of tribal environmental specialists. The
activities strengthen areas noted to be important within the State?s Science and
Technology Plan such as workforce training and development in the areas of
agriculture, climate change and social sciences.