* 1301032
* Peptide Assembly:Mechanism and Inhibition
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Bowers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 495,000.00

The award CHE-1301032 provided by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanism-B Program (CSDM-B) and the Chemistry of Life Processes of the National
Science Foundation to Professor Michael T. Bowers at the University of
California at Santa Barbara will be used to investigate the mechanism of peptide
assembly. This is currently a very active area of research both for its
fundamental importance and because of possible therapeutic applications in
neurological diseases. These studies will include the determination of oligomer
distributions, the structures of sized selected oligomers and the effect of
select inhibitors on this process. Peptides will be selected to test existing
models for beta sheet formation and eventual fibrilization and for their
possible implications in amyloid based diseases. Experimental methods will
include ion mobility spectrometry coupled with mass spectrometry, atomic force
microscopy and transmission electron spectroscopy and a newly developed oligomer
size selected infrared spectroscopy experiment constructed at the Fritz Haber
Institute in Berlin, Germany. The experiments will be complimented by high level
theoretical calculations including both DFT and replica exchange molecular
dynamics. Inhibitors will include both naturally occurring substances like
polyphenols and specially synthesized molecules designed for select peptide
attachment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two fastest growing major diseases in the
US today are Alzheimer's disease and Type 2 Diabetes. These seemingly dissimilar
diseases share the common trait of having toxic agents that come from the
assembly of ordinarily innocuous agents (peptides) in the body: one process
occurring in the brain causing Alzheimer's disease and the other in the pancreas
causing Type 2 Diabetes. It isn't clear how these normally safe species assemble
into deadly ones nor is it clear how they kill cells once they do assemble. This
is a difficult problem to study with the normal tools of biochemistry that can't
select specific assembled peptides and hence can't tell their structure or how
toxic they are. The thrust of this proposal is to provide a new set of methods
that can do this selecting and to apply these methods to model peptide systems
to learn the factors that control peptide assembly in general and then test
simple molecules that can stop this assembly in its tracks. Finally the results
are translated into presentations that can be given to local high schools and
each Bowers group member visits several such schools each year to make these
presentations.