* 1301150
* Collaborative Research:  Organizational and Uncertainty Impacts of Couplings in a System Design Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Ali Abbas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/29/2016
* USD 240,000.00

The research objective of this collaborative project is to investigate three
hypotheses focusing on the impact of organizational couplings and physics-based
couplings on decision-making under uncertainty in the design of large-scale
complex engineered systems. Methods to measure loss in value of a system design
due to fixed requirements as well as to organizational incentives are to be
developed and tested. Three research objectives are pursued as follows: 1)
evaluate the impact of incorporating physics-based coupling information in a
system value model to better enable trade-offs; 2) incorporate uncertainties
associated with physics-based couplings to determine impact on system value; and
3) evaluate the impact of fixed requirements on the system design. The work will
provide foundational theoretical and empirical investigations into the theory of
large-scale systems design using a value-based approach. The research will
identify the value gap due to organizational and technical couplings and the
associated impact on the resulting system design, thereby providing a clear
basis for changing present practice.

If successful, the results of this research will demonstrate that requirements,
organizational structure, and incentive structures can seriously impact the
system value and hence, system design. Further, the research will offer
alternatives to mitigate this impact, thereby enabling an increase in system
value and improved system design. This can have significant impact on industries
and federal agencies engaged in the design of complex engineered systems. For
these engineered systems, during the detailed design stage, there may be
thousands of individuals working in a team environment distributed across
multiple organizations, with many of these geographically and temporally
distributed, wherein these individuals operate with different preferences,
beliefs, organizational structures, and incentive structures. This research can
potentially result in improved theory, methods, and processes to continuity
across an organization, regardless of structure, to produce the greatest system
value. The results will be disseminated through a variety of conference and
journal mechanisms, with the most significant outreach effort focused on a
website that will also contain a "common language" established to span fields of
Multidisciplinary Design Optimization (MDO), Value-Driven Design (VDD), and
Decision Analysis (DA). Papers and tools produced will also be on this website.
Outreach to students from under-represented groups will be a key effort, using
the special emphasis of social sciences challenges being addressed together with
technical issues.