* 1301465
* Femtosecond studies of the influence of solvent on chemical reaction dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Stephen Bradforth, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2017
* USD 457,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen Bradforth of the University of
Southern California and his students will elucidate pathways for ultrafast
ionization, charge transfer and spin crossover in solution phase small
molecules. A combination of broadband transient absorption and liquid-microjet
time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy will be used to understand the role
that solvent plays in controlling excited state dynamics. The solvent is
expected to modulate solute electronic structure, stabilize charge-separated
states and modify the approach to conical intersections that control
photochemical branching. In this framework, a mechanistic understanding for the
photooxidation of aqueous guanine and adenine will be sought by mapping and
correlating the onset for ionization of these DNA bases with the dissociative
reactivity exhibited in non-polar solvents, the gas phase and theory. In
addition, the cascade of intermediate states in excited-state spin crossover
organo-iron complexes will be unraveled through a combination of time-resolved
optical and photoelectron probes, the latter being uniquely sensitive to ligand
field states. These specific chemical studies will complemented by construction
of a source of extreme UV femtosecond pulses to expand the electron binding
energy range for both steady-state and transient photoelectron spectroscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental mechanisms revealed in this project will
impact efforts in the photobiology community to correlate UV wavelength and
lesion formation in cellular DNA. In addition, the new spectroscopic tools
applied here to spin-crossovers systems should help to optimize organometallic
chromophores utilizing earth-abundant metals for solar energy conversion.
Training of PhD, postdoctoral and undergraduate students in the PI?s lab will
prepare a new generation of physical scientists in designing and analyzing
experiments that use contemporary spectroscopic probes of matter. Students will
have abundant opportunities to work with international scientists both here and
abroad through a network of collaborations. A broadening participation program
with proven success will be continued whereby Bradforth offers Los Angeles
county community college students 8-week summer internships themed on light-to-
energy conversion research. Participation of diverse groups and extensive
collaboration will be emphasized at all levels of involvement in the project.