* 1301131
* Structurally Diverse Molecular Architectures with Unusual Excited State Dynamics and Reactivity Providing Multifunctional Interactions with DNA
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Brenda Winkel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 362,500.00

The interaction of inorganic complexes, e.g., cis-platin, with DNA constitutes a
major entry point into modulating the reactivity and molecular biology of this
critical biomolecule. In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics
and Mechanism Program, Prof. Karen Brewer will design, prepare and study a group
of structurally diverse inorganic complexes which undergo multiple reaction
pathways with DNA, using a large array of sensitive methods. A series of new
structural motifs with multifunctional reactivity will be prepared to expand the
structural diversity of known molecules and create a large class of
supermolecules for which each sub-unit modulates some property or performs some
function that leads to molecular machines with very complex functions.
Understanding and controlling the role of each sub-unit on the properties and
reactivity of these unusual multifunctional molecules will be undertaken,
including unusual systems that are excited with low energy red light. The
project will explore the multifaceted reactivity of these systems including
thermal binding to DNA, visible light-induced DNA photobinding via new
mechanisms, red light activated DNA photocleavage, and a new paradigm for DNA
modification, DNA photocondensation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of new
materials which modulate the activity of DNA has many applications in medicine,
including the treatment of genetic and infectious diseases. In addition, the
knowledge base assembled by the development of such complex molecules with
multiple reaction pathways is applicable in many fields, including the
modification and detection of biomolecules, molecular sensing, light and redox
activated molecular electronics, conversion of light energy to chemical energy
and metal based catalysis.