* 1301332
* SusChEM: Deep Photochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide to Methanol
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Frederick MacDonnell, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 430,346.00

The NSF Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professors Frederick
M. MacDonnell and Norma S. Tacconi of the University of Texas at Arlington to
develop a class of molecular photocatalysts designed to drive the reduction of
carbon dioxide all the way to methanol. Energy derived from fossil fuels, while
central to today's economy, is not a sustainable solution to global energy needs
and has potentially severe environmental consequences upon continued use. Liquid
transportation fuels derived from fossil fuels are difficult to replace, however
solar technologies that efficiently convert carbon dioxide (a greenhouse gas) to
liquid fuels (such as methanol), could directly address this problem. This
research team is using well-established ruthenium polypyridyl complexes as
chromophores because of their stability, tunability, and favorable photophysical
properties. These molecules are coupled with pyridine-based catalysts to obtain
a deep 6-electron reduction of the carbon dioxide to methanol. Notably, despite
all the advances with carbon dioxide electro- and photo-reduction with
homogeneous transition metal catalysts, reduction has been limited to the two-
electron reduction products (carbon monoxide or formic acid) with deeper
reduction to methanol or methane conspicuously absent. The well understood
ruthenium chromophore is being used to provide proof-of-concept results that
establish the reaction mechanism before chromophores based on organics dyes or
more earth-abundant elements are utilized. Photocatalytic activity is being
studied in both aqueous (as a function of pH) and non-aqueous environments, in
the presence and absence of metallic surfaces, and with various electrolytes and
neutral modifiers to promote the desired reaction. Photocatalyst function is
screened and interrogated using custom designed photoreactors and their
catalytic efficiency is optimized by determining quantum yield and catalytic
turnover as a function of reaction conditions. The technical implications of
this research may help develop a carbon-neutral fuel cycle and produce a liquid
fuel that requires minimal infrastructure changes to adopt. This research falls
under the "SusChEM" program as it utilizes non-petroleum based resources (i.e.,
carbon dioxide) to produce a liquid fuel (methanol). The investigators are
actively involved in K-12 education through a number of outreach programs, most
notably through the development and implementation of an externally-funded
"Chemistry Magic Show" run through the Science Ambassadors program in the
College of Science. Over 43,400 students have seen the "Chemistry Magic Show"
since its inception in 2008.