* 1301813
* The Perovskite to Post-Perovskite Phase Boundary in Mantle Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Sang-Heon Shim, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2015
* USD 229,066.00

The structure and dynamics of the lowermost 400-km depths of the mantle are
believed to have strong influences on the chemical evolution of our planet. Deep
subducting slabs appear to transport materials formed at the surface of the
Earth to this deepest part of the mantle and hot spot volcanoes, such as Hawaii,
may have their roots in this deepest part of the mantle. Seismologists have
documented a discontinuous increase in shear wave velocity at 400-km above the
base of the mantle. Recent studies have proposed that this seismic discontinuity
may be related to a phase transition in the dominant mantle silicate perovskite
(post-perovskite transition), implying that the lowermost mantle has the same
composition as the shallower mantle layers. Yet, studies to date have focused on
simplified systems. Our recent study incorporating the effects of iron and
aluminum [Catalli et al., 2009, Nature], which is more realistic for the mantle,
showed that the post-perovskite transition cannot explain the seismic
discontinuity if the lowermost mantle has the same composition as the shallower
mantle layers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this grant, we will conduct
measurements on the seismic detectability of the post-perovskite transition in
rocks that may constitute the mantle, i.e., pyrolite, harzburgite, and basalt,
using synchrotron X-ray diffraction in the laser-heated diamond-anvil cell at in
situ high pressure-temperature conditions related to the lowermost mantle. The
aim of the proposed research is to explore compositions which may have a
seismically detectable post-perovskite transition. Our proposed study will
therefore provide important constraints on the chemical composition and
mineralogy of the lowermost mantle. One of the most important improvements in
the proposed research over previous measurements is the focus on understanding
the effects of other mantle phases, such as ferropericlase, silica, CaSiO3
perovskite, and the calcium-ferrite-type phase, on the seismic detectability of
the post-perovskite transition through the partitioning of iron and aluminum.
Our preliminary work on pyrolite, basalt, and San Carlos olivine reveal that the
multi-phase effects can change the detectability of the post-perovskite
transition significantly and the post-perovskite transition may be more
detectable in differentiated compositions (harzburgite and basalt) than
homogenized mantle composition (pyrolite). Therefore, the proposed measurements
will allow us to investigate the possible existence of differentiated recycled
materials at the lowermost mantle. This would have significant impacts on the
geochemistry and dynamics of the lowermost mantle and geochemical signatures of
the root of hot spot volcanoes which have been attributed to the lowermost
mantle.