* 1301081
* GOALI: Continuous-Bending-under-Tension Studies to Enhance the Formability of Advanced Steels and Aluminum Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Cedric Xia, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2017
* USD 487,680.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project in
collaboration with Ford Motor Company provides funding to, a) create a
fundamental understanding of the mechanism which enhances metal formability
during continuous-bending-under-tension and b) to exploit this behavior through
innovative manufacturing processes. In order for the industry to take advantage
of continuous-bending-under-tension to achieve formability improvements,
fundamental knowledge of the underlying phenomena, accurate models to predict
material behavior and innovative processing solutions to exploit this effect are
required. Two specific materials, DP780 steel and AA6022 aluminum alloy will be
investigated in this research. Both of these are of interest and increasingly
evaluated for various weight-sensitive applications, but have very different
microstructures and are expected to behave differently during continuous-
bending-under-tension. The principal investigators and senior personnel have
significant and relevant expertise in experimental mechanics, material
characterization, microstructural-based and continuum constitutive modeling,
process simulations, and sheet metal forming, to assure the success of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
benefit society at large by reducing the environmental impact of products such
as automobiles and by enabling more aggressive product designs, which will
further decrease the weight and cost of components. Also, graduate and
undergraduate students will benefit from the industrial focus of this project
and the fact that the results will be directly integrated into the curriculum.
In addition, the PIs will build on their past success in recruiting students
from underrepresented groups in engineering to participate in the research.
Research Experience for Teachers participants will be involved in the project
and will create modules for high school science and pre-engineering courses to
attract more students to these disciplines. Finally, to ensure that the results
of this research are effectively communicated to industry, workshops will be
conducted through the collaboration with industrial partners.