* 1301929
* Collaborative Research: Geological Hazards, Climate Change, and Human/Ecosystems Resilience in the Islands of the Four Mountains, Alaska.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Breanyn MacInnes, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2016
* USD 35,258.00

Assessing the degree to which geological hazards in the Aleutian archipelago
disrupted prehistoric human and ecological systems has important lessons for
current inhabitants of the northern Pacific Rim. The Islands of Four Mountains
region embodies environmental instabilities that, in the last 10,000 years,
include changing subarctic climate, volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, tsunamis,
and sea level fluctuations. Compared to adjacent regions to the east and west,
strong ocean currents and smaller island size magnify ecologically-driven
resource extremes, perhaps creating a physical bottleneck and the cultural
boundary that persisted into the early 20th century. These islands provide an
excellent opportunity to assess the development of prehistoric human adaptations
to geological hazards and environmental change. That such research has not
already occurred is understandable. The same volcanic activity, precipitous
coastlines, high winds, and strong riptides that may have posed profound risks
to prehistoric individuals hinder modern research expeditions. The Four Mountain
prehistoric sites are little studied but are highly significant in light of new
geologic data indicating volcanic activity during human migration and societal
development in the Aleutian archipelago. A team of professional and student
archaeologists, geologists, ecologists, and zoologists will conduct a
comprehensive, interdisciplinary three-year investigation in the Islands of the
Four Mountains. Extensive new radiocarbon, geological, paleoenvironmental, and
cultural data expected from these sites will yield novel insights into the
record of geological hazards, human coping mechanisms, changing subsistence, and
adaptations during the prehistoric and European contact periods.

The Islands of the Four Mountains are located in an ecologically and
economically important region of the world - the north Pacific and Bering Sea.
People on two continents rely on fish from its marine ecosystem, and, given the
sensitivity of airplanes to volcanic ash and of coastal cities to tsunamis, its
geologic hazards potentially affect all nations of the northern Pacific Rim.
Comprehensive research on long-term human-environmental interactions in the
Bering Sea region, set against a backdrop of accelerated global change, is vital
to understanding the dynamics of Aleutian biological and human systems and
effectively addressing the social, political, and economic issues that arise
from changes in those system dynamics today. The island group lies in a zone of
high catastrophic potential in that one of its volcanoes, Mt. Cleveland, has
erupted explosively more than 20 times in the last decade (as recently as May
2013) and during the time of prehistoric human habitation. The Aleutian plate
boundary is the site of four earthquakes having a magnitude greater than 8 and
dozens with magnitudes greater than 7, and these have generated tsunamis
historically and prehistorically. Through partnerships with the Alaska Volcano
Observatory, the Aleut Corporation, Museum of the Aleutians, and the Keck
Geology Consortium this project will bring scientists, Native Americans,
students and policy makers together in education and collaboration.