* 1301380
* Analysis of moving interface problems in fluid dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Steve Shkoller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 217,454.00

Idealized fluid flows are modeled by the Euler equations of fluid dynamics;
these are a coupled system on nonlinear conservation laws in (3+1)-dimensional
space-time, and are the fundamental to all models of fluid motion. Compressible
flows, in which the theory of sound is included, exhibit discontinuous wave
profiles; examples include shock waves, contact discontinuities, moving material
interfaces, moving vacuum boundaries, entropy waves, and a variety of additional
discontinuous wave patterns. The analysis of such multi-dimensional wave
patterns, and in particular, solutions of the Euler equations which propagate at
least one surface of discontinuity, is fundamental to the understanding of basic
physical phenomena. The goal of this research effort is to treat such multi-
dimensional discontinuous wave profiles as moving free-boundary problems, and to
develop a theory for the well-posedness of hyperbolic and degenerate hyperbolic
systems, construct solutions which exhibit finite-time singularities wherein the
propagating hypersurfaces collide with one another, study singular asymptotic
limits such as vanishing viscosity limits and limits of zero surface tension,
and develop a novel nonlinear stability theory for so-called hyperbolic-
parabolic problems which are ubiquitous in models of phase
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiphase fluid flows with moving interfaces
play a central role in a multitude of physical and engineering applications,
ranging from the creation of hurricanes due to wind blowing on top of the ocean
surface to the atomization of liquid fuel jets in combustion chambers to the
motion of astrophysical bodies such as gaseous stars, and to fundamental
predictions in atmospheric science and meteorology. The analytical understanding
gained in this work may have important ramifications in the understanding of
basic physical phenomena, which is heretofore, poorly understood. In addition to
basic wave motion and singularities that occurs in the motion of interfaces
between water and air, other conventional examples include the interface between
air and water, the motion of cloud fronts, the melting of ice-bergs, basic
instabilities between two compressed gases, the behavior of a gas bubble in a
liquid in a shock wave, and liquid fuels which are usually burned by first
atomizing a fuel jet to increase the surface area and hence the evaporation
rate. This proposed research aims to analyze the motion of evolving surfaces of
discontinuity in gases, liquids, plasmas, as well as in the context of classical
phase transition models.