* 1301336
* Collaborative Research: Laser-driven Micro-Transfer Printing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Placid Ferreira, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a new manufacturing process,
Laser-driven Micro-Transfer Printing (LMTP), that enables the facile transfer of
conventionally fabricated micro- and nanostructures from their handle or growth
substrate to a functional substrate. It exploits the difference in the response
of a printable (microstructure) ink and the stamp carrying it to a laser pulse
to create a thermal mismatch strain at the stamp-ink interface. This energy
stored in this mismatch strain drives the release of the ink from the stamp and
its transfer to a receiving substrate. Using experimental observations and
computational modeling, this research will seek to understand and characterize
the thermo-mechanical phenomena involved in the process. This knowledge will be
used to optimize the process elements (e.g., transfer stamp geometry and
material) and parameters to allow for low-temperature, robust process behavior.
Project deliverables include published models, knowledge and characterization of
the LMTP process, a computerized manufacturing tool with an instrumented print
head for the LMTP process, demonstrations of three-dimensional integrated
circuit (3-D IC) packaging and printed multi-layer micro-electromechanical
systems (MEMS), engineering student education, and engineering research
experiences for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
project will provide a facile and efficient manufacturing pathway for realizing
material-scale heterogeneous functional integration ? the controlled inserting
of microscopic functional devices at the precise locations of the desired
function. This type of capability is critical to emerging technologies such as
flexible electronics, 3-D IC packaging and integrated micro-electromechanical
systems. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will benefit through
classroom modules developed within this project as well as through involvement
in the research. Efforts to motivate high school students to science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) careers will benefit from the
contributions that this project will make to high-school summer camps.