* 1301132
* SusChEM: Solar CO2 Reduction (SCO2RE) with Non-Innocent Ligand Transition Metal Photocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Rochford, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 366,925.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jonathan Rochford of UMass Boston seeks mechanistic insight
into the solar driven production of chemical feedstocks from carbon dioxide. One
such product, carbon monoxide, is a valuable precursor towards further reduced
carbon-based fuels as well as syngas, a staring material used in the
petrochemical industry. There remain major obstacles to overcome before such
multi-electron photocatalysis can be efficiently utilized from single photon
initiated processes in molecular systems. In this context, Professor Rochford
and his research group designs rhenium(I)carbonyl systems with non-innocent
ligands that are capable of efficient light harvesting in the visible spectrum
while also displaying strong potential as carbon dioxide reduction
photocatalysts. While rhenium is a precious metal and its supply is limited,
this research project repeatedly reuses tiny amounts of the metal to create
significant amounts of desired product, making the overall effort more
environmentally friendly than current techniques for the production of fuels and
industrial feedstocks. This research is considered under the "SusChEM"
initiative as it converts a non-petroleum based feedstock (carbon dioxide) into
useful carbon-containing materials. By combining a rational program of
synthesis, electrochemistry, and photophysical analyses, a greater understanding
of design strategies towards solar carbon dioxide conversion is developed.

Mimicking natural photosynthesis by harvesting the sun's energy towards a
sustainable process for fuel production represents one of the grand challenges
of science today. This project aids in further understanding artificial
photosynthesis and provides multi-disciplinary training for students at UMass
Boston. Furthermore, key concepts and findings of this project are integrated
into the undergraduate curriculum at UMass Boston to educate future generations
of scientists on the importance of utilizing solar energy as our society works
towards a sustainable and greener future.