* 1301461
* GOALI / SusChEM: Structure-property relationships in metal-hydroxide oxygen-evolution electrocatalysts for alkaline-membrane-based water electrolysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Kathy Ayers, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2016
* USD 315,000.00

With this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liasons with Industry (GOALI) Award
co-funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, Professor Shannon Boettcher from the
University of Oregon will (1) study the mechanisms by which three-dimensional
(3D) structure and local composition control the oxygen-evolution reaction (OER)
activity in Ni hydroxide-based electrocatalysts and (2) identify the key factors
affecting performance and durability of optimized Ni hydroxide OER catalysts in
prototype alkaline-membrane electrolysis systems operating at practical current
densities. The work will be carried out in collaboration with Dr. Kathy Ayers at
Proton OnSite (Wallingford, CT). The focus on Ni-based OER catalysts is
motivated by recent work in the Boettcher laboratory demonstrating that thin
films of Ni-Fe hydroxides with 3D layered structures have higher per-atom
activities than other known alkaline OER catalysts including IrO2. The team will
also conduct outreach activities with local middle school students during
furlough days. The middle school students will engage in hands-on energy storage
and sustainability design-challenge activities on the University of Oregon
campus. The development of clean and sustainable energy sources is critical for
both the economic and environmental vitality of human civilization. Renewable
energy sources such as the sun and wind are intermittent and thus currently
difficult and expensive to integrate with traditional energy sources in large
amounts. One promising method to store intermittent renewable energy is by
splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen gas. The hydrogen gas can be used as a
sustainable carbon-free renewable fuel to replace fossil fuels. This research
addresses an important challenge in designing water-splitting systems - the
inefficiency of the oxygen production part of the reaction.