* 1301665
* Ramsey Theory, Set Theory, and Tukey Order
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 114,368.00

This research program involves development of theory lying on the interface of
Ramsey Theory, Set Theory, and Tukey Order. Ramsey theory is the study of
finding canonical structures within a given class of structures. Topological
Ramsey spaces are topological spaces in which every subset X which has the
property of Baire is Ramsey: every non-empty open set in the space contains a
non-empty open subset which is either contained in or disjoint from X. Such
spaces unify a large body of results in Ramsey theory, including the theorems of
Carlson-Simpson, Galvin-Prikry, Gowers, Graham-Rothschild, Milliken, and others.
Recent progress in the theory of topological Ramsey spaces due to Dobrinen and
Todorcevic has proved useful in solving problems in Set Theory regarding the
precise analysis of the difference between the Tukey and Rudin-Keisler
reducibility notions. Tukey reducibility, a weakening of Rudin-Keisler
reducibility, is of high interest for its ability to classify ordered structures
which defy classification by other means. This research program seeks to develop
a general framework for canonical equivalence relations on topological Ramsey
spaces and provide a unifying theory for ultrafilters satisfying some weak
partition property. These new Ramsey theorems will be applied to classify the
Tukey types of ultrafilters with partition properties. Methods developed are
intended to solve some long-standing problems in Ramsey theory. Further, this
research program aims to establish the full Tukey structure of ultrafilters and
find the model-theoretic implications which Tukey ordering has for
ultrapowers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A main driving force in mathematics is
finding simplicity within seeming chaos. Ramsey theory is the study of finding
simple, canonical structures from within a maelstrom. Tukey order is a useful
means of classifying strengths of objects, thereby simplifying a morass of
objects by grouping together all objects with the same strength. Ultrafilters
are of interest in many areas of mathematics, as they are used for constructing
mathematical structures and models of mathematical theories. In particular,
ultrafilters are fundamental to mathematics, and Tukey order gives a good notion
of the strength of an ultrafilter. This project aims to develop methods which
will solve long-standing open problems in Ramsey theory while significantly
improving our knowledge of Tukey Order and Set Theory. Being interdisciplinary
and focused on fundamental problems, this project is expected to have high
impact on several fields of mathematical.