* 1301071
* RET Site for Structured Organic Particulates
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Rajesh Dave, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) entitled, "RET Site for
Structured Organic Particulates", under the direction of Dr. John D. Carpinelli
and Dr. Rajesh N. Dave. This proposal seeks funding to build upon the current
RET Site for Structured Organic Particulates program at NJIT, in conjunction
with the NSF-sponsored Engineering Research Center (ERC) on Structured Organic
Particulates (C-SOPS). A total of 36 teachers, twelve high school teachers per
year for three years, will engage in a six-week research program under the
guidance of faculty supervisors, with follow-up programs during each school
year. Participants will be high school science and technology teachers from
school districts in northern and central New Jersey, with an emphasis on
teachers from districts that serve large numbers of students from
underrepresented populations in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). NJIT, through its Center for Pre-College Programs (CPCP), is
very actively engaged with the K-12 community in New Jersey, and works with
urban districts and their teachers that serve the targeted student population.
CPCP works with dozens of teachers every year through various programs; its work
has an immediate impact on thousands of students each year, with the vast
majority from underrepresented populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
program stems from cutting-edge C-SOPS research projects dealing with topics in
pharmaceutical materials structure, function, performance, and processing,
geared towards a unifying goal of improving pharmaceutical products. The
fundamental knowledge from research that leads to improved design, manufacturing
and quality of pharmaceutical products, will help high school teachers better
understand the role of engineers and develop curriculum materials that will help
their students better appreciate science and engineering. The program trains
teachers in inquiry-based research, and in concepts of product design and
engineering through examples from pharmaceutical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal are
multifaceted. The RET program will significantly impact a large number of
underrepresented minority students from the selected urban school districts,
several of which have a large number of African-American and/or Hispanic
students. Based on the results of a prior RET program at NJIT, it is anticipated
that this number will be in the thousands during the course of the program, and
many times more after the program ends as teachers continue to use and build
upon the materials they develop through this program. As participating teachers
bring their experiences and educational materials into their own classrooms,
this program will ultimately reach thousands of students, and will contribute
towards development of a well-trained, diverse workforce in this area of
national importance. Modules will be placed in several on-line repositories
available at the disposal of the C-SOPS ERC, making them accessible to scores of
other educators across the country, and will be easily adaptable to meet the
incoming common core standards, thus facilitating their use on a national scale.