* 1301552
* CONFERENCE:  2013 Archaea: Ecology, Metabolism, and Molecular Biology Gordon Research Conference to be held on July 28-August 2, 2013 in Lucca, Italy
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Zvi Kelman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 03/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

The 2013 Archaea: Ecology, Metabolism, and Molecular Biology Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) will be held on July 28-August 2, 2013 in Lucca (Barga), Italy.
Archaea, one of three major evolutionary lineages of life, are a diverse and
fascinating group of microbes with deep roots overlapping those of eukarya. The
objectives of this conference are to communicate and discuss ideas at the
frontiers of science and technology in archaeal research. The meeting will
expand on a number of emerging topics, highlighting new paradigms in archaeal
physiology and metabolism, protein structure and function, systems biology and
genomics, transcription and small RNAs, the ecology and diversity of the
archaea, translation and post-transcriptional regulation, replication, repair
and recombination, archaeal viruses and cellular defense, the archaeal cell
envelope and the central role of archaea in understanding the evolution of early
life and eukaryotes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A diverse and gender-balanced slate
of speakers and discussion leaders have been recruited for the conference. A key
goal is to encourage participation by graduate students, postdoctoral fellows
and faculty from small colleges (including community colleges). Special efforts
will be made to support students from underrepresented groups or students from
laboratories with limited resources. Students and postdoctoral fellows will
present and discuss their research in four poster sessions. In addition, at the
beginning of each session two students selected from submitted abstracts will
give a short talk to present their research findings. Thus young scientists will
be given the opportunity to exchange ideas and make contacts in the formal and
informal environment provided by the GRC and will be exposed to cutting-edge
archaeal research.