* 1301660
* Solving Large Sum-of-Squares Optimization Problems in Control by Exploiting the Parallel Structure of Polya's Algorithm
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/17/2012,08/31/2015
* Matthew Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 186,721.00

The goal of this project is to develop new parallel algorithms for control of
nonlinear and uncertain systems. Computer architectures are changing, with
multi-core chips and graphics cards replacing the CPU-based desktop powerhouses
of years past. And with this change, a great deal of control systems technology
is becoming obsolete. The problem is that the optimization algorithms being used
by controls engineers are not built for the parallel processing environments we
are encountering today. Increasingly, this will limit our ability to control the
large and complex models we use to describe such phenomena as fusion energy and
biological immunity. For this project, we have identified an approach to control
of nonlinear or uncertain dynamics based on optimization using Polya's lemma.
The unique feature of this approach is that the optimization algorithms when
applied to Polya's lemma become almost perfectly parallel. This means that the
algorithms we develop can run on almost any type of parallel computing
architecture, including cluster computers and supercomputers. Considering that
the computing power available on these platforms is currently more than
2,000,000 times great than that available on a single-core desktop, the result
of this project will be an order of magnitude increase in the complexity of
systems we can control. The project organization has three parts. i) develop
parallel algorithms to formulate robust control problems on the simplex as
semidefinite-programming problems via Polya's lemma ii) develop parallel primal-
dual interior-point algorithms for the problem of robust control on cluster
computing and multi-core architectures. Iii) expand the scope beyond robust
control to nonlinear analysis and more general types of system uncertainty and
include additional computing platforms such as GPU computing and supercomputing.
The algorithms developed in this project will be posted online for free
distribution using a public license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An order-of-magnitude
increase in the complexity of systems that can be controled has important
implications. For example, although detailed models of plasma in fusion reactors
are available, those models are too complex to control efficiently using
existing algorithms. The result is poor plasma confinement and inefficient
energy production. If more detailed models can be used to improve plasma
confinement, this has far-reaching implications for energy production.
Additionally, biological models of interaction between cells in the immune
system contain many different actors and are nonlinear and highly uncertain. An
improved ability to analyze and control these models may lead to innovative
forms of treatment for diseases such as cancer which is believed to be caused by
a failure of the immune system to self-regulate. The PI has ongoing projects in
both the areas of fusion research and immunology and this research will be
integrated into these projects. Finally, this project has an international
component with the University of Campinas in Brasil, including extended teaching
exchanges in both Campinas and Chicago. This will strengthen the collaborative
relationship between these two institutions and provide an international
perspective and educational opportunity for students at both schools.