* 1301595
* Multiparameter Harmonic analysis and sharp geometric inequalities with applications to PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,11/30/2016
* Guozhen Lu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 11/30/2016
* USD 187,329.00

Abstract (Lu, 1301595)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project
includes solving problems in two main directions: sharp geometric inequalities
and multiparameter harmonic analysis. Recent developments in the area of sharp
geometric inequalities include best constants for Moser-Trudinger inequalities
on the entire Heisenberg group and more general Carnot groups and Adams
inequalities on high order Sobolev spaces on unbounded domains in Euclidean
spaces. These are circumstances where symmetrization properties do not hold. The
PI, in collaboration with his PhD students, have very recently succeeded in
developing a rearrangement-free argument. This new method suggests that such
sharp geometric inequalities can be established in more general scenarios
including Riemannian and sub-Riemannian manifolds. Moreover, the PI will
investigate the existence of extremal functions for these sharp geometric
inequalities where many challenging problems still remain open. Another main
direction of research is to develop multiparameter harmonic analysis function
space theory in several complicated but important multiparameter settings. The
PI, in collaboration with others, has developed a satisfactory theory of
discrete Littlewood-Paley square functions in a number of multiparameter
scenarios. However, there are still many other important multiparameter settings
where such a discrete Littlewood-Paley theory is yet to be established.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi parameter Harmonic analysis and nonlinear partial
differential equations are central areas of modern mathematics. Findings and new
tools discovered in this project may lead to new development in the area of
classical harmonic analysis, partial differential equations as well as other
branches of mathematics. They have many applications in sciences and
engineering. The solution to the proposed project will have impact on many other
disciplines, including mechanics engineering (such as vibration and noise
reduction for vehicles), imaging processing and pattern recognitions in medical
sciences, stochastic control and optimization, game theory, chemical combustion,
human vision and other topics in the life and medical sciences. Moreover, this
project has a substantial training and educational component. It finely
integrates research together with education. Many graduate students will
actively participate in this project by receiving research training under the
supervision of the principal investigator.