* 1301535
* Regularity properties of stationary and evolution free boundary problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Daniela De Silva, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 127,092.00

This proposal focuses on regularity issues for stationary and evolution free
boundary problems. Part of this project deals with two-phase free boundary
problems with distributed sources, driven by uniformly elliptic operators. We
plan to develop new techniques to settle the fundamental question of whether
flat or Lipschitz free boundaries are smooth. We also propose to investigate
similar issues in the context of free boundary problems in the Heisenberg group,
which cannot be treated within the classical framework. Appropriate strategies
will be developed to take into account the subtle geometric features of the
problem. Another problem under investigation is the regularity of the moving
free boundary originating in a non-homogeneous evolution problem of Stefan-type.
Finally, we propose to complete the analysis of thin one phase free boundaries
by investigating the question of their higher regularity
(analyticity).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The free boundary problems under
investigation arise in different areas of mathematics and science in general:
shape optimization, combustion theory, probability and statistics among others.
Typical examples of two-phase free boundary problems with distributed sources
are the Prandtl-Bachelor model in fluid dynamics or the eigenvalue problem in
magneto hydrodynamics. Stefan-type evolution problems describe the melting (or
solidification) of a material with a solid-liquid interphase. Finally, thin free
boundaries are relevant in classical physical models in mediums where long range
(non-local) interactions are present, as in the propagation of surfaces of
discontinuities, like planar crack expansion. A better understanding of these
problems is thus of great interest to a wide scientific community.