* 1301621
* CSEDI: Constraining the mechanisms of melt transport, storage, and crustal contamination from temporal geochemical variations in monogenetic vents
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Marc Hesse, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2016
* USD 335,452.00

Monogenetic vents are relatively small volcanoes that are active for a single
eruption over a period of a few months to a few years, in contrast to more
typical volcanoes that are gradually built up over many different eruptions and
which are typically intermittently active for 10s of thousands of years or
longer. Monogenetic vents often occur in clusters, and are a common type of
volcanism in many tectonic settings. Several monogenetic vent fields occur in or
near high-population-density areas, including Auckland, New Zealand and Mexico
City, Mexico. Therefore, monogenetic vents represent a significant volcanic
hazard. Previous studies have shown that the compositions of the ash and lava
erupted from a monogenetic vent during the course of an eruption often varies
systematically over time. The cause of this variability is not clear, but it
most likely reflects either processes involved in melt generation and extraction
from the mantle, or melt storage in the continental crust and melt/crust
interaction prior to eruption. A better understanding of the cause(s) of the
chemical variations observed in monogenetic vent eruptions would provide
scientists with a better understanding of the plumbing system that feeds these
volcanoes. This in turn will allow better prediction of the precursor signals
that may signal an impending eruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
combine numerical modeling of melt transport and storage processes with detailed
geochemical analyses of material erupted from selected monogenetic vent eruptive
sequences to better constrain the processes of melt generation, ascent, and
storage that precede the eruption of monogenetic vents. Different hypothesized
mechanisms for generating chemical variations in monogenetic vent sequences
(e.g., reactive melt transport in the mantle or progressive draining of magma
sills that are emplaced in the shallow crust prior to eruption) will produce
different temporal chemical variations. We will compare model predictions with
observations to constrain the likely origin of these variations, and then use
the observed variations to extract information on important variables related to
melt generation, transport, and storage such as the size of chemical
heterogeneities in the mantle source region, the volume and geometry of magma
storage chambers in the crust, and the time interval between melt injection into
the crust and subsequent eruption of this stored magma. This information can be
used in future studies to predict the most likely signals that may indicate an
impending eruption (e.g., upward ground deformation due to magma injection) as
well as the likely time lag between these signals and an actual eruption. The
proposed study with therefore both improve our overall understanding of a
geologically important and widespread style of continental volcanism, and
improve our ability to evaluate and plan for the risks inherent in possible
future monogenetic vent eruptions.