* 1301567
* Fourier Coefficients, L-functions, and Endoscopy Correspondences of Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Dihua Jiang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2016
* USD 181,146.00

The PI, Dihua Jiang, has been working on some basic problems related to
Automorphic L-functions and explicit Langlands functorial transfers for square-
integrable automorphic forms. He investigates the basic structures of the
discrete spectrum of automorphic forms and the related problems on the Langlands
functoriality. In the local theory, his research attacks the local Langlands
conjectures and related basic problems in harmonic analysis of p-adic groups.
His long term goal is to understand the general local-global-automorphic
principles in the theory of automorphic forms, which reflects one of the basic
principles in the arithmetic and number theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI,
Dihua Jiang, is an expert in the modern theory of automorphic forms and the
Langlands Program. Automorphic forms are functions with abundant symmetries.
These symmetries are the guidelines to understand the intrinsic structures of
objects in our universe. In Mathematics, these symmetries are common grounds for
many different theories such as Geometry, Number Theory, Mathematical Physics,
Algebra and Analysis. Hence the modern theory of automorphic forms, essentially
the Langlands program, provides the organizing principle for further research in
these areas. The research of Dihua Jiang establishes basic structures for
automorphic forms and hence &lt;br/&gt;yields essential contribution to the
Langlands program.