* 1301243
* Novel Vanadium Dioxide-based Self-Sensing Microactuators:  Modeling, Control, and Application to Micromanipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Xiaobo Tan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this project is to investigate modeling and control
methods for vanadium dioxide-based microactuators, to enable robust, precise,
and efficient control of these actuators. Vanadium dioxide is a smart material,
whose unique actuation potential has not been noticed until recently, and it has
advantages of high volumetric energy density, superior durability, and excellent
repeatability. However, pronounced hysteresis from phase transition, together
with sophisticated, coupled electro-thermo-mechanical dynamics, presents
significant challenges in the control of vanadium dioxide-based microactuators.
The research approach consists of creating a model that captures hysteresis
across multiple physical domains with high fidelity and minimal complexity,
developing algorithms for self-sensing and for controlling systems with non-
monotonic hysteresis, designing and fabricating vanadium dioxide-based multi
degree-of-freedom micromanipulators, and experimentally validating the developed
modeling and control methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploiting the synergy
between control theory and novel actuation materials, the project will advance
the state of the art in both. If successful, the results from this award will
facilitate the realization of the full potential of vanadium dioxide-based
actuators in areas such as microsurgery, microrobotics, memory technology, and
microassembly, with positive impact on biotechnology and micro/nano-
manufacturing. Besides curriculum enrichment, the project will provide unique
interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and undergrad students.
Both PIs have a strong track record in recruiting and advising female and
minority students, with the co-PI himself being a successful role model for
Hispanic students. A number of outreach activities will be developed to engage
K-12 students and the public, to pique their interest in science and
engineering. Examples of these activities include teacher training, interactive
demos, and ?dancing with the micro stars?, where students act as choreographers
and make arrays of vanadium dioxide-coated micro-cantilevers ?dance? to music
through laser scan programming.