* 1301958
* Workshop on Task-based Information Search Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Robert Capra, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2013
* USD 49,996.00

This award provides support for the "Workshop on Task-based Information Search
Systems", to be held March 14-15, 2013 in Chapel Hill, NC with the goal to
discuss challenges of designing a new generation of information search systems
that go beyond simple searches and can support people in resolving a underlying
need or task. While contemporary search engines are good at helping people
resolve simple look-up tasks, they are not as useful in helping people engaged
in more complex tasks whose resolution might require multiple search sessions
and multiple search strategies. Most search environments are tailored to support
a small set of basic search tasks and provide searchers with few options to
search and interact with information, and little to help them synthesize and
integrate information across session. Participants of the workshop, leading
researchers in interactive information retrieval from academia and industry will
discuss challenges of incorporating task models into systems and tools to
support complex, multi-search and multi-session tasks. The goal of this workshop
is to enumerate, discuss, and document these issues into a research agenda that
can help guide work in this field. Specifically, this workshop is focusing on
the following topics: (1) identification, elicitation, modeling and tracking of
tasks, processes and states, including the identification of frameworks for
conceptualizing task and relevance models; (2) creation of task-specific and
task-aware search environments, including the development of interfaces, tools,
features, indexing techniques and search algorithms; and (3) development of
methods and measures for studying user behavior and evaluating task-based search
systems, including session-based measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will outline directions for short, mid-, and long-term research, seed
interdisciplinary and international collaborations and generate a unified and
multidisciplinary bibliography for researchers and students interested in
working in this area. Workshop will include junior and underrepresented
attendees in order to broaden participation in computer science. Workshop
results will be summarized in a report that will be disseminated via the
workshop web site (http://ils.unc.edu/taskbasedsearch) and various publications.
In addition, it is expected that general users of search tools will benefit from
resulting advances in technology that will provide better tools and services to
support task-based retrieval across multiple search sessions.