* 1301193
* Experimental Investigation of Fundamental Mechanical Behavior of Silicon Nanowires
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Yong Zhu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/28/2017
* USD 329,274.00

This research is about the correlation between the size effects of silicon
nanowires on elasticity, fracture, and their brittle to ductile transition.. In-
situ scanning/transmission electron microscopy resonance and tensile testing on
the same single NWs will be conducted to measure the elastic behavior. A
statistical, Weibull-type, probability model will be employed to analyze the
fracture data and identify fracture origins with the assistance of real-time and
post-mortem microscopy analyses. In-situ thermomechanical testing done in-situ,
in a Transmission Electron Microscope using a novel microfabricated testing
stage will be used to probe the brittle to ductile transition.

If successful, the proposed research has potential to improve flexible and
stretchable electronics, improve energy conversion and storage. It is
anticipated that the experimental results will be used in a collaborative way to
develop atomistic simulations that will pin down the mundamental mechnisms of
nanoscale elasticity, fracture and brittle to ductile transition. In addition,
the novel experimental tools and methods developed in this project (e.g., the
microfabricated thermomechanical testing stage) can be used to understand the
properties of a broad range of nanostructures. From a teaching perspective, this
work will be: 1) integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses that PI
offers at NCSU (including a NSF supported undergraduate nanotechnology
laboratory course), and web-based dissemination of the new course module; 2)
used for training of graduate and undergraduate students for multidisciplinary
research with involvement of women and underrepresented minorities; 3) used for
collaboration with the Engineering Place program at North Carolina State
University to develop an interactive demonstration module and present it to K-12
students.