* 1301054
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site:  RET in Functional Materials at University of South Florida
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Sylvia Thomas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2019
* USD 540,960.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the University of South Florida entitled, "RET in Engineering and
Computer Science Site: RET in Functional Materials at the University of South
Florida", under the direction of Venkat R. Bhethanabotla and Dr. Sylvia W.
Thomas. The University of South Florida (USF) College of Engineering (COE), in
partnership with the school districts of Hillsborough and Pinellas Counties and
St. Petersburg College will conduct an eight week summer RET in Functional
Materials for 15 teachers per year for 3 years (45 total); 9 local high school
teachers, 2 local community college instructors and 4 pre-service teachers.
Materials Science is chosen as the focus because of its highly interdisciplinary
nature (making it relevant to a large number of subject areas). The pervasive
presence of materials in everyday life can provide multiple teaching contexts,
and its research emphasis at the University of South Florida is the perfect
conduit. USF has made substantial investments in the past 10 years in materials
science through the hiring of 20+ materials research faculty, establishment of a
shared metrology and clean room facility, an interdisciplinary master's program
in materials science and engineering and large scale research computing
facilities. The project team further proposes to sustain this collaborative
atmosphere among participants through the creation of an educational resource,
the Materials College, to be designed and implemented by the participants
themselves. This web-based resource will house the participants' inquiry-based
lesson plans within a coherent structure, containing additional content that
provides an overview of Materials Science and its relevance to current
technologies, describes the fundamental knowledge required by practitioners in
the field and highlights applications to the field of core subjects taught in
high schools and community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Materials College
activity will provide a framework for the sustained engagement of, and
collaboration among, teachers and provide a foundation for building additional
partnerships with other school districts, community colleges and Colleges of
Education. Web-based dissemination of lesson plans in a focused structure will
enhance the professional development of a&lt;br/&gt;broad range of teachers. The
diversity of participants will result in expanded participation of
underrepresented groups and women in STEM disciplines. The project team expects
that its efforts will result in an increased number of math and science
certified teachers and U.S./permanent resident AA and BS degree holders.