* 1301057
* Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of the Effects of Transit System Operations on Urban Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Jorge Laval, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 07/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

This award explores the premise that the recently developed theory of the
Network Fundamental Diagram (NFD) can be extended to account for the main
effects that transit systems' operational characteristics (such as bus
frequency, number of stops, number of routes) have on macroscopic network
performance measures (such as, network capacity, mean travel time and
probability of gridlock) and for the effects of network performance on transit
operations. To accomplish this, the research approach will be to combine NFD
theory with traffic flow theory of moving bottlenecks to produce the proposed
NFD-transit theory and evaluate its results using both empirical data and a
microscopic simulation model especially developed for this project. The
empirical data will come from the metro Atlanta region and includes traffic data
from loop detectors at signalized intersections and transit data from buses' GPS
devices and ridership surveys.

If successful, this award will improve our understanding of the cause-and-effect
mechanisms between transit systems and transportation network performance. The
research could be potentially transformative since traditional travel
forecasting models cannot address this problem satisfactorily because of their
reliance on travelers' origins and destinations. The proposed method is
macroscopic and therefore does not require microscopic travel patterns. Although
it is expected that the real-world data will deviate from the assumptions of the
theory, valuable insights will be obtained by carefully studying how these
deviations affect predictions and how this theory can be improved. The project
will develop urban congestion reduction strategies that consider both public and
private transportation alternatives. The results will be beneficial to the
population of large urban areas, especially to underrepresented groups who often
live in transit-dependent areas. The main findings will be disseminated through
graduate-level courses, simulation and analysis tools made available online and
through two workshops for planning agencies.