* 1301874
* Understanding Conditions for the Emergence of Virtual Organizations in Long-Tail Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Carl Lagoze, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2014
* USD 152,929.00

The potential of advanced cyberinfrastructure to facilitate new collaborative
paradigms and new forms of virtual organizations in science is compelling.
However, development of appropriate cyberinfrastructure must consider the
diversity of the target scientific communities, their cultures and practices,
and how social and technical issues interact in the context of a specific user
community. Some highly collaborative fields have been pioneers in the
development and adoption of cyberinfrastructure. Others (termed "long-tail
sciences") follow an organizational model of independent small research groups.
Researchers in these fields would have to overcome significant epistemic,
cultural, and institutional hurdles to achieve their collaborative potential and
adopt enabling cyberinfrastructure. This project investigates the potential of
long-tail sciences to benefit from a range of different types of virtual
organizations. Employing an innovative methodology that integrates quantitative
(network analysis) and qualitative (ethnographic) techniques, it systematically
investigates the differential epistemic and cultural propensity of research
fields to adopt into their research practices virtual organizations and the
technology that supports them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
so-called 'long-tail' sciences, where collaborations are generally small, and
studies the social and cultural conditions that enable scientific communities in
those fields to benefit from investments into new technologies to support their
collaborations. Thus, this project complements current cyberinfrastructure
research directed at large-scale collaborations and is distinguished by
conducting a systematic, comparative study of scientific fields. There are few
such studies that seek to understand how field differences shape the uptake of
new technologies supporting research collaboration and scientific communication.
It is not clear yet what the relevant distinguishing characteristics of research
fields are, nor how to reliably identify or construct the appropriate unit of
analysis for such comparisons. By systematically exploring field-specific
differences this project contributes to a deeper understanding of what
cyberinfrastructures and the virtual organizations they support have to offer
the long-tail sciences, and what field-specific challenges need to be overcome
if they are to be adopted. The results will be relevant to understanding the use
of cyberinfrastructure across the disciplinary spectrum to guide funding
decisions and development efforts.