* 1301485
* Indenofluorenes and Related Structures: Syntheses, Properties and Emerging Materials Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Michael Haley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2016
* USD 443,900.00

With the support of this award from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Haley of the Department of Chemistry at
the University of Oregon will prepare and study molecules based on or inspired
by the indenofluorene skeleton to answer fundamental scientific questions as
well as to explore their materials properties. The Haley research program will
develop facile synthetic methods for the assembly of these strongly electron-
accepting molecules. Once in hand, the Haley group will examine the optical and
electronic properties of all new molecular scaffolds with an emphasis towards
organic field effect transistor (OFET) and organic photovoltaic (OPV)
applications and use in devices. The study of such molecules answers fundamental
questions regarding the electronic structure and properties of non-benzenoid
organic materials.

The molecules developed in these studies present opportunities for practical
applications, particularly in the area of nanotechnology and low-cost
electronics. Moreover, this project serves as an excellent training ground for
graduate and undergraduate researchers in fundamental and applied chemical
synthesis. The studies will provide the researchers with broad experience in
organic synthesis, computational chemistry, x-ray crystallography, and the
interplay between electronic structure and molecular architecture. The broader
impacts of this program include industrial internships of graduate students at
local and regional companies and national labs, the exchange of graduate
students with those of foreign collaborators in Germany, Denmark, and Japan, the
hosting of extended stays of visiting scientists including professors from PUIs,
and continued substantial involvement of undergraduates in state-of-the-art
chemical research via programs which promote the participation of
underrepresented groups.