* 1301157
* Simulating quantum dynamical processed in photoexcited nanoscale molecular structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* David Coker, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

David Coker of Boston University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Division of Chemistry
program to study excited state dynamics in condensed phase systems. Using
simulation and electronic structure methods, Coker and his research group are
developing accurate quantum mechanical techniques, in particular they are
extending their partial linearized density matrix propagation approach to enable
efficient and broader application. They are 1) exploring how exciton transport
in biological and synthetic light harvesting systems is influenced by local
variation of chromophore environment and chromophore density, 2) studying the
dynamics of multi domain complexes in which exciton transport is followed by
competing charge separation and recombination processes, 3) incorporating new
semiclassical mapping Hamiltonian methods for treating dynamics of many electron
systems into their partial linearized propagation approach to treat dense
systems of strongly interacting chromophores, and 4) developing a new approach
to sample the initial Wigner distribution characterizing multistate thermal
equilibrium that is required for the general implementation of their quantum
dynamics methods.

In this research, Coker and his research group develop accurate methods for
studying energy transfer and dynamics in photo-excited nanoscale molecular
structure such as natural and synthetic light harvesting systems. The research
is aimed at fundamental understanding of biological light harvesting processes,
such as photosynthesis, as well as enabling the digital design of new enhanced
functional materials for alternative energy, such as solar fuel production and
photovoltaic applications. The research also is relevant to quantum information
science.