* 1301628
* Nonlinear PDE with gradient constraints: Regularity, Eigenvalue problems, and Infinity ground states
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Ryan C. Hynd, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2016
* USD 151,961.00

Abstract (Hynd, 1301628)

The aim of this project is to analyze properties of solutions of partial
differential equations (PDE) with gradient constraints. The principle
investigator (PI) proposes to establish the best known regularity result for
solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations arising in stochastic control
theory, where the underlying control processes have sample paths that are
singular. This will allow control theorists to better study a wider class of
models as the design of optimal controls in stochastic singular control depends
on regularity properties of solutions. In mathematical finance models involving
transaction costs, quantities of interest in the limit of small transaction
costs may be characterized via a solution of an eigenvalue problem involving a
PDE with gradient constraint. The PI proposes to deduce various properties of
these solutions including providing new minmax formulae for eigenvalues. The PI
will also perform a study of infinity ground states, which are solutions of a
PDE involving the infinity Laplacian and a gradient constraint. This equation
arises as a limit of Euler-Lagrange equations associated with a sequence of
constrained variational problems. The PI will develop techniques for resolving a
fundamental unresolved uniqueness question: on exactly which domains are
infinity ground states unique up to a multiplicative factor?

The proposed research seeks to address a variety of problems at the intersection
of diverse fields of mathematics with applications to industries such as
telecommunications and finance. Consequently, this project has the potential to
serve a wide audience and to attract students and other researchers looking to
forge research connections. In attempts to increase the participation of
underrepresented groups doing research in these areas of science, the PI will
attend meetings such as the Conference for African American Researchers in the
Mathematical Sciences and the Blackwell-Tapia conference. The PI will also visit
universities that serve large numbers of students from underrepresented groups
to give presentations on this research and to build relationships that may
ultimately lead to research collaborations.