* 1301124
* Biologically-Inspired Silicification of Fine-Grained Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Patricia Dove, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/28/2017
* USD 387,652.00

Many organisms mineralize tissues to produce structures that serve diverse
functions such as skeletal support and protective composite layers. These
structures are formed through biomineralization processes that have low
metabolic cost to the organism. Of particular interest is the process of
biosilicification -- the ability of organisms to direct the nucleation and
growth of mechanically efficient silica skeletal materials. Advances in
biosilicification research present an opportunity for cross-fertilization
between the seemingly disparate disciplines of biomineralization and
geotechnical engineering to advance ground improvement technology. The goals of
this project are to: 1) Uncover new pathways for silica polymerization in fine-
grained soil, 2) Use insights from biosilicification research to develop new
processes for forming amorphous silica cements at natural pH levels using
environmentally benign chemical materials, and 3) Reduce the life cycle impacts
associated with ground improvement. To achieve the project goals, laboratory
experiments will be conducted to model the geotechnical construction practices
of subgrade stabilization using wet and dry soil mixing. Lime and cement
stabilized samples will be used as control treatments. Soil materials that
consist of pure clay minerals, mixtures of the clay minerals, mine tailings, and
natural soils will be silicified with a polycation and sodium silicate.
Adsorption and silicification-caused changes in soil geochemical properties will
be assessed by x-ray diffraction, zeta potential, surface area, cation exchange
capacity and pH. Changes in geotechnical index properties due to treatment will
be determined and used to optimize the experiments. Strength of silicified soil
will be measured by unconfined compression, consolidated undrained triaxial
compression tests. Consolidation and creep tests will be used to evaluate
strength and compressibility changes. The potential for the silicification
process to reduce the volume changes associated with expansive soil will be
determined. Pilot scale field tests will guide development of field
implementation methods and to improve treatment effectiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this project will benefit society by
reducing the life cycle environmental impacts of geotechnical construction, and
training of the next generation of geotechnical engineers. Current ground
treatment processes can possess relatively high embodied energy, and they rely
on resources that cannot be renewed on human time scales. There can also be
impacts to soil and groundwater and significant releases of CO2 to the
atmosphere. The silicification process offers the potential for using reduced
amounts of environmentally friendly input materials to achieve engineering
performance that is comparable to or better than current technologies. By
reducing the environmental impact, this new process has the potential to lower
the cost of infrastructure projects. The findings also have the potential to
benefit the resource recovery industries in managing fine-grained tailings.
Graduate students will receive interdisciplinary training and will have the
unique opportunity to develop expertise in the rapidly growing areas of applied
biogeochemistry and biologically inspired materials.