* 1301370
* Rigidity in von Neumann Algebras; Connections and Applications to Orbit Equivalence and Geometric Group Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Ionut Chifan, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 190,989.00

Within the general context of Popa's deformation/rigidity theory and building on
principal investigator's prior research results, the goal of this project is to
find new rigidity results for von Neumann algebras associated with group actions
on probability spaces. The project revolves around the following main problems:
(1) find new examples of actions of more "exotic" groups on probability spaces
that can be completely reconstructed from their von Neumann algebras; (2) find
additional examples of group actions that lead to von Neumann algebras with
unique Cartan subalgebras; (3) obtain new applications to ergodic theory
(particularly orbit equivalence and structural properties for equivalence
relations) and probability theory (percolation on graphs); and (4) deepen the
connections with geometric group theory and representation theory. The principal
investigator plans to achieve these goals by further refining his previous
techniques and continuing to expand the cohomological and geometric group theory
perspective that he and his coauthors have brought to the study of rigidity in
von Neumann algebras. He expects these techniques to reveal new aspects of the
theory that will enable an even more fruitful interplay between these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of von Neumann algebras was initiated in
the 1930s by Murray and von Neumann as a tool to study quantum mechanics, and it
has progressively morphed into a stand-alone discipline. It also created a basis
for the development of powerful mathematical theories that ultimately brought
valuable insight to areas of physics (statistical mechanics), biology (DNA
structure), and engineering (cell-phone design). This project, which continues
the study of rigidity phenomena in von Neumann algebras, is expected to generate
novel applications and to establish new bridges to other active research areas
in mathematics (probability, ergodic theory, and geometric aspects in group
theory). On a broader scale, the principal investigator anticipates that
applications of rigidity phenomena outside the mathematical spectrum will
continue to unveil themselves, particularly in engineering and computer science
(e.g., error-correcting codes). The project will offer numerous development
opportunities for graduate students or young researchers just entering this very
active research field. While the topic of the project is focused heavily on
advanced trends, it also contains substantial research directions and open
problems that can be excellent subjects for Ph.D. theses. The principal
investigator is currently teaching a two-semester introductory course on this
subject with the purpose of attracting new young talent to the area. He will
continue to disseminate his findings from the project through publications,
lecture series, and seminar and colloquium talks, and to promote the connections
with related areas of mathematics and beyond.