* 1301008
* An Integrated Framework for the Aerodynamic Shape and Performance-Based Topology Optimization of Tall Buildings under Winds
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ahsan Kareem, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,999.00

Objective of the project is to pursue research in analysis and design of super-
tall buildings through computational fluid dynamics (CFD) aided shape tailoring
and geometric optimization of the structure. Super-tall buildings not only need
to be safe but also need to be comfortable to occupants in high winds. CFD
simulations will allow the architects to change the aesthetics of the building
and permit the structural engineer to develop structural systems that are safe,
serviceable and efficient. The integration of cutting-edge CFD technologies with
state-of-the-art structural system optimization is the innovation of this
project. The results will give U.S. consultants a competitive edge in the
international market of design of tall buildings.

Two fundamental stages of the building design process, conceptual and
preliminary, will be investigated with the aim of enhancing analysis
methodologies and optimization procedures. Concerning the conceptual design
stage, low dimensional CFD simulation strategies that allow the efficient and
robust comparative aerodynamic assessment of parameterized - envisaged as part
of the Building Information Modeling (BIM) process - geometric profiles,
morphable through embedded dynamic mesh algorithms, will be developed. These
strategies will take full advantage of the latest advances in CFD flow
simulation while avoiding the large computational burden through low-dimensional
modeling. This will lead to a first-of-its-kind tall building aerodynamic
shape/form tailoring tool that will not only shed light on the aerodynamic
effects of geometric modification, but also help define aerodynamically optimum
profiles. Step two of the design process will be investigated with the aim of
developing performance-based topology optimization algorithms specifically
geared at defining robust and innovative structural systems to be coupled with
the building profiles of stage one. These algorithms will yield optimum
structural topologies subject to performance expectations, defined in terms of
system fragility, explicitly modeling the uncertain environment in which the
structural system of tall buildings must exist. These algorithms will be
analytically embedded within specifically developed topology search spaces
capable of yielding structures with the morphology and constructability demanded
by the complexity of the architectural design space of modern tall buildings.