* 1301491
* Precision Process Control for Fabrication of High-Performance Polymer Optical Fiber
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2013,09/30/2021
* Vipin Kumar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2021
* USD 432,320.00

This grant provides funding to study and enable processing of high-performance
(i.e. very high bandwidth) polymer optical fiber using precision process
control. The team will investigate the precision control of the optical fiber's
refractive index profile across the fiber radius to achieve high bandwidth
transmission. The new methodology will produce nanometer scale pores by control
of the diffusion of gaseous carbon dioxide into a cylindrical polymer preform at
elevated pressure, generating a non-equilibrium, supersaturated solution of
carbon dioxide in the polymer and a resulting change in CO2 concentration as a
function of the radial position. The optical fiber has the potential to enable
gigahertz data transmission. A combination of modeling and experimental tasks
will explore the transport behavior and control of carbon dioxide in optical
grade polymer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer optical fiber has a lower modulus of
elasticity compared to silica glass, allowing it to be manufactured with larger
fiber diameters, making fiber connections easier and cheaper. For short-range
applications with a large number of connections, the system cost can be
dramatically reduced using polymer optical fiber. If the research is successful,
polymer optical fiber will offer a completely new opportunity to provide secure,
low-cost, user-friendly media for extending high bandwidth to all aspects of
society: homes, businesses, data centers, and everyday modes of transportation
including entertainment in aircraft and automobiles.