* 1301877
* Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BTD) Cohort IX (2013-2015) Program
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Karan Watson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2017
* USD 987,000.00

The primary aim of the proposed Cohort XI Texas A&amp;M University System Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate
(BTD) program is to increase the pool of science, technology, engineering or
mathematics (STEM) PhDs among underrepresented minority (URM) groups at TAMU and
to create a cohesive community of graduate students across different disciplines
within the university. Our goal is to foster academic success in a cohort of
first-time URM STEM graduate students, by developing their readiness and
encouraging eagerness to complete STEM doctoral degrees and by preparing them to
take their places as leaders in interdisciplinary research and in academia. As
such, objectives to carry out the program's goals include (1) retention of
fellows into doctoral programs with funding after completion of the NSF BTD
program, (2) preparation to meet the challenges of completing doctoral programs
of study and for possible academic careers in higher education, and (3)
leadership skill development necessary to succeed as young URM professionals
upon completion of doctoral programs of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be
achieved through collaborations among the College of Science (COS), College of
Engineering (COE), the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (COALS), and the
College of Geosciences (COG) at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU). Twelve first-
time graduate students from underrepresented minority (URM) groups, in five
departments in the COS, 12 in COE, 14 in COALS, and 5 in COG will be selected as
BTD fellows. The Fellows will be nurtured for two years as a cohorted community
benefiting from a program of academic and personal development activities and
social support, to sustain their commitment and success to their degree programs
and advancement toward doctoral programs by the end of their second year. The
BTD students, with differing STEM disciplines and a common purpose, will share
coordinated resources and intellectually enriching group activities with each
other, and also with the larger population of STEM, minority and other graduate
students at TAMU, to the benefit of all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the
intellectual impact of BTD, the program will enhance the infrastructure of
research and education by advancing pursuit of graduate and doctoral STEM
degrees.