* 1301075
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Reliability Prediction in Early Design Stages
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Rong Pan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2017
* USD 245,191.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to predict product
reliability in the earliest design stages, such as concept design. The
prediction is based on information gathered from a variety of sources such as
previous components and products, expert opinions, early prototype testing, and
simulations. The project uses a Bayesian framework that aggregates and processes
uncertain information. Quantifying product reliability in early design stages
helps reduce risk and avoid costly and unnecessary design changes. This project
uses a graphical model of probabilities to represent system reliability and a
combination of subjective and objective information, using reliability-related
data that are scattered, in different formats, at different levels of details,
from various sources. Pulling together all this data allows for more accurate
reliability prediction, leading to more effective actions identified early to
prevent potential failures or reduce their likelihood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this project will improve design practices for all kinds of
products, because reliability is a core element of product performance and
directly determines customer satisfaction, product market share, and product
safety. Specifically, this project will advance engineering design theory and
methodology and expand the scope of reliability engineering. By quantitatively
predicting product reliability early, the project provides engineers with a
better way to achieve high reliability with reduced cost.