* 1301881
* Collaborative Research: Physics of Magnetized Dusty Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Edward Thomas, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Plasmas (i.e., charged, ionized gases) are pervasive. From stellar nurseries to
the Earth's ionosphere, plasmas represent a fourth state of matter that is the
most common form of matter in the visible universe. Moreover, a phenomenon known
as a "dusty" or "complex" plasma is formed when charged particulate matter, such
as dust or ices, becomes incorporated in the plasma environment. In space,
phenomena such as in comet tails or the rings of Saturn are examples of dusty
plasmas. Closer to Earth, control over particulates in plasmas are important in
high-technology and microelectronic fabrication. In both astrophysical and
technological plasmas, the presence of magnetic fields can have a profound
influence on the properties of the plasma. This research project supports a new,
state-of-the-art, multi-user, superconducting, high-magnetic device to
understand the basic properties of a strongly magnetized plasmas and magnetized
dusty plasma. The intellectual merit of this work is that it will enable the
study of new regimes of plasma physics and dusty plasma physics that have not
been accessible in previous experiments. The main project goal is to investigate
how the structural, thermal, charging, and stability properties of a dusty
plasma evolve as the system is taken from an unmagnetized state through a
progression of regimes where first the electrons, then the ions, and then
charged microparticles become magnetized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this work is substantial. This project is a direct collaboration among
three US universities (Auburn University, The University of Iowa, and University
of California-San Diego) that perform leading research in the field of dusty
plasmas. The researchers from these three organizations will coordinate a broad
team of collaborators representing universities, national laboratories, and
international partners. And, this project will provide excellent opportunities
to train the next generation of plasma scientists through the training of
graduate and undergraduate students as well as providing partnerships with dusty
plasma researchers at predominantly undergraduate institutions.