* 1301715
* Effective and sparse equidistribution problems on homogeneous spaces  and linear dynamics of semisimple groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Nimish Shah, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 165,000.00

The PI (Nimish A. Shah) proposes to investigate, together with his graduate
students, a wide range of limit distribution problems on homogenous spaces of
Lie groups with an aim of applications to questions in number theory and
arithmetic geometry. The following three areas will be focused on: (1) effective
density and effective equidistribution of orbits of unipotent flows, (2)
description of limit distributions of stretching translates of sub-manifolds on
homogeneous spaces, and (3) equidistribution of relatively sparse set of points
on unstable leaves under the action of a partially hyperbolic flow. This study
will combine techniques and results from diverse areas of mathematics: theory of
semi-simple Lie groups and their finite and infinite dimensional
representations, ergodic theory and dynamical systems, probability theory,
number theory and automorphic forms, algebraic geometry, etc. The work will
further the development of bridges between these areas, and yield interesting
new results and techniques, of dynamical, number theoretical, geometrical and
combinatorial nature.

The proposed research links several important areas of mathematics: we apply
concepts of ergodic theory and dynamical systems (the area with origin in
physics) to solve a class of problems in number theory, using techniques of Lie
groups, algebraic and differential geometry, and probability theory. All of
these areas have deep connections with other sciences such as physics,
astronomy, statistics, and computer science. The broad purpose of the proposed
project is to investigate a range of ideas and create techniques that have the
potential to impact many problems of interest in all of these fields. An
important aspect of this project will be training of graduate students and post
doctoral fellows to conduct research where ideas of one filed are applied to
solve problem in another field.