* 1301373
* RET: in Engineering and Computer Science:Energizing Engineering Education (E3):  An RET site at the University of New Mexico investigating energy research  and engineering practice
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Charles Fleddermann, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2018
* USD 509,543.00

This award provides funding for a three year continuing award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site
program at the University of New Mexico (UNM) entitled, "Energizing Engineering
Education (E3): An RET site at the University of New Mexico investigating energy
research and engineering practice", under the direction of Dr. Charles
Fleddermann.

The E3 RET site program will advance pre-college education by creating enduring
partnerships between New Mexico's under-represented minority (URM)-serving
secondary schools, tribal community college and UNM faculty, students and staff.
A total of 40 teachers and community college faculty over three years from New
Mexico (NM) Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA), Albuquerque
Public Schools, Bernalillo Public Schools, Cibola County Schools and the
Southwestern Indiana Polytechnic Institute (SIPI), will participate in a seven-
week summer program where as part of interdisciplinary teams, they will plan,
conduct, analyze and interpret potentially tranformative energy research at the
materials, device and systems levels. Research topics include solar, wind and
hydropower, biofuels, fuel cells, nuclear power, batteries, smart grid and
solid-state lighting. The E3 program will be seated in three University Research
Centers: the Center for Emerging Energy Technologies (CEET), the Center for
Micro-Engineered Materials (CNEM), and the Center for High Technology Materials
(CHTM). In addition, faculty and graduate student mentors from four NSF
Engineering Research Centers will be collaborating with RET participants. RET
participants will also collaborate with the College of Education co-PI, Dr.
Vanessa Svihla, to develop activities and instructional approaches that model
and transfer their RET experience to the classroom. Scheduled interactions
throughout the academic year, continued UNM research in the teachers'
classrooms, the E3 website and UNM outreach visits will sustain these RET
partnerships.

As one of the nation's first "minority-majority" states, New Mexico's students
represent the future of the U.S. workforce. The UNM E3 RET site will work to
attract these students to STEM majors and careers through the educational
enrichment and mentoring of their teachers. By focusing on energy research the
E3 RET site will enlist teachers and students in the real-world quest for clean,
sustainable energy, which will not only address the nation's critical need, but
will brighten the economic outlook of New Mexico.