* 1301798
* Condensed Matter Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Steven Girvin, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education in
theoretical condensed matter physics, quantum optics, and quantum information
processing using circuit and cavity QED. The research builds upon theoretical
progress during the previous grant period and is driven by recent dramatic
experimental and theoretical advances in the quantum mechanics of electrical
circuits and in the manipulation of nanomechanical systems via radiation
pressure forces. Motivated by the recent experimental progress in 'circuit QED,'
the PI will continue his productive collaboration with the Yale experimental
group of Schoelkopf and Devoret to realize novel and fundamental strong-coupling
quantum optics in microwave electrical circuits. The PI will develop theoretical
models of the many-body physics of strongly-interacting microwave polaritons in
lattices of superconducting qubits and resonators. Such lattices can be used to
simulate strongly-correlated bosons as well as frustrated quantum
spins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axions are elementary particles proposed to exist by
theory which are important candidates to explain the cold dark matter which
pervades the universe. In the presence of a strong magnetic field they are
predicted to decay into microwave photons. Circuit QED advances are approaching
the point where they could dramatically change the way axion dark matter
searches are done. In light of recent experimental advances, the PI will
evaluate the efficacy of different possible approaches to optimizing microwave
photon detection in axion searches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also
continue collaborations on opto-nano-mechanics with the Yale experimental groups
of Jack Harris and Hong Tang and begin collaboration with new faculty member
Peter Rakich. A new direction with Harris will be development of models of the
opto-mechanics of whispering gallery modes of deformable levitated drops of
liquid helium. Another will be collaboration with Rakich on the theoretical and
practical limits of narrow line widths which can be achieved in on-chip
optomechanical Brillouin lasers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications and
extensions of quantum optics ideas for superconducting circuits and opto-
mechanical systems will be developed. A new direction will be to propose and
develop new ideas for quantum bath engineering which will create 'friction' with
the aim to naturally relax quantum systems, not towards their ground states, but
rather towards pre-determined entangled many-body states of interest. Such ideas
will likely be broadly applicable beyond superconducting qubits to include
atomic physics systems and other types of quantum bits and to quantum
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has a strong interdisciplinary
component which brings together ideas and methods used in the condensed matter,
atomic physics, and quantum optics communities. The close collaboration of the
PI with experimental groups is leading to new precision microwave measurement
techniques at the single photon level which will have applications beyond
quantum information processing to probing nanoscale systems generally, and is
yielding new forms of ultra-low-noise microwave amplifiers and
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education on artificial atoms created
from electrical circuits made from materials that are superconductors.
Superconductors exhibit a quantum mechanical state which can conduct electricity
without dissipation. Like real atoms, these artificial atoms can interact with a
single quantum or photon of microwave radiation. These superconducting
electrical circuits are being developed as the basic hardware for the
construction of a quantum computer. A quantum computer would perform
computations by manipulating quantum mechanical states and in principle can
dramatically outperform the fastest existing computers for some problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to this potential practical application, these
superconducting circuits can be used to efficiently detect individual microwave
photons. The PI will explore applications of this new capability to the improved
detection of axions, elementary particles postulated to solve the 'dark matter'
problem of cosmology and astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also
continue his study of the theory of opto-mechanics in which the feeble pressure
exerted by light can be used to cause mechanical motion of small objects and
even cool their motion. This is opening up a whole new technology with practical
applications in optical communications and measurements. Of particular
fundamental interest will be exploration with experimental colleagues of new
ideas for applying radiation pressure of light to move and distort magnetically
levitated drops of superfluid helium.