* 1301288
* Chain-Structured Strain and Fracture Sensor for Bridge Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Andrew Smyth, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 06/30/2016
* USD 333,112.00

The objective of this award is to investigate the motion of ferromagnetic
particles in silicone prepolymer to form a chain-structure composite for strain
and fracture sensing, which will be validated in bridge structural health
monitoring. In the fabrication of the sensors, ferromagnetic particles are mixed
in a liquid pre-polymer, which is then cured under a high magnetic field. To
improve the measurability, carbon nanotubes or graphene nanoplatelets are added
to increase the conductivity of the matrix. The equivalent inclusion method will
be developed to model the particle motion in the magnetic field and to predict
the change of electric resistance of the sensor while it deforms with the
specimen. The sensitivity and applicability of novel sensors will be validated
in bridge structural health monitoring and other applications. The research
activities of this project will range from nano- to macro- scales, and from the
theoretical to the experimental.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The success of this
project will immediately result in new research areas of nanocomposites and
applications in structural health monitoring and, in the longer term, improve
the sustainability and safety of our infrastructure. The algorithm and modeling
approach can be applied to the design of other smart materials. This sensor will
exhibit large strain measurement capacity, high gauge sensitivity, integrated
strain and fracture measurability, simple and prompt installation, stable
performance at large temperature range, and excellent applicability to different
materials. The polymer used in the new sensor can also serve as a shield for the
particles, therefore it will not be susceptible to unwanted noise and can, thus,
be used in some environments for which traditional strain gauges are not
suitable. The equivalent inclusion method will be implemented numerically and
can be applied in simulation of general hetergeneous material systems.