* 1301911
* AF: Small: Geometric Algorithms for Constructing Road Networks from Trajectories
* CSE,CCF
* 08/02/2012,08/31/2016
* Carola Wenk, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2016
* USD 313,625.00

The objective of this project is to develop geometric algorithms with quality
and performance guarantees for constructing road networks from geo-referenced
trajectory data. This is a new type of geometric reconstruction problem in which
the task is to extract the underlying geometric structure sampled by a a set of
noisy, movement-constrained trajectories. Different models for trajectories and
for road networks will be investigated. Ideas from geometric shape matching,
probabilistic modeling, and trajectory clustering will be applied to develop
geometric algorithms with quality and performance guarantees that exploit the
continuity of the input trajectories. Proof-of-concept implementations will be
developed to test and validate the algorithms on real data.

Vast amounts of geo-referenced trajectory data are being collected due to the
ubiquitous availability of positioning technologies such as the Global
Positioning System (GPS). This project will help address the very timely
challenge of analyzing this data. It will also provide novel algorithms for
construction and maintenance of digital street maps, which are among the most
valuable digital data resource in today's society. The results of this project
will benefit a wealth of applications ranging from a variety of location-based
services on street maps to the analysis of tracking data for hiking trail map
generation or for studying social behavior in animals. Students will be tightly
integrated into research projects, providing them with collaborative research
experience.