* 1301496
* User-Centric Sensing and Distributed Control of Corridor Transportation Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Dipak Ghosal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 424,998.00

This research studies the behavior and performance of a transportation corridor
made of a freeway and arterial streets under a Connected Vehicles (CV)
environment, where vehicles equipped with wireless communication and sensing
devices collect, process, and share traffic information among themselves along
with roadside sensors. First, methods of fusing/combining real-time traffic data
from both vehicles and roadside sensors will be explored to automate the
detection of incidents (e.g., accidents), to estimate the number of cars waiting
in line and to populate the tables that contain the number of trips from origins
to destinations. Second, the research studies how congestion, particularly
traffic jams, emerge and spread, and how this information can help drivers cope
with congestion. Finally, the research makes use of the results obtained from
the first two tasks to explore algorithms that will enable the adaptive,
coordinated control of freeway ramp meters and nearby arterial traffic lights,
and the re-routing of traffic in response to traffic
incidents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
lead to a better understanding of traffic congestion in corridor networks and
new ways to monitor and control vehicular traffic. These can enable applications
with significant societal benefits such as reduced traffic congestion and fuel
consumption. The results of this research will also be disseminated to public
agencies (such as Departments of Transportation (DOTs)) and the general public
through presentations and brochures, and other means. This research is at the
intersection of vehicular traffic flow and computer networks, it is expected to
contribute to the understanding of how corridor based transportation networks
work, and provides interdisciplinary training to the students involved. Minority
graduate and undergraduate students will be recruited to participate in this
project through college-level minority programs such as CAMP (California
Alliance for Minority Participation) at the University of California Davis.