* 1301148
* Optimal Control and Sensorless Manipulation of Complex Ensemble Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Jr-Shin Li, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

The research objective of this award is to create a unified control-theoretic
framework and develop computationally tractable methods for optimal control and
sensorless manipulation of complex ensemble systems. Many practical engineering
and biomedical applications involve controlling large ensembles of structurally
similar dynamical systems by the use of a common control input. Constructing
robust external inputs that steer an ensemble of systems to form a desired
dynamical condition, such as synchrony, is of fundamental importance. The
research will result in methods that are general enough to apply across
disciplines and can be exploited in diverse applications ranging from quantum
physics to neuroscience. The research approach progresses from a fundamental
investigation of controllability of ensemble systems based on geometric control
techniques to the development of an efficient optimization-free computational
method for optimal ensemble control synthesis. Deliverables include distributed
computational routines for optimal ensemble control design, experimental
demonstration and validation of the designed controls, documentation of research
results, engineering student education, and engineering research experiences for
pre-service teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will substantially advance our understanding of complex ensemble
systems and directly contribute to new developments in control and systems
theory. It will also broaden seminal applications by enabling analytically and
numerically tractable methods for optimal control designs in atom cooling, deep
brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease, and electrochemistry. This
achievement has great potential to make significant impacts on the advancement
of quantum science and technology, network sciences, biology, and neuroscience.
Undergraduate and graduate engineering students and pre-service teachers will
benefit through classroom instruction and involvement in multidisciplinary
research, in particular gaining interactions with experimentalists. General
public and pre-college K-12 students will also be engaged through, for example,
Science Outreach Programs at Washington University.