* 1301268
* Manufacturing of Responsive and Functional Nanoporous Metal/polymer Heterostructures using Strain Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kyriaki Kalaitzidou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,520.00

The goal of this research is to investigate both the manufacturing process and
properties of polymer-nanoporous metal bilayers. Nanoporous (NP) metals are a
unique class of materials that are characterized by very high surface-to-volume
ratios and possess such desirable properties of metals as high electrical
conductivity and strength. The abundance of free surfaces is thought to give
rise to many of the unusual properties of NP metals, including the ability to
actuate in response to various external stimuli. These materials have shown
great promise in many applications, including small-scale sensors and actuators.
In this work, polymer-NP metal bilayers will be manufactured through nano-scale
self-assembly processes with the ultimate goal of obtaining compliant,
responsive, and functional three dimensional heterostructures. Heterostructures
are structures made of different materials to obtain new properties.
Specifically, this work will explore how mismatched strains affect the self-
assembly of NP metals on polymer substrates, as well as the overall morphology
of the structure. The response and fatigue behavior of the self-assembled
heterostructures under different stimuli will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research can lead to fundamental
advances in understanding of the role of interfacial mismatching of strains and
how they can be tuned to manufacture functional 3D macro-, micro-, or nano-scale
objects with nano-size features. Both the manufacturing technology and the
specific structures considered in this proposal may potentially impact a wide
variety of technological areas. For example 3D structures responsive to
different external stimuli can be used as sensors, actuators, switches, vesicles
for delivery and filtrating applications, etc. Integration of research,
teaching, and outreach programs across multiple disciplines including polymer
science, nanotechnology, and manufacturing will impact the education and
training of a diverse student body at graduate, undergraduate, and high-school
levels.