* 1301072
* The effects of charge transfer on aqueous and ionic systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Steven Rick, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2018
* USD 470,386.00

Steven Rick of the University of New Orleans and Susan Rempe of Sandia National
Laboratory are supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to develop charge
transfer (CT) models for ions and protein chains, building on previous work for
water and to examine the effects of charge transfer on the properties of
interfaces, water transport though nanochannels, ion solvation, and biological
ion channels. Two often opposing principles, a need for efficiency and a need
for accuracy, guide the development of interaction potentials for atomistic
simulations. One strategy is to use quantum mechanical calculations or
experimental results to determine the interaction types that are significant and
then develop efficient methods for treating these interactions. Experimental and
theoretical studies have demonstrated that charge transfer can play an important
role in intermolecular interactions. Specifically, for two molecules in contact,
the electron density is not equally shared between the two molecules. Thus,
molecules can have small transient charges and ions can have non-integer
charges. This amount of charge transfer may have important and largely
unexamined effects on the thermodynamics and kinetics of condensed-phase
systems. Studies of ions in non-aqueous systems, including ethylene carbonate
and ionomers, are also planned. All these projects involve quantum mechanical
calculations both to parameterize the CT models and to validate the results of
the models.

This award supports theoretical and computational research aimed to develop and
use simulation models with a new level of sophistication, without sacrificing
computational efficiency. The understanding of materials at the molecular level
is greatly enhanced by the use of computer simulations, which require a
mathematical description of the interactions between particles. Charge transfer
is a class of interactions commonly excluded in molecular simulations but which
quantum theoretical calculations indicate is important. The quantum calculations
reveal that charge can be spread out from a central molecule or ion to nearby
particles. As an example, in water a chloride ion, with a formal charge of minus
one, shares this excess charge with its neighbors and has a charge that is
reduced by about 20%. The charge reduction of this and other ions is strongly
environmentally sensitive, as its nearest neighbors change, impacting how ions
interact and flow through various materials. This charge variation could have
important consequences on the behavior of electrolytes as, for example, used in
batteries, and in design of water desalination filters. This work would develop
and use charge transfer models for the study of the structure and dynamics of
ions and water in a variety of materials, including biological ion channels,
water purification membranes, and battery materials.