* 1301762
* EAGER:  A New Look at the Middle Atmosphere through the Eyes of SABER (Sounding of the Atmosphere using Broadband Emission Radiometry)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Alexander Kutepov, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2017
* USD 100,904.00

The investigators will study various Infrared (IR) emission mechanisms in the
Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere (MLT), which may be responsible for a largely
unexplained enhanced IR feature at ~90 km. The Sounding of the Atmosphere using
Broadband Emission Radiometry (SABER), one of four instruments on board of
NASA's Thermosphere, Ionosphere, Mesosphere, Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED)
mission, is a 10-channel broadband limb-scanning infrared radiometer covering
the spectral range from 1.27 to 17 microns. SABER has already provided a decade
worth of information about kinetic temperature, pressure, ozone, carbon dioxide,
water vapor and atomic oxygen. The interpretation of these results, which are
strongly affected by the quality of models of the IR emissions in the MLT, have
crucial importance for understanding the physics and chemistry of this region.
An IR limb emission feature that resembles a layer-like enhancement has been
present since the beginnings of the satellite operations in SABER's 4.3 micron
channel. This feature is localized at an altitude region that corresponds to
tangent heights between 85-95 km and has a distinct spatial and temporal
variability. Although the enhanced limb radiances are present at all latitudes
and seasons, they appear to be stronger at the polar summer MLT. Preliminary
analysis of observations from other spacecraft reveal similar features although
those instruments operate significantly different, which indicate this is, at
least in part, a real phenomena. This enhancement is not predicted by our
current IR emission models in the MLT, in particular when compared to similar
effects observed in additional channels. Due to a lack of understanding of its
origins, this effect has been ignored for a decade and, as a result, is
generally unknown by the aeronomy and space science communities. The
investigators will study a number of radically different as well as
interdisciplinary approaches, among them non-equilibrium chemistry of molecular,
atomic and ionic compounds of MLT and their possible interactions with dust and
ice particles, various potential mechanism of energy transfer from photolysis
and chemical reaction products to molecular vibrations, non-LTE molecular
emission, absorption, transformation and multiple scattering of radiation in
various spectral regions, etc The investigation will address a feature that may
alter the understanding of the CO2 characteristics in the MLT. As such, the
results may have high impact on atmospheric chemistry and climate. Additionally,
this study will provide a more robust analysis of IR radiances that can be later
expanded to other space missions.