* 1301093
* Optimal Spatiotemporal Reduced Order Modeling for Nonlinear Structural Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Prakash Vedula, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,682.00

The overall goal of this project is to formulate optimal, data driven, reduced
order modeling (ROM) frameworks for significantly faster and more accurate
computational predictions of nonlinear dynamical systems. The modeling framework
is based upon the optimal prediction formalism and includes information in the
form of relevant spatiotemporal correlations. To achieve the overall project
goal, the work will a) apply the method to variational (weak) forms and b)
investigate, using the ROM methodology and fully resolved simulation, two
problems in nonlinear structural dynamics which are expected to exhibit complex
spatial and temporal (scale) characteristics. The two specific problems to be
investigated are: 1) turbulent behavior of isotropic plate vibration and 2)
vibration characteristics of three-dimensional continua with anisotropic
constitutive relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reduced order modeling is an
integral part of the engineering design process as fully resolved simulation is
still too expensive to be practical for parametric and optimization studies. The
advances in reduced order simulation provided by the work will have significant
impact on the ability to provide fast and reliable simulation to aid in the
innovation of new engineering products. Results and ideas generated from the
project will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publication and conference
attendance. In order to introduce students to the important concept of reduced
order simulation, a new graduate level course on the subject will be developed
at The University of Oklahoma. To further broaden the impact of the work,
underrepresented groups (undergraduates in general, women and minority students)
will be actively recruited to participate both directly in the research
activities and indirectly through a new course.