* 1301630
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Policing Citizenship in the United States: Violence and Differential Access to Public Space
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Melissa Wright, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 09/30/2014
* USD 3,666.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines how gender dynamics guide
the state's public response to violence that occurs within the private space of
the home. The spatial distinction of public and private space is critical to the
conceptualization of intimate partner violence as well as to policing practices
as a matter of public security and citizen protections. The project's objective
is to study the connections between public space and citizenship, the state and
its role in addressing the security needs of its citizens as well as the
experiences of victims in this process. Three key questions guide this research:
1) How do gendered dynamics affect policing strategies regarding intimate
partner violence? 2) How does the gendering of this policing affect the
experience and practice of citizenship in relation to public space and security?
3) How does the gendering of policing strategies affect women's experience as
citizens in particular places and times? While critical scholarship on terrorism
and violence have recently been addressing the spatiality of policing, absent
from this literature is an understanding of the gendered dimensions of policing
at a more local scale. With a specific focus on the policing of intimate partner
violence, this research will address this gap by providing new insights into the
gendered and spatial dynamics of policing strategies that affect women's access
to public space and citizenship rights. Further, this project will contribute to
scholarly debates on policing and governance, private space and policing, and
policing and exclusion. Lastly, this research advances understandings of how
political processes affect women's position as citizens within the state by
examining the current relationship between the state and victims, policing
practices within the US and the impact of these processes on the lived
experiences of victims. This research will be conducted via a qualitative study
in central Pennsylvania.

In addition to academic dissemination via geographic and feminist-based
scholarly journals, results from this research will be disseminated in formats
accessible to non-academic communities as they address socially-relevant
community policing strategies. Project results will be presented in public
symposia and results will be made available in reports to local and state
community organizations as well as the National Coalition Against Domestic
Violence in such a way that they will be able to make on an impact on policy-
making and policing practice regarding intimate partner violence. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research career while
providing timely research to address the issue of intimate partner violence.