* 1301108
* Processing of Layered Semiconductor-Core Optical Fibers for Mid-IR Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Soumendra Basu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2018
* USD 443,511.00

This grant provides funding for a fundamental study of the processing of
semiconductor-core waveguides from materials that are able to be formed into
fiber form, in concert with most regular glasses, and that facilitate refractive
index engineering to create complex waveguide cores for optical fibers for use
in the delivery and manipulation of mid-infrared laser beams. Borosilicate glass
fibers with layered silicon and germanium alloy cores will be designed and
fabricated, where the light is to be completely confined in the core so as to
minimize loss during use. The system is chosen to allow semi-solid deformation
of the semiconductor core, where the liquid composition of the different layers
will be identical. The sharpness of the interface is determined by the diffusion
of solid grains in a liquid and will be critical for performance. The diffusion
of the interface will be studied, both microstructurally, and by changes in
optical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the
fundamental understanding of the complex multicomponent modified chemical vapor
deposition process, an understanding of the semi-solid deformation of
semiconductor alloys, optical waveguide design, and the ability for waveguide
processing control in layered semiconductor-core fibers. The successful
completion of this research will have significant impact, ranging from
biomedical surgery, information decoding, hazardous chemical sensing, to
technologies that enhance defense capabilities. Low loss mid-infrared waveguides
will enable delivery and manipulation of mid-infrared laser beams and this
capability will open up new markets for mid-infrared lasers, an area that is
ripe for growth. Two graduate students and several undergraduate students will
be directly involved in the research effort. A module demonstrating optical
fiber technology will be developed for use as an outreach tool.