* 1301247
* Collaborative Research: Mitigating Emergent System Behavior through System Evolvability
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Christopher Mattson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 05/31/2017
* USD 210,196.00

The research objective of this collaborative project is to discover the
principles governing the evolvability of complex engineered systems (CES) and
understand how service-phase evolution can be used to reduce negative emergent
behavior in the face of unforeseen future needs. While providing essential
benefits to society, complex systems are unusually challenging to design because
they have (i) elaborate internal interactions, (ii) long development times,
(iii) lifecycles associated with extended service windows, and (iv) exhibit
unanticipated emergent behavior. To address these challenges, this research
project will begin by conducting empirical studies to understand how existing
CES have evolved in-service in response to emergent needs. These studies will be
used to draw insights about why certain CES are more effective at evolving than
others. Different measures and models of evolvability will be then be explored
and validated to guide designers in manipulating the evolution of CES. Finally,
this project will explore how information about service-phase evolution can be
integrated into a value model, and how different evolution strategies impact
overall system value. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this work will begin
to address a recurring theme from recent CES workshops highlighting the need to
control and capitalize on system evolvability. Results from this project will
significantly advance understanding of the relationship between system design
and the tendency for systems to mitigate emergent behavior through evolution by
identifying and cataloging useful principles that can be accessed by practicing
engineers. By exploring metrics to characterize system evolvability, this
research will facilitate the synthesis of information from various design tools
to describe system capabilities and quantify the impact provided by various
evolution possibilities. Linking these insights to value-driven design will
study the relationship between evolvability and system value while furthering
the use and validation of this design approach. Lessons learned and
contributions of this work will be disseminated through publications, internet-
available design camp teaching modules, interactions with industry supports, and
at conferences. Finally, student involvement through summer design camps at both
NCSU and BYU campuses will grant first-hand experience in system design and
bring together students of diverse backgrounds and thinking.