* 1301171
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site for Machine Learning, Big Data and Computer Science Principles
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jeffrey Popyack, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2016
* USD 499,989.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Teachers site at Drexel
University. The Drexel team plans to create a summer research institute in
computer science for STEM high school teachers and 2-year college faculty in the
City of Philadelphia and Greater Philadelphia Metropolitan Area. Teachers will
spend the time performing research with faculty and students in the associated
labs and initiating work on educational modules for use at their home
institutions. They will prepare poster presentations and videos summarizing
their projects, initial accomplishments, further expectations and descriptions
of their modules. Participants will remain engaged year-round by participating
in Teacher2Teacher discussion groups, facilitated by the Math Forum@Drexel. They
will also visit campus for quarterly meetings, culminating in a 1-day showcase
event in the spring to present results, materials and posters, and to which
their colleagues and students are invited. The objectives of the program are to
build partnerships between high schools, community colleges and the university,
introduce teachers to cutting edge research in the computer science community,
inform and excite them about computer science principles and computational
thinking, produce learning materials for use in high school and community
college STEM curricula, and expand the pipeline of students studying STEM and
computing curricula in college.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit is in the strong research expertise
of the participating faculty in research as well as their significant experience
with pre-college education. The focus is on important themes of big data and
machine learning which are areas that are current and of importance all
citizens. The translation of the research experiences into modules compatible
with Computer Science Principles should also add to the significant body of work
linking fundamental computer science to classroom practice and applications.

Broader Impacts: The project makes significant outreach to the greater
Philadelphia metropolitan area, with a population exceeding 5 million, and the
eighth largest school district in the USA. The Math Forum involves a substantial
community of mathematics teachers and professionals, providing a variety of
services and resources. Through the partnership with these organizations and
dissemination through other widely used services, the team expects to provide
significant impact for these activities.