* 1301515
* Spectral properties of quasicrystals via dynamical methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Anton Gorodetski, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 145,000.00

The project focuses on the development of new methods and the improvement of
existing techniques in the modern theory of dynamical systems that can be
applied to study spectral properties of the most prominent models of
quasicrystals, in particular, of discrete Schrodinger operators with Fibonacci
and Sturmian potentials. The specific models to be studied are discrete
Schrodinger operators with Sturmian potentials, the square (or cubic) Fibonacci
Hamiltonian, the Fibonacci quantum Ising model, quantum walks for quasicrystals,
and the labyrinth model. We intend to study the deep relations between these
models and hyperbolic dynamical systems that allow us to confirm rigorously a
series of previous heuristic and experimental observations regarding
quasicrystals made by physicists. In particular, for discrete Schrodinger
operators with Sturmian potentials we expect to show that the Hausdorff
dimension of the spectrum is the same for almost every frequency. For square and
cubic Fibonacci Hamiltonians we intend to provide an understanding of the
transition of the spectrum from an interval to a Cantor set with the change of
the coupling constant, and establish absolute continuity of the density of
states measure in the small coupling regime. Also, we hope to prove that the
square continuum Fibonacci Hamiltonian with large couplings has density of
states measure of a mixed (a.c. and singular continuous) type, providing the
first example of an ergodic family of Schrodinger operators with this
property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems in this project are related to
mathematical models of quasicrystals. The properties of quasicrystals were
heavily studied by physicists and chemists, and it is important to give an
explanation of the observed experimental and numerical results based on a
rigorous mathematical analysis. Potentially this will not only explain the
behavior of existing models but will also help to predict the behavior of new
ones. The tools that we intend to develop will undoubtedly find applications in
other parts of mathematics as well. For example, in order to prove absolute
continuity of density of states measures for some models, we are studying the
questions on absolute continuity of convolutions of singular measures. These
questions appear frequently in number theory, analysis, dynamics, probability,
and geometric measure theory. In additin, the relations between different parts
of mathematics (in this case, between spectral theory and dynamical systems)
give beautiful evidence of the unity of mathematics. Various problems closely
related to the project will be suggested to graduate and undergraduate students
at UC-Irvine, thereby initiating them into, or increasing their involvement in,
scientific activities. The principal investigator considers such educational and
training aspects to be very essential.