* 1301435
* Developing a Simple, Robust and Universal Surface Coating Method
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2016
* USD 381,060.00

This research is about developing a universal surface modification method
applicable to any surface, irrespective of surface chemistry or material
characteristics. At present, each surface modification method is specific to
only a certain type of surface. Such a universal surface modification method
does not exist. The objective of this work is to perform a systematic and
fundamental study of catechol surface binding via physical or/and chemical
forces and to develop a simple, robust, and universal surface coating method.
The approach of this research will be to attach a well-characterized polymer,
consisting of one functional moiety and one surface-adhesive moiety, to a
surface. The surface-adhesive moiety will be based on a catechol group, which in
principle can be attached to any type of surface, particularly in the presence
of amine groups. The functional moiety will be based on a zwitterionic
poly(carboxybetaine methacrylate) (PCB) polymer, since this is the most
challenging surface coating problem due to PCB being highly hydrated in aqueous
solutions. This universal coating will be tested on a number of surfaces ranging
from hydrophobic to hydrophilic, including noble metals, metals, polymers, and
semiconductors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this
research will include (a) a fundamental understanding of how chemical and
physical forces interplay to achieve surface coatings that are stable and have a
high packing density and (b) a new surface modification strategy applicable for
attaching any kind of functional polymer to any surface. It will have
significant impact in a wide range of applications from medical devices to
consumer products. Underrepresented undergraduate and community college
researchers will be recruited through well-established outreach programs. This
project will also provide opportunities for high school students and teachers
for summer research and for visiting students and professors. The PI has been
actively involved in international collaborations at national and university
levels and is organizing the first international conference on bio-inspired and
zwitterionic materials to be held in December 2013.