* 1301286
* Porous Polymeric films with Ultra-low Coefficient of Friction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Damir Khismatullin, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2016
* USD 312,426.00

This research is about better understanding the mechanisms involved in the
lubrication of porous polymer-based surfaces or coatings with ultra-low
coefficients of friction. These mechanisms arise from the partial hydrodynamic
repulsive forces that act between shearing compliant surfaces. A combination of
tribology experiments and simulations will be used to guide the design of a
macroscopic porous polymer-based surface to attain minimal coefficients of
friction. Specifically, the project will involve the determination of the
optimal geometrical parameters of pores within a polymer through simulations and
supported by experiments, the determination of the lubrication performance
through longevity studies, and the fabrication of a macroscopic prototype of the
ultra-low shearing surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research
will improve the performance and durability of artificial knee and hip
replacement devices. Specifically, these low friction polymer surfaces have the
potential to be used as a biocompatible mimic for cartilage and synovial fluid
in diseased or damaged joints, which affects a large fraction of the elderly
population. Furthermore, these ultra-low friction surfaces may be used as
lubricating surfaces in a wide range of machinery involving moving parts. From
an educational standpoint, this project will involve underrepresented K-12
students in open house events held at Tulane University. These events will
expose scientific principles to middle and high school students in the greater
New Orleans area through hands-on demonstrations and experiments with the
ultimate aim of encouraging the students to consider science and engineering as
future fields of study. In particular, a module involving the friction between
shearing surfaces will be included. At the undergraduate level, students from
underrepresented groups will be offered research opportunities based on this
project.