* 1301142
* DONOR-ACCEPTOR INTERACTIONS, LONG-RANGE ELECTRON CORRELATION, AND DYNAMIC SPIN MANIPULATION:  RELATIONSHIP TO MOLECULAR ELECTRONICS
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Martin Kirk, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2017
* USD 246,189.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B Program supports Professor
Martin Kirk of the University of New Mexico for a project entitled "Donor-
Acceptor Interactions, Long-Range Electron Correlation, and Dynamic Spin
Manipulation: Relationship To Molecular Electronics." The project focuses on
electronic structure contributions to the ground state properties of magnetic
donor-bridge-acceptor biradicals. The primary goals of the research are to
understand excited state contributions to bridge mediated electronic coupling,
understand how open-shell excited state singlet configurations promote long-
range electron correlation, and develop new platforms for spin control of
excited state dynamics in photoexcited donor-acceptor molecules. The research
project is achieving these goals by adding to the electron/spin transport
knowledge base and providing new insight into electronic structure contributions
to molecular electronic materials, particularly as they relate to switchable
electron transfer/transport conduits, spin-polarized electron transport, and the
control of quantum interference effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research
activities broadly impact our understanding of how molecular and molecule-based
systems can advance new technologies based on molecular electronics. The project
advances discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and
learning through incorporation of research advancements in the classroom,
student research presentations at international meetings, and mentoring
undergraduate and high school students who are involved in the research. Broader
participation is emphasized through New Mexico's Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (NM EPSCoR) projects, The University of New
Mexico (UNM) Nanoscience and Microsystems program, mentoring students from
underrepresented groups, and mentoring early career faculty members at UNM.
Infrastructure for research and education is being enhanced through an
association with the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, sharing
spectroscopy facilities with collaborating scientists and UNM junior faculty,
and contributing to improved computing infrastructure at UNM. New research
results are constantly being injected into the classroom environment, which
contributes to the broad dissemination of research results. Finally, potential
benefits to society derive from the ability to transform the results of the
basic research to an increased understanding of electron and spin transport,
long-range interactions, and excited state dynamics in molecular electronic
systems at the nanoscale.