* 1301555
* Variational problems in physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Michael Loss, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 171,000.00

The proposal is about disparate physical and mathematical applications that have
the Calculus of Variations as a common theme. One area of inquiry is non-
equilibrium statistical mechanics with the goal to understand simple aspects of
non- equilibrium steady states in simple models, such as a Kac-type model
describing the interaction of colliding particles with a thermostat. A second
topic is related to symmetry breaking or the absence thereof in a class of non-
linear variational problems. The plan is to find volution equations that let any
function evolve into an optimizing function. This is a concept that has worked
in a number of interesting cases already. The third topic concerns problems in
quantum mechanics, in particular some problems about random Schroedinger
operators with the goal to extend recent results on the Random Displacement
Model to a larger class of geometries. The fourth topic that will be
investigated, is the connection between the geometry of curves and certain
special Lieb-Thirring-type inequalities. While these topics sound quite
different, they all can be cast as optimization problems, and can lead to new
and unexpected mathematical insights into the calculus of variations.

Mathematics is important because of its universal nature, both as a language and
as a toolbox for solving problems in science and engineering. The aim of this
proposal is to understand a range of questions that arise from the physical
sciences. A central problem is how to describe the evolution of large systems of
interacting agents, be it colliding particles, flocking birds or individuals
that exchange goods in an economy. Such systems are usually in an equilibrium
but react to external disturbances. It is important to understand whether such a
system returns to equilibrium and if so, how fast. One focus of this grant is on
understanding these question in the context of large systems of colliding
particles. A second area of inquiry concerns the effect of randomness on the
motion of quantum mechanical particles. The goal is to understand in more detail
than is presently known how randomly displaced obstacles influence the motion of
an electron. An understanding of this question is important since it yields
another way of modeling insulators. The mathematically fascinating aspect of
this line of research is that most of these problems can be formulated as
optimization problems, thus tapping into a large mathematical toolkit while at
the same time adding to it. This research area also is an excellent training
ground for students because they are forced to see beyond the purely
mathematical aspect of a problem.