* 1301912
* Bridge to the Doctorate at UMBC, 2013-2015
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Renetta Tull, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2016
* USD 987,000.00

The University System of Maryland (USM) Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Program (cohort 8) is a
collaborative effort between the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the USM
institutions to increase the quality and quantity of underrepresented minorities
(URM) matriculating and completing doctoral degrees in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Since the first BD cohort
matriculated at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) in 2005, 79
BD Fellows have enrolled in STEM graduate programs at UMBC and the University of
Maryland, College Park (UMCP). Since the inception of the USM LSAMP in 1995, the
USM has remained a driving force in increasing the number of URM baccalaureate
degree recipients in STEM disciplines, and more than 8,500 STEM bachelor?s
degrees have been awarded to underrepresented students. As a Senior-level
Alliance, the USM LSAMP continues to work to increase the number of STEM
bachelor?s degrees awarded to URM students and the number of undergraduate URM
students conducting scientific research and going on to pursue STEM
doctorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BD Program provides a cohort of 12 students
who have participated in LSAMP Programs as undergraduates the opportunity to
receive substantial funding and other critical support to successfully pursue
graduate degrees in diverse STEM fields at UMBC and UMCP. The participants also
have the opportunity, early in their academic careers, to conduct cutting-edge
research with top research scientists on the campuses and at national
laboratories located in close proximity to the campuses. An outcome of this
training is evidenced by the careers and international contributions that are
being made by USM?s BD Fellows. As an example, some of the careers for USM?s BD
Fellows who have received the Ph.D. include, but are not limited to: Senior
Aerospace Engineer (QuinetiQ North America ? Defense and Space Industry),
Postdoctoral Fellow at the Buck Institute (Chemistry and Aging), Assistant
Research Professor at the United States Naval Academy (Mechanical Engineering),
and Postdoctoral Fellow at North Carolina State University (Biomedical
Engineering). BD Fellows also have won awards for their research and have co-
authored publications and conference proceedings for international meetings. In
addition, UMBC?s BD Fellows have received subsequent funding after the first two
years from the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, the National GEM Consortium,
Google, as well as funding from the academic
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BD Fellows at UMBC will participate in a
number of activities that are specifically designed to facilitate retention,
professional development, Ph.D. completion, and preparation for their STEM
careers. Plans for the 2013-15 UMBC BD cohort include the following
components:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? Extensive orientation program, including
mandatory participation in a two-day summer institute, the university-wide
orientation for graduate students, and departmental orientations with faculty
and peers&lt;br/&gt;? Bi-weekly cohort meetings, small group triad sessions,
monthly individual consultations, and special peer mentoring sessions from BD
Fellows in previous cohorts&lt;br/&gt;? Monthly professional development
seminars (e.g., ?Marketing your Science?, Professors-in-Training?)&lt;br/&gt;?
Multi-day ?Writing for Publication? conference, weekend M.S. thesis completion
workshops, followed by access to and assigned mentor-coaches for Dissertation
House&lt;br/&gt;? Conceptual research idea and hands-on Fastlane training
sessions for the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program, and group preparation
for external fellowships and competitive research opportunities&lt;br/&gt;?
Connections to the BD Fellows at UMCP and connections to the USM?s BD
alumni&lt;br/&gt;? Training in public speaking, and participation in the UMBC
Graduate Research Conference&lt;br/&gt;? IRB and Responsible Conduct of Research
Training, including CITI Certification, 50-page ?Preparation for Research?
development plan that outlines and details the students? research
goals&lt;br/&gt;? Opportunities to participate in short-term research and site
visits at national labs, corporations, and UMBC strategic partner sites such as
the Quality of Life Technology (QoLT) Center, and NSF Engineering Research
Center and collaborative between the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie
Mellon University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BD Program serves new graduate
students who were undergraduate researchers in LSAMP programs, many of whom are
members of groups that traditionally have been underrepresented in STEM fields.
The BD Program provides the next step for LSAMP?s graduates by providing layers
of support at the graduate level that will facilitate completion of STEM
doctoral degrees. The extensive suite of BD professional development and
supportive activities for UMBC have been built upon proven methods for
motivation, retention, research preparation, milestone achievement, degree
completion, and transition to Ph.D.-level STEM careers.