* 1301577
* Israel - USA Conference on Complex Analysis and Dynamical Systems VI
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Catherine Beneteau, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 02/28/2014
* USD 20,000.00

The project aims at supporting the U.S. participation in a conference organized
jointly by a group of scientists at Bar-Ilan University, Hebrew University, ORT
Braude College and the University of Miami in the US to be held in Nahariya
Israel on May 19-24, 2013. The participants will be prominent scientists, young
researchers and students from the US, Canada, the European Union, Eastern Europe
and Asia. Recently, techniques from complex analysis (e.g., the concepts of
Schwarz function, quadrature domains, complex harmonic maps) have given new
lines of attack on some long standing problems in physics, e.g., Hele-Shaw
flows, gravitational lensing, Laplacian growth, etc. The presentations at the
conference range from plenary lectures describing recent breakthrough results in
Complex Analysis, Dynamical Systems and Mathematical Physics, in a form
accessible to advanced graduate students and young researchers, to more
specialized talks on more focused research topics. Each of the past conferences
attracted a significant number of US Ph.D. students and postdoctoral
researchers. The proposal's main goals are to build on the development of
collaborations between mathematicians and mathematical physicists from all over
the world, young and experienced. The project strives to increase the existing
momentum and bring in another group of young US researchers and graduate
students into collaboration with colleagues worldwide, initiate US young
researchers and graduate students into an active research scene worldwide and
introduce them to most of the active researchers in complex analysis from all
over the world. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Supporting the travel of young
researchers and graduate students to such a conference where scientists from
North and South America, Europe and Asia, old and young, prominent and just
beginning, are spending all their waking hours together in an inspiring and
congenial environment will inspire many beginning researchers. There are already
several graduate students and young post-docs that will be participating in the
conference. The project aims to significantly increase the participation of
young students and researchers. One of the most important broader impacts of the
project is also to increase participation of women and minorities in the event
and insure their inclusion into a larger group of scientists working in the
areas of the conference.