* 1301184
* Nanoporous Silicon: Probing Dimensionally Constrained Deformation in Non-Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Thomas Balk, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 06/30/2017
* USD 399,618.00

The research objective of this work is to understand how the mechanical behavior
and structural stability of nanoporous silicon are influenced by the combined
effects of small deformation volume and large surface-area-to-volume ratio.
Silicon, with broad technological importance and wide current application, will
serve as a model material for nanostructured non-metallic systems. Recently, a
number of research groups have reported that nanoscale silicon structures
exhibit ductile deformation below a critical size. Motivated by these results,
this project will investigate the mechanical behavior of nanoporous silicon
whose ligament structure consists of an interconnected network of fine silicon
nanowires. The research approach combines computational and experimental
methodologies and leverages an ongoing collaboration between the University of
Kentucky and the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. The proposed research
specifically aims to structurally and mechanically characterize nanoporous
silicon, and to simulate and model nanoporous silicon deformation. The
investigators will utilize a battery of thin film and small-scale test
techniques that have been established in Lexington (Kentucky) and Karlsruhe
(Germany) as well as atomistic computational models to realize these aims.
Combined results will then be leveraged to elucidate the structural stability,
mechanical properties and deformation mechanisms of nanoporous silicon,
particularly with respect to the role of dimensional constraints placed on
silicon deformation by the nanoscale ligament
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in this research project will benefit
efforts to more broadly incorporate nanostructured non-metals in technological
applications, as well as the deployment of nanostructured silicon in
industrially relevant engineering solutions. The proposed research establishes
the fundamental understanding required by related device-level engineering
efforts to develop next-generation photovoltaics, optical sensors, battery
anodes, flexible electronics or nanoscale light-emitting diodes. In addition,
the Kentucky-Karlsruhe collaboration will provide American students with hands-
on laboratory experience in a world-class international research environment,
German students with an opportunity to live and perform research in the USA, and
all students the horizon-broadening opportunity to work with foreign peers in a
science-focused cultural exchange.