* 1301452
* Boundary Regulation: Output-Recovery Guidance  for Nonminimum Phase Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Santosh Devasia, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 03/31/2017
* USD 249,000.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate control methods for
cancelling external disturbances for nonminimum-phase systems. Performance of
feedback controller is limited for nonminimum-phase systems due to the special
structure of the system dynamics. Recent developed non-causal feedforward
techniques can only be effective when sufficient preview information of the
disturbance is available. This research will investigate feedforward-based
control for nonminimum phase systems when the disturbance is not known in
advance. The theoretical developments will be for general nonminimum phase
systems, and can be applied in diverse applications. The research issues to be
addressed are: (i) Stability, since loss of stability can arise with multiple
output transitions due to an outer-loop closure; (ii) Performance, e.g.
maintaining system output within the desired region under multiple transitions
triggered by aggressive disturbances, and (iii) Computation effort. It is
important to keep the computational effort at an acceptable level, e.g.,
approximating the feedforward for output transitions from a set of pre-computed
trajectories. Deliverables include tools to design controllers for nonminimum
phase systems, conditions for guaranteed stability and performance,
documentation of research results, and engineering student education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will impact a variety of applications (with
nonminimum phase dynamics), such as, (i) precision control of probe-sample
forces to avoid sample damage during high-speed operation of Atomic Force
Microscopes; (ii) wind turbines in the presence of wind-gust disturbances that
are challenging to measure a-priori; and (iii) flight control of small unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs), which are more sensitive to wind disturbances. Graduate
and undergraduate engineering students will benefit through classroom
instruction and involvement in the research. In addition to dissemination to
students and other academics through classes, seminars, publications, and
conference presentations, the results will be presented to high-school students
and the community through exhibits in annual open houses.