* 1301524
* Collaborative Research: CAMEO 2009 - A novel tool for validating trophic position estimates in ecosystem-based fisheries models
* GEO,OCE
* 08/16/2012,07/31/2014
* Carolyn Jones, Hawaii Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2014
* USD 28,106.00

Evidence increasingly demonstrates that selective removal of marine life can
induce restructuring of marine food webs. Trophic structure is the central
component of mass balance models, widely used tools to evaluate fisheries in an
ecosystem context. Food web structure is commonly determined by stomach contents
or by bulk tissue stable isotope analyses, both of which are limited in terms of
resolution and versatility. The investigators will refine a tool, Amino Acid
Compound-Specific Isotopic Analyses (AA-CSIA), which can be broadly applicable
for quantifying the time-integrated trophic position (TP) of consumers.
Differences in source and trophic nitrogen isotopic composition for specific
amino acids will provide an unambiguous and integrated measure of fractional
trophic TP across multiple phyla, regardless of an animal's physiological
condition or of the biogeochemical cycling at the base of the food web. AA-CSIA
will allow testing of the efficacy of trophic position estimates derived from
ecosystem-based models and promote the evolution of these models into decision-
support tools. This project has three goals: 1. To validate the application of
AA-CSIA across multiple marine phyla under differing physiological conditions.
2. To compare the application of AA-CSIA across systems with contrasting
biogeochemical cycling regimes. 3. To develop the use of AA-CSIA TP estimates
for validating trophic models of exploited ecosystems. The investigators will
test and refine the approach using a combination of laboratory feeding
experiments and field studies across regions with differing biogeochemical
cycling regimes. They will determine the applicability of the AA-CSIA approach
in a variety of marine organisms assessed in controlled studies. Subsequently,
ecosystem components will be sampled from the eastern tropical Pacific, coastal
California and the subtropical Pacific gyre. They will also test the effects of
sample preservation on the isotopic composition of individual AA to determine
whether the approach can be used on archived samples. This tool will allow
testing of the efficacy of ecosystem-based models currently used to gain insight
into the ecological effects of fisheries removals and improve the reliability of
future models required to manage marine resources. In addition to the goal of
developing AA-CSIA for use as a TP indicator, the information obtained through
this project will provide important species-specific biological data on the
feeding behavior of marine organisms that could have implications for their
resilience to anthropogenic pressures and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have direct application to
evaluating ecosystem effects of fisheries by providing an unbiased, integrated
and independent approach to&lt;br/&gt;estimating trophic structure, and a method
by which to validate existing ecosystem-based model outputs and predictions. In
addition, the project will have outreach benefits through the involvement of
graduate and undergraduate students, and exposure of younger students through
K-12 programs. This research will contribute to the greater understanding of the
biology of locally important fish species as well as globally important shrimp
and endangered marine turtles.