* 1301717
* Fourier Analysis on Bounded and Exterior Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Matthew Blair, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 145,000.00

This mathematics research project by Matthew Blair deals with Fourier analysis
and its applications to partial differential equations. Of particular interest
here are space-time integrability bounds of Strichartz and local smoothing type
for the wave and Schr√∂dinger equations. The proposal also concerns closely
related estimates on eigenfunctions of the Laplacian on a compact Riemannian
manifold. These problems actually stem from those in classical Fourier analysis,
such as the Stein-Tomas restriction theorem, and the relevant techniques involve
closely related oscillatory integral estimates. While basic formulations of
these inequalities exist for these equations when they are posed over Euclidean
space and even Riemannian manifolds without boundary, less is known about their
validity for initial boundary value problems. Here one considers a domain or
more generally a Riemannian manifold with boundary, and the imposition of
homogeneous boundary conditions affects the flow of energy in significant ways,
sometimes even inhibiting dispersion. Consequently, the proofs of these
estimates typically involve microlocal or phase space analysis, which provide
avenues for understanding this phenomena. For smooth boundaries, Blair and his
collaborators have achieved a great deal of success by realizing solutions as a
superposition of wave packets, then showing that the resulting oscillatory
integrals yield the desired inequalities. On domains with corners, even less is
known about the validity of these estimates, but Blair and his collaborators
have been able to obtain some results for polygonal domains.

This mathematics research project by Matthew Blair is in the area of Fourier
analysis: this is a branch of mathematics that plays an important role in the
development of mathematical and physical theories. The research pursued in this
project provides the mathematical foundation for the study of light and sound
waves. Fourier analysis continues to play a significant role in deepening our
understanding of the equations which model this behavior. In particular, these
investigations yield further insight as to how the presence of a hard boundary
surface influences the development of waves. For example, if one listens to the
symphony in an auditorium, the sounds heard are affected by the manner in which
the acoustic waves reflect off the walls. In this sense, it can be important to
understand how the shape of the hall influences its acoustics. While this is of
course a classical problem, there is more to be understood in terms of how these
interactions influence dispersive properties. Moreover, this line of work is
important in the analysis of closely related nonlinear equations arising from
fiber optics and water waves, where there is much to be done in understanding
and limiting the various types of instabilities which can occur.