* 1301667
* Conference:  "22nd Western Photosynthesis Conference:  From Engineering to the Environment?"; January 3-6, 2013; Asilomar, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 11/30/2013
* USD 10,596.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Photosynthesis is the most dominant energy
conversion process on the planet. Understanding how photosynthesis functions at
the mechanistic and regulatory levels will allow man to exploit energy capture
and storage performed by photoautotrophic organisms by redirecting energy flow
into high density fuels and/or electrical current. Designing scientific
platforms that capture photosynthetic energy will require the skills of
biologists who understand physiological and biochemical processes, molecular
biologists and bioengineers, who can modify those processes in specific ways,
biophysicists who can help predict the consequences of some of the potential
modifications and provide the analytical tools to assay those consequences, and
electrical and mechanical engineers who can help build systems that interface
with or mimic the biological systems. It is with this diverse view of
photosynthetic processes that the 22nd Western Photosynthesis Conference will be
convened in Asilomar California on Jan 3-6, 2013. This meeting will present a
broad landscape of photosynthesis, providing the attendees with the most up-to-
date view of photosynthetic processes ranging from photosynthetic electron
transport and energy conversion, to the fixation of carbon in cultured organisms
and ecological systems, to a new understanding of the dynamics of the oxygen
evolving complex. Included in the program are two Plenary Speakers, Dr. Thomas
Jaramillo, a young faculty member (Mechanical Engineering at Stanford
University) investigating water splitting and hydrogen evolution on surfaces
coated with inorganic catalysts, and Dr. Stephen Palumbi (Director of the
Hopkins Marine Station), who has developed a project exploring the health of the
coral reefs and the role of photosynthesis in the biology of the reefs in a
changing environment. There will also be six symposium sessions which are: An
Engineers View of Photosynthesis, chaired by Dr. Thomas Moore (Arizona State
University), The Diversity of Photosynthetic and Related Metabolic Processes in
the Oceanic Environment, chaired by Dr. Jonathan Zehr (UC Santa Cruz),
Photosynthetic Structure and Function, chaired by Dr. Petra Fromme and Dr.
Rebekka Wachter (Arizona State University), Genomics and the Use of High-
Throughput Technologies, chaired by Dr. Martin Jonikas (Carnegie Institution for
Science), The Biophysics and Biochemistry of the Light Reactions, chaired by Dr.
Junko Yano and Dr. Bruno Robert, and The Use of Inorganic Carbon and Potential
Production of Fuels, chaired by Dr. Donald Ort, Chair. Overall, this meeting
will bring together open-minded researchers with a diversity of technical
expertise and different ways of thinking about systems and processes that will
lead to a deeper understanding of photosynthetic processes and rational ways to
tailor the process to help create more robust systems for sustaining the growing
population on the planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;This
meeting will have over 100 attendees with approximately 65 students and
postdoctoral research associates and over 35 senior scientists (Professors and
staff at research institutes). It is a meeting in which, traditionally, strong
interactions occur among scientists at all career levels, often leading to
fruitful collaborations. Furthermore, usually nearly half of the attending
students and postdoctoral research associates are expected to give oral
presentations and most of the remainder will present posters. The meeting
provides an excellent venue for the younger scientists to develop their
communication skills. This year the students will be provided with novel
orientations toward understanding photosynthetic processes, including
"Photosynthesis in the Environment" (an environment which is rapidly changing),
and the "The Eye of the Engineer on Photosynthetic Energy Capture" (the use of
engineering principles to understand and exploit photosynthetic processes). In
the view of the organizers, it is critical that the students who will help shape
the scientific future of the planet understand the complexity of photosynthetic
processes, how cross-disciplinary approaches result in a more realistic and
precise view of photosynthesis in the natural environment, and also help develop
potential paths that will ameliorate the energy crisis looming in the future.