* 1301835
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Characteristics of Lower Tropospheric Airborne GPS Radio Occultation Observations and Their Impact in Hurricane Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jennifer Haase, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2015
* USD 77,545.00

The hurricane genesis process is known to depend on the degree of vertical
instability needed to support deep convection and on mid-level moistening, which
modulates convective activity. However, the time variation of moistening is
poorly known due to the lack of high temporal and spatial observations during
the genesis process. Global Positioning System (GPS) Radio Occultation (RO)
provides area-averaged profiles of refractivity (which depends on moisture and
temperature) with very high vertical resolutions that are complementary to
dropsondes (pointwise, high vertical resolution) and satellite retrievals (high
horizontal but poor vertical resolution). GPS RO is insensitive to heavy
precipitation, clouds, and winds. Since the Constellation Observing System for
Meteorology, Ionosphere and Climate (COSMIC) became operational, space borne GPS
RO data have shown a positive impact on global numerical weather prediction
models in the mid to upper troposphere range. However, the use of the data at
lower levels has lagged for several reasons: 1) complications due to strong
horizontal variations in moisture 2) difficulties in signal tracking and 3)
sparse observations within the window of interest for mesoscale systems. This
has led to minimal impact in tropical cyclone genesis and forecasting, and
minimal impact below mid-troposphere in general. Airborne RO can play a major
role in advancing understanding of the hurricane genesis process, because dense
targeted measurements are simpler to make with an airborne system than with the
existing space borne constellation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will take
advantage of a unique opportunity to collect data during the Pre-Depression
Investigation of Cloud Systems of the Tropics (PREDICT) campaign in August 2010,
which will allow them to test their progress in data assimilation for the case
of tropical cyclone genesis. The data assimilation results should be of great
interest to PREDICT investigators because they will provide better initial
conditions for high-resolution models for testing new hypotheses concerning the
evolution of tropical disturbances into hurricanes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will promote the use of
airborne radio occultation to an expanded research community and serve as a
feasibility test for hurricane hunter surveillance missions, potentially
resulting in a direct societal benefit from improved operational forecasts. This
research activity will educate graduate students and promote the advancement of
postdoctoral researchers within an international collaborative structure between
Taiwan and US universities. It will strengthen research programs led by four
female investigators, who will serve as role models for their students as well
as other young female scientists.