* 1301953
* BRIGE: OS-SPECIFIC MANY-CORE DESIGN
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Chen Liu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2017
* USD 220,020.00

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this BRIGE research project is to leverage
current microprocessor design to support and meet the increasing demand on
system performance/ throughput. The ever-increasing complexity of
microprocessors makes it necessary to renovate the current technology. The
project will explore the design space of many-core microprocessors, centered on
reducing the operating system overhead and interference with user applications
via hardware support. This project is expected to yield a more detailed
understanding of the interactions between the hardware and system software that
take part during the execution of applications. A transformative scheme is
proposed to distribute the operating system services onto dedicated and
specialized cores. The novelty of this research lies in an attempt to combine
research fronts at different layers of the microarchitectural design into a
unified framework, with specific focus on scalability, adaptivity, and improved
fault handling. This project will advance the fundamental understanding of
principles of designing such systems and introduce creative concepts and
perspectives. These advantages will pave the way towards taking advantage of the
computing power of future many-core systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This BRIGE project aims to tightly integrate the research with
different levels of education to attract traditionally underrepresented ethnic
and gender groups into the engineering and computing pipeline and to pursue a
successful higher education. An associated broadening participation plan will
support a number of mentoring and outreach activities for disseminating
knowledge of the advancements in modern microprocessor design into high school
and university classrooms. It will include an outreach to K-12 students and
teachers and local community college in a predominantly underprivileged and
social-economically impacted neighborhood of Miami, Florida, leveraging upon the
existing university programs to attract underrepresented students to the
discipline of engineering. Several undergraduate researchers selected from a
diversified student body will be actively involved with the proposed research
activities. The integration of experimental effort along with theoretical
analysis will offer invaluable experiences to graduate and undergraduate
researchers involved in the project. The educational component also includes
development of a specific course on many-core architecture and its interaction
with operating systems, integrated with the research program. The advances
expected from this project will enable the design of next generation high-
performance microprocessors that will impact the computing ability and
performance of future personal computers and the public at large.