* 1301487
* RUI: Quantum, arithmetic, and categorial analysis of convex polytopes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Joseph Gubeladze, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 135,000.00

Lattice polytopes and convex polytopes form a natural habitat for a major part
of the contemporary combinatorics. The first research direction, proposed in
this project, involves a radically new idea of using analogies with quantum
probabilistic physics. It introduces a new topological context for normal
lattice polytopes. The second direction develops essentially new techniques for
studying general convex polytopes. It is based on advanced categorial and
homological machinery. The first line of research aims at shedding new light and
making substantial progress on several outstanding open problems, such as
unimodular triangulations and covers, Caratheodory rank, higher syzygies of the
corresponding toric rings. The new idea of attacking these challenges draws from
a physical interpretation of special discrete point configurations. Concrete
suggestions in this direction to the PI were made by theoretical physicists and
further connections to the physical context will be paid special attention. The
second direction focuses on the category of convex polytopes and their affine
maps. The goal is to devise a universal technique, providing a general context
for various recent important constructions and results in polytope theory. The
categorial approach leads to very concrete problems in classical polytopal
combinatorics.

Combinatorics is the science of organizing, arranging and analyzing discrete
data. An illustrative example is the set of integer points in a convex polygon
in the plane or in a convex polytope in the space. Combinatorics of lattice
polytopes studies such point configurations to encode important constructions in
algebra, geometry, and topology, while combinatorial methods are well suited for
related computations. The interaction of combinatorics and abstract mathematical
techniques, central to the proposed research, over the last decades has resulted
in a number of fundamental theorems in a variety of disciplines. The proposal
explores some of the deepest problems in polytopal combinatorics, employs ideas
from a variety of disciplines and unexpected links between them, and offers
concrete strategies for attacking central open questions. Applications range
from algebraic geometry (the science of solution sets to systems of
multidimensional polynomial equations) to integer programming/computer science,
probability theory, and physics. The progress would have been unimaginable
without computer assisted investigation and experimentation, the increased
importance of which is related to the demand for algorithmic understanding of
discrete structures. Both proposed research lines incorporate a strong -
sometimes, crucial - computational element. Developing and implementing related
algorithms is an excellent possibility for involving beginning graduate
students.

