* 1301646
* Inverse Problems for Wave Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Plamen Stefanov, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 177,000.00

This mathematics research project by Plamen Stefanov concerns the study of
inverse problems arising in wave propagation phenomena. They include the
following: (a) inverse problems in integral geometry of recovery a function or a
tensor field from the geodesic ray transform; (b) microlocal inversion of
transforms appearing in Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) imaging; (c) non-linear
boundary and lens rigidity questions in Riemannian geometry; (d) inverse
boundary problems for wave equations with variable speed; and (e) inverse
problems for the wave equation arising in multiwave medical imaging. In (a),
(c), and (d), we assume that there are conjugate points and the goal is to study
their effect on the invertibility and its stability. The unifying theme in the
project is that the inversion is done in complex geometry. A straightforward
inversion in all those cases fails due to the fact that the microlocal Bolker
condition does not hold anymore. One often gets artifacts in the reconstruction
placed at conjugate pairs or at mirror points in SAR, etc. The fundamental
questions that Stefanov will study are whether those artifacts are indeed there;
how to remove them, if possible; and, (if not possible) how to characterize
them. The long term goal is to understand linear and non-linear inverse problems
and their stability for wave phenomena in complex media, where caustics are
inevitable and stability might be lost. The work on those problems is based
upon, and will further develop, methods in several areas in mathematics:
Riemannian and Integral geometry, Inverse Problems, microlocal analysis,
including analytic microlocal analysis, as well as classical functional analysis
and PDE theory.

This mathematics research project by Plemen Stefanov is motivated by problems
arising in Synthetic Aperture Radar imaging (SAR), medical imaging and
geophysics. In SAR, Stefanov will study practical questions such as what are the
best flight paths that produce the best data for image reconstruction; Stefanov
will also develop an approximate reconstruction algorithm for situations where
there is no exact answer to this question. The boundary and the lens rigidity
problems studied in this project are the mathematical foundation of Seismic
Tomography: to recover the inner structure of the Earth (and the Sun) from the
travel times of seismic waves; they also occur in the investigation of
ultrasound imaging. The geodesic ray transform problems are a special case
(linearization) of the latter. The inverse wave equation problems arise in
Seismology as well, as an attempt to use more information about the wave -- not
just the time of arrival but also the shape of the wave. The multiwave problems
are the mathematical foundation of emerging medical imaging methods like
Thermoacoustic and Photoacoustic Tomography; they belong to the new class of
multiwave (hybrid) medical imaging methods which combine the high contrast of
one wave with the high resolution of another.