* 1301714
* Great Lakes Geometry Conference 2013
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Benjamin Weinkove, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2013
* USD 18,500.00

The Great Lakes Geometry Conference 2013 will take place at Northwestern
University on April 20-21, 2013. The main theme of the conference will be
geometric analysis. It is well-known that many problems in differential geometry
can be formulated in terms of differential equations on manifolds. These
equations differ from traditional differential equations in Euclidean space in
that they usually encode global, geometric information. To solve them, one needs
both analytic techniques and geometric insight. This conference will feature
eight speakers who are experts in various fields across geometric analysis,
including General Relativity, Kahler geometry and Riemannian geometry. A common
theme of much of their work is the study of the Einstein equations, which first
arose in General Relativity and now play a central role in Kahler and Riemannian
geometry. A major goal of this conference is to expose graduate students and
junior mathematicians to new developments in these areas of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Great Lakes Geometry Conference
conference is a well-established conference series that has been annually held
in the Great Lakes region, and this will be its 12th edition. The conference
will have geometric analysis as its main theme. This is an important field of
mathematics with great impact and applications to other areas in mathematics and
physics. Geometric analysts use and develop the tools in analysis and partial
differential equations to tackle problems which originate from geometry and
physics. The conference this year will bring together eight well-known experts
working in a number of active research areas in geometry. We expect that the
conference will attract a large and diverse spectrum of participants from
Northwestern University and other Midwestern universities, and we encourage the
participation of early career mathematicians, women and underrepresented
minorities. A major goal of this conference is to expose graduate students and
early career mathematicians to the recent developments in this active field of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference website is:
http://www.math.northwestern.edu/greatlakes2013