* 1301957
* LSU BD-6: 2013 Cohort LA-BRIDGE
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Su-Seng Pang, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2017
* USD 987,000.00

The US Census Bureau reports that African, Hispanic, and Native Americans
comprise some&lt;br/&gt;30% of the US population, however only 16% of the
undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics (STEM)
degrees and less than 3% of the doctoral STEM degrees produced within the US
are&lt;br/&gt;awarded to students from these groups! It is in the nation?s best
interest to support innovations that test&lt;br/&gt;strategies to increase the
success groups underrepresented in the STEM disciplines, not simply for
reasons&lt;br/&gt;of equity or social justice, but because these students are an
untapped potential in fulfilling the STEM&lt;br/&gt;workforce needs of today and
tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed, ?BD-Cohort 5 ? LA-BRIDGE: Louisiana Broadening
Resources for Increasing&lt;br/&gt;Diversity in Graduate Education,? represents
a transformative and strategic institutional approach to&lt;br/&gt;build human
resource capital at the doctoral level. In this endeavor, Louisiana State
University (LSU), a&lt;br/&gt;state-supported Carnegie Research Extensive
Institution, nationally designated as both land-grant and
seagrant,&lt;br/&gt;will serve as the Bridging Institution. The project features
strong inter-institutional collaborations&lt;br/&gt;between colleges and
universities throughout the Senior Level Louis Stokes (LS) Louisiana Alliance
for&lt;br/&gt;Minority Participation (LAMP); intra-institutional collaborations
between the LSU Offices of Academic&lt;br/&gt;Affairs, Strategic Initiatives,
and Research and Economic Development as well as the LSU Center
for&lt;br/&gt;Academic Success; and international collaborations between LSU and
the French Alternative Energies&lt;br/&gt;and Atomic Energy Commission in
Grenoble (CEA Grenoble).&lt;br/&gt;The vision of LA-BRIDGE is to create a
successful model to increase minority student&lt;br/&gt;persistence and global
competitiveness at the doctoral level, an effective model with well-
tested&lt;br/&gt;strategies, which can be adopted nationwide. The goals of LA-
BRIDGE are a logical extension of the&lt;br/&gt;goals of the LS-LAMP Senior
Alliance: (a) to increase the quality and number of minority
STEM&lt;br/&gt;students pursuing doctoral degrees at the bridge institution; (b)
increase the retention to graduation rate of&lt;br/&gt;minority STEM PhD
students; and (c) investigate a national model for increasing the share of
minority&lt;br/&gt;STEM PhD holders. The objectives of LAMP-BD are: (1) to
provide systemic mentoring that includes&lt;br/&gt;effective faculty-to-
student/student-to-student interactions that work collectively to increase the
number&lt;br/&gt;of minorities earning PhD degrees in STEM fields; (2)
facilitate academic support structures that increase&lt;br/&gt;students?
acclimations to the rigors of doctoral study; and (3) expose minorities to
international research&lt;br/&gt;experiences that prepare them for long-term
scholarly engagement in the global STEM research&lt;br/&gt;enterprise; (4) to
promote, guide and support the transition of these PhD degree-holders into the
STEM&lt;br/&gt;research workforce with emphasis on the professoriate; and (5) to
achieve self-sustainability by&lt;br/&gt;expanding, and institutionalizing the
systemic mentoring, and research infrastructure enhancements
and&lt;br/&gt;activities across the state.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: LA-
BRIDGE will provide strategic and transformative leadership
in&lt;br/&gt;designing effective LS-LAMP inter-institutional and multi-national
alliances that improve the quality of&lt;br/&gt;STEM education for PhD students.
This project will cultivate and test systemic mentoring strategies
that&lt;br/&gt;have been designed to increase minority student matriculation and
graduation from PhD programs.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the project will explore
models to enhance the ability of LSAMP students to be more
effective&lt;br/&gt;researchers in a global environment. The scientific basis of
the mentoring model and its related activities,&lt;br/&gt;the publication in
system mentoring and educational research, lend themselves to the development of
best&lt;br/&gt;practices for graduate education and professional development.
Further, the research to be conducted by&lt;br/&gt;BD scholars will contribute
to scientific and technological innovations spanning the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: LA-BRIDGE will increase minority student
access to STEM PhDs. The salient&lt;br/&gt;project impacts are a) the increase
in the number of high quality PhD level researchers
from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minority communities who will pursue research
careers in the STEM academic,&lt;br/&gt;industrial, and governmental enterprise;
b) the consequent contribution to and the development of a
more&lt;br/&gt;qualified and diversified workforce; c) the wide-spread
dissemination of the best practices of system&lt;br/&gt;mentoring for graduate
studies and professional development; and d) the significant enhancement
of&lt;br/&gt;institutional graduate education and research infrastructure.
Further, this project will benefit society by&lt;br/&gt;enhancing the ability of
its graduate students to thrive in an international research environment