* 1301165
* Collaborative Research: Vulnerability and Resilience in Island Socioecosystems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Jennifer Kahn, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,525.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Jennifer Kahn and Patrick Kirch,
assisted by an international team of collaborators, will conduct archaeological
and paleoecological fieldwork on three islands of French Polynesia. The team
brings together U.S., Australian, New Zealand, and French specialists in
archaeology, paleoethnobotany, paleoecology, and soil science. They will examine
island ecosystems and cultural responses to ecosystem change which led to
radically transformed landscapes and emergent sociopolitical formations
(chiefdoms) in Polynesia. Using a comparative approach, the project will study
the island ecosystems of Mangareva, Mo'orea, and Maupiti. These three islands
exhibit critical contrasts in island geology and age, geomorphology, size, and
climate and marine resources; they vary significantly in the degree of socio-
political hierarchy and integration; and they have existing archaeological and
paleoecological data upon which the research can build. Applying the concept of
islands as model systems, the project seeks to understand both the vulnerability
of island ecosystems and their resilience to long-term human interactions with
the landscape. The team will also investigate how socio-political systems
responded to, and were affected by, such processes. All Polynesian societies
trace their origins back to a common Ancestral Polynesian culture, yet diverse
social systems evolved through time with marked differences in population
densities, productive systems, and political structures. Thus, comparative
archaeological research in Polynesia offers an especially clear opportunity to
understand the emergence of complex socio-political organizations such as
chiefdoms. The study will contribute to understanding how dynamic interactions
between island populations and island environments allowed some Polynesian
cultures to develop substantial resilience, and led others into states of high
instability and vulnerability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will obtain
basic data from former cultivation zones, monumental architecture sites, and
coastal habitations with paleoecological records of island flora and fauna.
These data will be used to understand: 1) interactions among human-induced
landscape change; 2) shifts in settlement patterns; 3) changes in agricultural
infrastructure and production; and, 4) levels of ideological control. The
project will model how these variables influenced emerging social complexity,
and how they affected long term adaptive cycles in island systems. The
intellectual merit of the research includes testing models of how social
complexity develops over time and examining how past societies adapted to
challenges such as over-exploitation of resources and high population densities,
two of the most contentious issues confronting contemporary archaeology and
indeed, many current societies. The deeper understanding of interactions between
island social systems, environments, and differential cultural responses to
ecosystem change gained in this research will enhance current perspectives on
sustainability and resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
study include education, outreach, fostering international research
collaboration and integration of natural and social sciences. The project
involves collaboration among scholars and students from multiple institutions in
the U.S., Australia, New Zealand, and French Polynesia and of diverse cultural
and ethnic backgrounds. The project team will offer critical training
opportunities to students of Polynesian descent. The project emphasizes
archaeology but is truly interdisciplinary, and will contribute more broadly to
conceptual integration across the natural and social sciences.