* 1301051
* RET: Shaping Inquiry from Feedstock to Tailpipe with Education Development (SHIFTED)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Susan Stagg-Williams, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,986.00

This award provides funding for a 3 year continuing award to support a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site program
at the University of Kansas (KU) entitled, "RET: Shaping Inquiry from Feedstock
to Tailpipe with Education Development (SHIFTED)", under the direction of Dr.
Susan M. Stagg-Williams. The proposed new SHIFTED RET Program enhances and
extends the previous successful SHIFT RET Program (EEC-0909100).

This program hosted by the University of Kansas and the Southeast Kansas
Education Service Center (referred to as Greenbush) will provide a 6 week summer
experience for a total of 39 in-service and pre-service teachers (13 per year
for 3 years). The participants will be math and science high school teachers and
UKanTeach undergraduate interns. THE RET:SHIFTED program at KU is a synergistic
alliance between KU faculty, Greenbush, and the UKanTeach program. This is a
natural collaborative endeavor, KU faculty members have interdisciplinary
research projects and a rich history of mentoring high school teachers,
Greenbush has been delivering content to K-12 students and teachers for decades
and UKanTeach is an innovative teacher preparation program for ~400
undergraduate science and math students.

The primary objectives of the program are to: 1)Engage high school teachers in
authentic research opportunities. 2) Guide the creation of classroom activities
that (a) use real-world applications; (b) bridge multiple subject areas; (c)
engage students in scientific inquiry or engineering design; and (d) stimulate
students' interest in science, technology, engineering and math. 3) Nuture long-
term linkages between KU faculty and the surrounding educational community. 4)
Provide professional development opportunities to pre- and in-service teachers.
5) Broadly disseminate classroom activities.

Most of the participants will teach at schools with a majority of economically
disadvantaged students. The rural schools have a growing Hispanic population and
the urban schools serve many students from underrepresented groups. A
partnership with Science Pioneers will also help the project team reach more
than 1,000 teachers and 4,000 students in the greater Kansas City region. By
partnering with UKanTeach, SHIFTED will expose pre-service teachers to research
and innovative classroom activities, increase its recruitment pool via UKanTeach
alumni, and broaden dissemination. Each participant will be equipped with the
skills and tools needed to effectively disseminate outcomes with local, regional
and national audiences. With guidance from Greenbush educators, participants
will translate their research experiences into curricular materials, designed to
meet state science standards, that can be used in their classes the following
year.