* 1301238
* GOALI: Aging Propagation and Model-Based Prognosis for Interconnected Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Giorgio Rizzoni, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

The research objectives of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award are to develop a methodology to understand the
propagation of aging in engineered system consisting of many interconnects
subsystem and components, and to demonstrate it by developing tools and methods
to predict life and understand the state of health of battery pack systems in
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. The first goal of the research is to
understand how knowledge of the aging behavior of individual components (e.g.:
battery cells) translates into overall system aging. The second goal is to
develop a systematic approach to assess the state of health of the system based
on knowledge of its components states of health. The resulting approaches are
then demonstrated using a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle battery pack as a case
study, in collaboration with General Motors. Deliverables include: mathematical
models and computer simulations of aging propagation in a battery pack; the
experimental validation of the life prediction methods, in collaboration with
General Motors; graduate course materials; and a short course designed for
industrial audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this work
will have a broad impact on the theory, methodology and application of failure
prognosis to engineered systems, beyond the specific application considered in
this project. The participation of General Motors in this project is critical in
that it provides an opportunity to validate and implement the methodology in a
real-world setting that presents many important challenges such as cost
constraints, the application to a large number of systems (potentially millions
of vehicles), and the need to achieve a degree of robustness that is consistent
with today's consumer expectations of warranty. If this research on aging
propagation and prognosis for interconnected systems is successful, it will
greatly help in making informed and timely life cycle management decisions,
reducing warranty and maintenance costs while improving serviceability,
availability and safety.