* 1301726
* The Solar Energy-Water-Environment Nexus in Nevada
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2023
* Robert Boehm, Nevada System of Higher Education
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2023
* USD 22,384,419.00

In this five-year project, Nevada Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (NV-EPSCoR) addresses critical practical problems of relevance to
large-scale solar installations in arid desert lands. The project combines
research on solar thermal energy generation with the understanding of eco-
hydrological impacts of solar installation in desert regions to advance the
economic and eco-friendly viability of solar electricity generation. This
combination distinguishes this project from several other existing solar energy
projects, thus making it a unique model study of relevance to Nevada and other
solar installations in the US and around the world. The major participating
institutions in this project are: the University of Nevada, Reno, the University
of Nevada, Las Vegas, and the University of Nevada Desert Research Institute.
Faculty and students from the College of Southern Nevada, Truckee Meadows
Community College, and Nevada State College will also be engaged in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Despite plentiful
sunlight and cloud-free days which are conducive for solar energy collection,
arid regions experience frequent dust storms and receive little or no rain. Dust
accumulated on solar panels absorb sunlight and decrease the efficiency of solar
cells; water scarcity increases the cost of meeting the cooling needs of solar
thermal collectors. This project seeks to develop engineering/technological
solutions to repel dust and minimize water usage in large solar installations.
In addition, it examines the desert ecosystem responses and provides science-
based information for designing effective ways to manage and mitigate
environmental impacts associated with large-scale solar installations. The award
establishes a research facility, called the Nevada Environment, Water, and Solar
Testing and Research Facility (NEW-STAR) during this project. Enhancements to
the existing cyberinfrastructure capabilities are effected through the creation
of the Nevada Research Data Center (NRDC) for data management and communication.
These new facilities promote collaboration among teams of interdisciplinary
scientists and engineers on solar-energy-water-environment nexus research and
education theme. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project
has the potential to develop less costly and thus more competitive solar
electricity generation techniques aimed at minimizing both water usage and
environmental degradation. The technological solutions to be developed are
applicable to other solar energy installations nationally and globally.
Interactions among scientists and collaboration at regional, national, and
international levels as well as partnerships with energy industry and
environmental agencies in Nevada are expected to promote economic development in
the state. The project involves 41 faculty, 24 technicians, 43 graduate
students, and 38 undergraduate students as participants. The project offers the
following programs aimed at pre-college and undergraduate students with a focus
to attract underrepresented minority groups, K-12 teachers, and the general
public: (1) Pre-college bridging programs to assist K-12 students to develop
academic skills and career pathways; (2) Undergraduate research opportunity
programs (UROP) to provide research experience at the solar energy-water-
environment nexus; (3) Undergraduate and graduate hands-on training (HOT) to
facilitate transition from student to professional; activities include industry
internships and laboratory experiences in solar energy technology, and proposal
writing workshops; (4) Teacher professional development programs that engage
K-12 teachers in research, field work, and working with graduate students; (5)
programs to educate K-12 students on project related themes and inform their
families of opportunities for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) careers; and (6) Online learning laboratories, which provide wireless
access to cyber learning materials and enhance public understanding of solar
energy and related impacts on water and environment.