* 1301822
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Perceptions of and Intentions toward Tornado Sheltering Strategies of Mobile Home Residents
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Susan Cutter, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2015
* USD 14,756.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project investigates the
attitudes and beliefs held by mobile home residents about taking shelter from
tornadoes. Mobile home residents are disproportionately affected by tornadoes.
They make up about 6% of the population of the United States, but account for
about 45% of tornado deaths. Previous studies investigated what people knew
about tornadoes or how they perceived danger from tornadoes. This project takes
a different approach and focuses on what people know about sheltering strategies
and how they perceive the effectiveness of those actions in preventing harm. For
example, people who believe they are not able to carry out sufficient actions to
protect themselves from a tornado may develop negative attitudes toward
sheltering behavior. Such negative attitudes can lead them to ignore warnings
and put themselves at greater risk from tornadoes. The first goal of this
project is to identify a few common sets of attitudes and beliefs about tornado
sheltering within mobile home communities. This will be accomplished by a series
of interviews with mobile home residents in South Carolina, where mobile homes
are as prominent in the housing sector as any other state in the United States.
After the interviews, a questionnaire will be mailed to random occupied mobile
home units in South Carolina; this will provide data for the remaining goals of
the project. A second goal is to discover if certain types of attitudes and
beliefs are more prevalent in different sectors of the population. For example,
the study will investigate gender, age, race and ethnicity, family structure,
education, mobility, and several other factors to determine how these relate to
attitudes and beliefs about taking shelter from tornadoes. This project will
also research whether mobile home residents living in different geographic
situations have different tornado sheltering strategies. Many mobile homes are
situated in and near urban areas within mobile home parks containing dozens of
units. However, there are also large numbers of mobile homes in rural areas
which are single-sited units situated in areas with fewer roads and nearby
sturdy structures. The final goal of this project is to find out what mobile
home residents intend to do when tornadoes threaten, and to understand which
factors discussed above are most important in their decisions as to what to do.
This will enable the building of a conceptual framework for how mobile home
residents develop tornado sheltering plans and take action, or why they fail to
do so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project benefits society by fostering awareness
and education to reduce the number of deaths and injuries in mobile homes as a
result of tornadoes. The interview and questionnaire data will be made available
to researchers and practitioners interested in the issue of tornado sheltering.
Results of the study will be presented at national meetings attended by
meteorologists from the National Weather Service, emergency managers from
federal, state, and local agencies, and other researchers. The findings will
inform new education and outreach programs, as well as aid in improving
communication between the public and those in the emergency management and
meteorology sectors. The methodologies used in this study will provide an
example for future work to investigate mobile home resident tornado sheltering
in other regions of the United States. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this study also provides support enabling a promising student
to establish a career as an independent researcher.