* 1301198
* EAGER: Computational investigation of the  distributed decentralized control of cerebral blood flow
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Andreas Linninger, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 12/31/2015
* USD 94,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance - Cerebral autoregulation
is the remarkable control task of maintaining constant cerebral blood flow over
a wide range of disturbances such as posture change, physical activity, or
changes in cardiac output. In addition, the brain is capable of dynamically up-
regulating blood flow to very specific, locally confined territories of the
brain to support the metabolic reactions of neuronal firing, referred to as
functional hyperemia. This servo problem is accomplished in fractions of a
second in a small confined cortical domain without affecting blood perfusion to
other cortical regions. Though physiological and anatomical details of cerebral
autoregulation and functional hyperemia have been well researched, the systems
control behavior is not well understood. We propose a holistic systems approach
for the investigation of the fundamental principles of decentralized distributed
blood flow control in the entire human brain. Our project plan foresees a non-
conventional pioneering approach integrating control theory, computational fluid
dynamics, biochemistry, neurophysiology, and biomedical imaging. While our
interdisciplinary approach entails a&lt;br/&gt;high risk approach, novel
insights from research on complex dynamics and regulation of the human brain may
be transformative, making the project an excellent candidate for the EAGER
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have already constructed a morphologically
accurate, physiologically consistent, multi-scale computer network model of the
entire cerebral vasculature to predict the functional interaction of structural
and hemodynamic parameters in tissue oxygen perfusion. Systems engineering
methods will be used to adapt this model for the investigation of autoregulatory
control and functional hyperemia of the human brain. To research the distributed
decentralized control functions of the brain, we will incorporate&lt;br/&gt;the
several biochemical and physiological principles: (i) active vasodilation
through vasoactive signaling molecules, (ii) feed forward signal processing, and
(iii) distributed oxygen-sensing chemo-receptors in the brain
tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will introduce spatially distributed,
time-dependent simulations based on first principles of fluid dynamics and
passivity control theory of the entire brain1. The decentralized distributed
control mechanisms will be shown to require only biochemical sensors sensitive
to neural tissue oxygenation and local wall shear stress without the need for
centralized supervision. We will investigate the brain?s remarkable stability
and specificity in achieving highly localized blood flow distribution without
altering flow to adjacent cortical territories. This localized specificity of
cortical blood flow has been observed in functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI), but the hemodynamic control principles are not known. We will predict
and explain the time delay between neuronal firing, changes in relative cerebral
blood flow (rCBF) and tissue oxygen perfusion. This first principles model will
explain the physical and chemical kinetic principles underlying fMRI, which are
currently under debate in the medical imaging community. The final systems model
of cerebral blood flow control will predict the decentralized, distributed,
dynamic behavior of cerebral blood flow in response to local neuronal firing and
stable rCBF despite inlet arterial blood pressure fluctuations. Model
predictions will be validated using advanced distributed mathematical
programming techniques to match a spectrum of temporally and spatially
distributed data acquired in vivo by medical imaging
modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project offers -for the first time- a dynamic computer model to elucidate the
principles of cerebral autoregulation by integrating control theory,
computational fluid mechanics and medical imaging into a single visionary
project plan. The insights from investigating rCBF dynamics of the entire brain
will unravel nature?s design for robust, distributed and decentralized control.
Due to the complex distributed blood flow demand in the human cortex, a systems
approach is needed to quantify and characterize the underlying dynamic
mechanisms. The knowledge gain is expected to create new opportunities for
controlling distributed technical systems such as artificial organs, dialysis
machines or process engineering to hypothermal stroke treatments. To achieve a
broader impact, the final computational model will be disseminated to the
research community via a comprehensive data sharing plan and distribution via
the lectures in the UIC CAVE-2 virtual reality environment at UIC. Undergraduate
students and high school teachers will benefit from the intellectual core
created in this through the NSF-sponsored REU and RET programs directed by the
PI.