* 1301661
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Lawrence Evans, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 374,997.00

Most of the fundamental equations of the physical and engineering sciences are
partial differential equations (PDE), of which the most difficult are nonlinear.
A central goal of mathematics is therefore discovering general principles and
methods widely applicable to the many important strongly nonlinear PDE. This
proposal identifies several classes of interesting such problems: analyzing
solutions of nonconvex Hamilton-Jacobi equations (with applications to dynamical
game theory models), improving PDE methods for weak KAM theory (to establish
connections with classical dynamics), studying the regularity of solutions of
the infinity Laplacian equation (a key equation for max-norm variational
problems), and investigating the regularity of solutions to certain strongly
nonlinear parabolic systems of PDE. These various nonlinear equations have
widely differing structure, but are unified as being accessible to variational,
maximum principle and/or energy methods, although usually in certain singular
limits.

Understanding the existence, uniqueness and regularity of solutions to nonlinear
partial differential equations (PDE), and ascertaining as well their behavior,
are fundamental mathematical tasks, which have interesting implications in view
of the numerous practical interpretations of these equations. For example, the
nonconvex Hamilton--Jacobi PDE is the basic equation for two-person differential
games; and so understanding the singular structure of solutions helps directly
in the design of optimal strategies. Related applications apply to so-called
mean field game theory, a newly developed subject modeling behavior of large
populations of competing players. In addition the design of fast and accurate
numerical methods depends upon detailed understanding of the underlying
nonlinear PDE. Vast experience has repeatedly demonstrated that simple-looking
nonlinear PDE, with mathematically natural structure, appear and reappear
throughout the pure and applied sciences.