* 1301765
* Delaware EPSCoR: Meeting Delaware's 21st Century Water and Energy Challenges through Research, Education, and Innovation
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Donald Sparks, University of Delaware
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 11/30/2018
* USD 20,000,000.00

As a coastal state, Delaware is facing the prospect of sea-level rise and its
consequences for natural and built landscapes ranging from tidal wetlands to
agricultural land to densely populated and polluted urban areas. Accordingly,
this project addresses water and energy sustainability issues through four
interdisciplinary research themes that integrate engineering and the social and
natural sciences: the effect of sea-level rise on contaminant mobility and
cycling; coupled land use and climate change impacts on water and natural
systems; development and deployment of environmental sensors that provide data
for the other themes and assist in environmental monitoring and forecasting
systems; and innovations in environmentally sound renewable energy
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Delaware (UD), Delaware State
University, Wesley College, and Delaware Technical Community College will
collaboratively address these themes using innovative research approaches and
educational programs. The project includes public outreach activities and
partnerships with private industry and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is interdisciplinary with a focus on factors affecting water
quality in a coastal zone subject to land use, demographic, and climate changes.
Novel approaches will be used to investigate the fate of soil-bound contaminants
inundated by sea-level rise, new environmental sensor technologies will be
developed, and economic, sociological, ethical, and policy research will be
integrated within each of the research themes. The project will address
renewable energy including wind and biofuels. Novel means of securing the
economic and societal benefits of the research through intellectual property
development, education, and outreach, in the context of workforce development,
are proposed. A seed grant program will capitalize on new opportunities and
expand the network of investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding of the changes likely to
occur in coastal areas and the range of possible human responses to those
changes will have direct and near-term application in the state of Delaware, as
well as widespread applicability around the nation and the globe. The research
is planned so that results will inform public policy and decision making through
collaboration and outreach. Student participants will be trained in
interdisciplinary research approaches that integrate the natural and social
sciences, as well as bridge the academic, public, and private sectors. New
degree programs, internships with public and private partners, outreach visits,
training in communication and intellectual property, and initiatives to
integrate education and research combine to provide innovative opportunities for
training the next generation of scientists and engineers.