* 1301502
* The Engineering Medical Therapeutic Technologies-Research Experience for Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Mark Humayun, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2017
* USD 392,466.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and puter Science Site
program at the University of Southern California (USC), entitled, "The
Engineering Medical Therapeutic Technologies-Research Experience for Teachers
(EMT2-RET)", under the direction of Dr. Mark Humayun. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
vision of the EMT2-RET program, is to leverage the considerable resources of the
University of Southern California to create long-term partnerships among world-
renowned biomedical engineering and computer science researchers, K-12 teachers
in Los Angeles inner-city schools, and community college educators. 6-week
program will support the involvement of a total of 30 (10 per year) high school
and community college educators in mentored engineering and computer science
research focused on medical therapeutic technologies conducted in Viterbi School
of Engineering (VSoE) and the Biomimetic MicroElectronic Systems Engineering
Research Center (BMES) Laboratories at USC. The coordinated efforts of
multidisciplinary research groups offer RET teachers the opportunity to work in
laboratories that range from basic science to systems engineering. Additionally,
teachers will participate in professional development workshops in engineering
and technology, aiding the teachers in the translation of the RET experience
into relevant classroom activities, including discovery-based laboaratory
exericses that are standards aligned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of
students in the Los Angeles Unified School District, East Los Angeles College,
Pasadena City College, Los Angeles City College are from underrepresented
minority groups. The RET program will train science teachers from urban schools
in biomedical engineering and computer science and, in turn impact the education
of their respective students. Students who traditionally have little or no
direct connection with STEM will, through the RET teachers, experience the
excitement of cutting edge discoveries. In addition, the professional and
collegial relationships that develop between the RET teachers and their USC
colleagues and the extensive academic year follow-up component of the RET will
foster long-term partnerships.