* 1301070
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Experimental and Computational, Multiscale Study of Geopolymers for Next Generation Soil Improvement
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Guoping Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2013
* USD 171,723.00

The role of inorganic geopolymer technology in sustainable development has
recently been manifested in a great number of research activities and
publications. To date, a wide array of viable applications of geopolymer has
been explored, some of which have been demonstrated in field pilot projects.
Yet, its potential applications in geotechnical engineering, particularly as a
cementitious material for soil improvement, have rarely been studied.
Collaborative research under this award will fill this gap, by exploring
geopolymer as the next generation soil stabilizer for geotechnical applications.
The research program includes: (1) studying the viability of geopolymers for
soil improvement, and (2) revealing the fundamental science on the nanoscale
geopolymer-clay interactions and hence the soil cementation and stabilization
mechanisms. This study will also create the enabling knowledge on multiscale
chemo-microstructural-mechanical modeling of geopolymer-improved soils.
Integrated experimental and computational work, consisting of materials
synthesis and processing, microstructural characterization, multiscale
mechanical testing, molecular simulations, and multiscale modeling, will be
conducted to achieve the aforementioned goal so that the emerging geopolymer
technology can be exploited by geotechnical engineers for sustainable
construction. This study is potentially transformative by introducing an
innovative, "green" cementitious material to geotechnical engineering research
and practice, with the potential to evolve into a series of new technological
and economic advancements. Successful completion of the project will further
advance currently ongoing worldwide efforts in sustainable infrastructure
construction, environmental protection, and energy conservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this study is expected to result in
benefits to diverse industries such as infrastructure materials and
construction, energy conservation, waste utilization and reduction, and
environmental protection, because geopolymer is regarded as a "green," energy-
and environment-friendly material. This study also tackles a combination of
global sustainability issues (e.g., CO2 emission, energy conservation, and
environmental protection), and hence is expected to generate significant
technological, environmental, and economic impacts. Concurrent education and
outreach activities will be integrated into the research to disseminate
knowledge, provide training, and facilitate technology transfer. First, outreach
will be achieved by high school visits, presentations, attending science
fairs/symposia, and other special "MA-Strive" and "La-STEM" programs to attract
more students to STEM. Second, undergraduate and graduate training and mentoring
are an integrated part of this research, with particular emphasis on women,
minority, and/or disadvantaged students. Third, the project's impact will be
extended, via meetings and conferences, to engineers in private industries and
state agencies through proactive participation in local engineering societies'
activities, and prompt dissemination of research findings.