* 1301409
* Rational Design of Eco-Friendly Homogeneous Catalysis by Rhodium- and Ruthenium-Catalyzed C-H Bond Activation and Decarboxylation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Pinjing Zhao, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2016
* USD 410,000.00

The Division of Chemistry supports the efforts of Professor Pinjing Zhao of
North Dakota State University Fargo for catalyst development and increased
mechanistic understanding of rhodium-and ruthenium-mediated carbon-hydrogen
(C-H) bond activation and decarboxylation. This research project develops the
[3+2] reaction of unsubstituted imines, further develops catalytic C-H
alkylation of electron deficient arenes, and investigates rhodium-mediated
stoichiometric and catalytic decarboxylation. A number of rhodium(I) and
ruthenium(II) complexes with phosphine and N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) ligands
are isolated and characterized. The research plan is integrated with educational
and outreach activities through the COINS (Career Opportunities In Natural
Sciences) Program. This program encourages undergraduate and graduate students
to explore various career opportunities in the natural sciences and reaches out
to rural communities in the region to enhance public awareness of scientific
research and career opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Division of
Chemistry supports the efforts of Professor Pinjing Zhao of North Dakota State
University Fargo for the development of transition metal-based homogeneous
catalysts. Rational design of efficient catalytic processes relies heavily on
mechanistic understanding of relevant elementary organometallic reactions.
Towards this goal, Professor Zhao and his group develop metal-catalyzed coupling
reactions for the efficient carbon-carbon and carbon-nitrogen bond formations
needed for the synthesis of new pharmaceuticals and commodity chemicals. In
addition to his research, Professor Zhao initiated and leads the educational and
outreach program, Career Opportunities in Natural Sciences (COINS). Through this
award and the COINS Program, Professor Zhao organizes annual summer workshops
for 15-20 high school students and their science teachers in rural North Dakota
and western Minnesota. Students and faculty participate in discussions on the
social and economic impacts of research advances, technology transfer and
commercialization, and career opportunities in chemistry and other natural
sciences.