* 1301935
* Multi-scale Approach for the Comprehensive Modeling and Simulation of Non-Equilibrium Atmospheric-Pressure Turbulent Plasma Flows
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Juan Trelles, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 150,001.00

Multi-Scale Approach for the Comprehensive Modeling and Simulation of Non-
Equilibrium Atmospheric-Pressure Turbulent Plasma Flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will explore the novel use of Variational Multi-Scale Large Eddy
Simulation (VMS-LES) as a consistent, complete, and computationally feasible,
modeling and simulation approach for turbulent plasma flows. Three main tasks
will be pursued: (i) formulation of a VMS-LES model of plasma flows based on a
monolithic treatment of fluid conservation and electromagnetic field evolution
equations, together with a novel description of the small scales
(computationally unresolvable flow features); (ii) implementation of the model
within a software infrastructure for the simulation of industrially-relevant
non-equilibrium atmospheric-pressure plasma flows; and (iii) validation of the
approach with Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) of model problems and with
experimental data from collaborators from the Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic. The comprehensiveness of the VMS-LES approach will allow the seamless
exploration of laminar, transitional, and turbulent non-equilibrium plasma flow
regimes. The monolithic formulation is expected to provide increased robustness
and computational efficiency with respect to prevailing solution methods. The
project will test the hypothesis of the universality of the small scales, at the
core of LES approaches, which will lead to broader understanding of the physics
of plasma turbulence and to increased predictive capabilities of turbulence
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will impact diverse modern technologies
based on non-equilibrium atmospheric-pressure plasma flows, such as fuel
reforming, assisted combustion, gasification, toxics remediation, and materials
processing, for which no comprehensive turbulence modeling and simulation
methodology exist. The project has the potential to impact a wide range of
subfields of Plasma Science and Engineering by providing a turbulence modeling
and simulation approach applicable to different types of plasma models, and
therefore enabling the computational investigation of diverse natural (e.g.,
astrophysical jets, solar flares, earth's magnetosphere, lightning) and
technological (e.g., confined fusion, planetary entry, processing of materials)
plasma flows for which DNS is unfeasible with current and foreseeable
computational resources. The project promotes international collaborative
research, and has educational impacts by the training of a Ph.D. student, the
dissemination of research outcomes through journal publications, and by the
outreach of underrepresented undergraduate STEM students into applied academic
research through mentorship to the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers at
UMass Lowell.