* 1301542
* Advanced Study Institute on Global Healthcare Grand Challenges and Opportunities Conference on July 21-26, 2013 in Antalya, Turkey
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Metin Akay, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

PI: Metin Akay&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1301542&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Academy of Engineering announced the 14 Grand Challenges for Engineering at the
annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. The
committee also praised biomedical and biological engineering as the research
field to fulfill the promise of personalized medicine. Included among these 14
challenges were Reverse Engineering the Brain, Engineer better Medicines and
Advance Health Informatics. An important way of exploiting such information
would be through the development of methods that allow doctors to forecast the
benefits and side effects of potential treatments or cures. "Reverse
Engineering" the Brain, is an emerging discipline that helps us to understand
how the brain works and treats several diseases. It furthermore helps us to
develop computerized artificial intelligence. Advanced computer intelligence, in
turn, should enable automated diagnosis and prescriptions for treatment.
Computerized catalogs of health information will enhance the medical system's
ability to track the spread of disease and analyze the comparative effectiveness
of different approaches to prevention and therapy. Finally, engineering new
medicines will help us fight the growing danger of attacks from novel disease-
causing agents. For instance, certain deadly bacteria have repeatedly evolved
new properties, conferring resistance against even the most powerful
antibiotics. New viruses arise with the power to kill and spread more rapidly
than disease-prevention systems are designed to
counteract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The main objective of the
"Advanced Summer Institute on Global Healthcare--Challenges and Opportunities"
is to highlight and discuss these emerging grand challenges, mainly focused on
the latest advances in the areas of science, engineering, technology and
medicine. The institute provides a unique environment to discuss the emerging
research areas, challenges and opportunities which lead to very fruitful
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: It exposes the attendees with
biology and medicine backgrounds to the latest developments in these emerging
enabling technologies. It is also helpful to those with engineering and science
background who are interested in doing research in bionanoscience and
nanomedicine, neuroscience and engineering since the advanced institute provides
exceptional insights into the fundamental challenges in biology and medicine.