* 1301611
* 2013 International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Xiu Ye, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 22,000.00

The 2013 International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Computation will
be held on May 16-19, 2013 at Wuhan University, China. The conference will serve
as a platform to showcase recent advances in computational mathematics and
mathematical modeling, to provide a forum for exchanging ideas and disseminating
results in computational/applied mathematics, to foster the interaction and
collaboration between mathematicians and scientists from other disciplines, to
introduce computational/applied mathematics to graduate students, postdocs and
junior faculty members, and to enhance the participation of women,
underrepresented minorities and persons with disabilities in
computational/applied mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, applied and
computational mathematics has emerged as a major driving force for
interdisciplinary researches. Currently, the boundaries between traditional
disciplines, such as mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology and engineering
are evolving, redefining and coalescing. New challenges in science and
engineering require collaborative and synergic efforts from mathematical,
physical, and engineering scientists. Meanwhile, the applied and computational
mathematics has preserved and enhanced its core value that defines the
community. This conference will cover a wide range of topics in computational
mathematics and mathematical modeling. The main themes of the conference
include, but are not limited to numerical methods for scientific computing,
optimization, and high performance computing, modeling and computation of
condense matter materials, soft matter and complex fluids, modeling and
computation of nano-fluidic systems and nano-electronic devices, modeling and
computation of complex systems in biological and biomedical sciences, and
multiscale and stochastic methods for science and engineering. Special efforts
will be made to ensure a broad participation by students, junior researchers,
college faculties, especially, women, under-represented minorities and persons
with disabilities. The results of the conference, including abstracts,
presentations, and preprints, will be published online at
http://math.msu.edu/?wei/ICMMC/index.html.