* 1301691
* EAGER: Exploring Antenna-Enhanced Nano IR-Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Ning Xi, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 04/30/2016
* USD 138,000.00

The objective of the program is to explore the integration of nano metallic
structures with photonic crystal for developing high efficient photonic antennas
to significantly improve the fill factor of nanocarbon material based infrared
detectors. It has been demonstrated that the nanocarbon material based infrared
detectors have many superb performance comparing to currently available infrared
detectors such as no need for cryogenic cooling, spectrum detection, and high
signal to noise ratio. However the major bottle neck for applying such detectors
is their low fill factors due to the dimensions of nanocarbon material. The
potential results of this program will be a key step forward for the
applications of nanocarbon material based infrared detectors. They will be also
transformative by discovering new knowledge on the design of nanophotonic
antenna and nanoinfrared detectors, and developing new nanomanufacturing
processes for nanophotonic devices. The intellectual merit is to advance the
state-of-art of nanocarbon material based photovoltaics by using a photonic
antenna to increase quantum efficiency and fill factors. The transformative
contributions will be made in theoretical understanding of electromagnetic field
topology and surface plasmonics, optimal design of nanophotonic devices, and
efficient nanomanufacturing. The broader impacts are not only on nanophotonics
and nanomanufacturing, but also on broader areas including: creating new
multidisciplinary research and development directions in nanotechnology and
electromagnetics; providing new understanding and devices for research and
development in engineering, biology and other science fields; and leading to the
development of new infrared cameras for applications in national security,
medical diagnostics, and industrial inspections.