* 1301262
* SusChEM: Molecular Level Foundation for Olefin Metathesis by Heterogeneous Supported WO3/SiO2 Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2017
* USD 353,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation supports Professor Israel E. Wachs from Lehigh University to
investigate the underlying science that can lead to the development of highly
selective supported WO3/SiO2 catalysts for olefin metathesis. This research
proposal focuses on olefin metathesis by heterogeneous supported WO3/SiO2
catalysts because of this catalyst system's outstanding metathesis
characteristics for light olefins that have made it the industrial catalyst of
choice. The hypothesis of this research proposal is that there is a unique
molecular structure and oxidation state for the surface tungsten oxide species
on the silica supports, the catalytic active site, that is responsible for C2 -
C4 olefin metathesis. The objective of the proposed research is to employ modern
state-of-the-art in situ spectroscopic techniques in conjunction with
molecularly designed model single site catalysts to directly determine the
molecular/electronic-catalytic activity/selectivity relationships for
heterogeneous supported WO3/SiO2 olefin metathesis catalysis. The students
involved in the proposed research project will be mentored to develop their
critical thinking skills, experimental design and data analyses approaches,
effective oral and written communications skills and research ethics. Special
emphasis will be made to recruit graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups. The students will participate in Lehigh's annual
outreach program CHOICES involving high school teachers and middle school female
students.

Propylene (C3) is the second largest feedstock for the petrochemical industry
and a shortage of propylene has developed that will continue to increase over
the next decade. To meet this demand, the petrochemical industry is turning to
olefin metathesis catalysis via the C2 + C4 -> 2 C3 reaction, and improving
catalyst performance for this reaction is a key challenge. Increased fundamental
understanding of this reaction by supported WO3/SiO2 catalysts has the potential
to assist in the rational design of improved industrial-type heterogeneous
olefin metathesis catalysts with improved carbon efficiency and showcase the
modern approach to heterogeneous catalysis research.