* 1301001
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Advancing System Reliability with Application to Light-Framed Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Helen Chen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 155,539.00

This collaborative Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project seeks transformation of structural design practice for buildings
from one based on the safety and reliability of the individual pieces
(components) of a building to one based on the safety and reliability of
building's structural systems: roof, walls, and floors. This change in design
practice has the potential to lead to both safer and more economically efficient
buildings. Buildings framed from cold-formed steel are targeted for initial
application. The industry partner, the American Iron and Steel Institute, is a
consortium of the nation's steel producers and spearheads the development of
codes and standards for buildings designed from cold-formed steel. The industry
partner will work directly with the academic research team to insure that
industry is utilizing the latest research findings in system reliability, and to
insure the research has maximum impact on the practical design of cold-formed
steel buildings. The research combines new analytical models for system
reliability, with new frameworks for implementing reliability in building
design, along with a series of physical tests on cold-formed steel framed walls,
floors, and roof trusses - all specifically design to demonstrate how component
and system reliability of buildings interact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
goal of this research is to provide a path to transformation of structural
design from a component-based process to a system-based process that can be made
accessible to design engineers through design code modifications, but which is
based on rigorous analysis. Specific research objectives are: (1) enumeration of
a general system-subsystem-component hierarchy; (2) development of a subsystem-
component reliability procedure supported by experiments and high fidelity
simulations; and (3) application of subsystem dependent component reliabilities
for codes and standards. The projected solution will identify the primary
subsystems that make up a structural system and then employ optimization to
define appropriate component reliabilities to ensure a target system reliability
and favorable failure mode. Novel reliability-sensitivity analysis and
structural simulation enable the optimization engine. The research objectives
will be integrated with educational and outreach initiatives, including regular
meetings with an Industry Advisory Board.