* 1301885
* University of Colorado Denver CO-AMP Bridge to the Doctorate
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Rick Miranda, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 12/31/2016
* USD 987,000.00

The Colorado Alliance for Minority Participation (CO-AMP) has thus far
matriculated four cohorts of underrepresented minority students through the
LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) program. The first three cohorts matriculated
at Colorado State University (CSU), the lead institution for the CO-AMP
alliance, whereas the fourth BD cohort matriculated at Colorado School of Mines
(CSM). The fifth cohort, if funded, will matriculate at the University of
Colorado Denver (CU Denver). As the only urban, research-intensive institution
in the Rocky Mountain States, CU Denver offers a unique training experience in a
wide range of STEM disciplines. Program Goals: A cohort of 12 BD fellows will be
recruited into this program for each of two years using a wide range of
strategies. The Program Coordinator, along with members of the Management Team,
will advertise the BD program using Web-based media, flyers, brochures and
direct communication. Particular attention will be given to 1) current CU Denver
STEM undergraduate and Masters students, 2) other higher education institutions
in the CO-AMP alliance, 3) four Native American tribes in Colorado and the Four
Corners region, 4) all LSAMP alliances nationwide, 5) national meetings such as
SACNAS and ABRCMS, and 6) visits to targeted programs and electronic postings to
GradSchools.com. The Program will be administered by a Management Team, which
includes individuals who are nationally recognized for their efforts in
diversity and inclusion. The Team will meet regularly with all BD fellows to
assess their overall satisfaction with the program as well as gather feedback
for areas of improvement. Importantly, once per semester, individual one-on-one
meetings will be held with each of the BD fellows to assess their academic
progress and career development. These academic progress and mentoring meetings
will continue throughout the entire program of study for all BD fellows. The
program is designed to provide a series of career development courses and
workshops to facilitate their successful completion of the program and
preparation for careers in academia and related professions. Examples of such
career development programs include: teaching preparation, ethical conduct of
research, scientific writing, and a broad array of related career development
workshops. Furthermore, regularly scheduled meetings of the local BD cohort, as
well as annual meetings with all BD fellows in the CO-AMP alliance will build a
sense of community and serve as a venue for sharing experiences and best
practices. Intellectual Merit: As the only urban, research intensive institution
in the Rocky Mountain states, CU Denver offers a unique training experience in a
wide range of STEM disciplines. Although the Management Team will make the BD
cohort aware of all 29 STEM-related PhD training programs, BD fellows will be
encouraged to matriculate into the following STEM programs where the USA job
market is most promising: Mathematics and Statistical Sciences, Engineering and
Applied Sciences, Computer Science and Engineering, Bioengineering,
Computational Biosciences and Structural Biology. Through a well-developed
series of career development courses and workshops, coupled with ongoing
individual mentoring, the program will strive for successful completion of the
PhD degree for all CU Denver BD fellows. Broader Impacts: Although the
percentage of underrepresented minority students continues to increase at the
undergraduate level, matriculation into STEM graduate programs still lags
behind. Consequently, it is critical to develop programs and mechanisms that
encourage underrepresented students to matriculate into STEM graduate training
programs as well as the successful completion of their PhD degree. Towards that
end, this program will provide regularly scheduled mentoring and academic
progression meetings with each BD fellow, career development workshops, teacher
preparation courses, local and state-wide community building meetings, and a
range of other activities and mentoring approaches to improve the likelihood of
successful completion for their PhD programs. Best practices will be applied to
other campus-wide recruitment initiatives for underrepresented students, as well
as with other partners in the CO-AMP alliance and national LSAMP alliances.
Ultimately, the long-term goal of this and similar programs is to train and
prepare a larger number of underrepresented students for careers in the STEM
disciplines, where they will serve as role models for the ongoing matriculation
of underrepresented students in STEM graduate programs and professions.