* 1301335
* Adhesion Mechanics of Bio-Electronics Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Nanshu Lu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 05/31/2016
* USD 360,780.00

The research objective of this proposal is to measure and model the native
interfacial adhesion between polymers or metal coated polymers and bio-tissues
using a contact mechanics approach. Bio-integrated electronics are a class of
ultra-thin, ultra-soft, stretchable electronics which can conformably integrate
with the soft, curvilinear and kinetic surfaces of bio-tissues for sensing,
treatment, and communication. Conformable and robust binding between bio-tissues
and electronics components can be obtained directly by such intrinsic adhesive
interactions without recourse to intermediate adhesives or conductive gels. The
proposed research will initiate a contact mechanics approach pertinent to bio-
tissues through a combination of experiments and analytical/numerical modeling.
We propose to develop a custom tissue tack tester capable of displacement
control, measurement of contact load, and in situ monitoring of the contact
area. Experimental data will be used in conjunction with contact mechanics
models to determine the work of adhesion and traction-separation relations as
the continuum representation of the adhesive interactions between various
biotic-abiotic contact pairs. The effects of rate-dependence, tissue roughness,
and bio-fluids will be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Native adhesive
interactions between electronic materials and bio-tissues as characterized by
this research will be the key parameter in predicting interface reliability and
in guiding the rational design of the mechanical structure of bio-integrated
circuits. Outcomes from the proposed research will be assimilated into a new
graduate level, school-wide, multidisciplinary course. Texas demographics are
such that the undergraduate body at UT-Austin has a significant Hispanic
representation (~17% in the Cockrell School of Engineering), who we have
successfully encouraged to participate in our undergraduate outreach programs.
The PI is a committee member of the UT Austin Women in Engineering Programs
(WEP) and has dedicated herself as a mentor for underrepresented undergraduate
and K-12 students.