* 1301640
* NPGI:  NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Rick Masonbrink, Masonbrink              Rick
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2016
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2013. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow, who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Rick Masonbrink is "Investigating Centromere Evolution in
Diploid and Polyploid plants in the Cotton Genus, Gossypium." The host
institution for the fellowship is Iowa State University and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Jonathan Wendel.

This project focuses on the evolution of centromeres and the mysteries that
surround centromere function after a chromosome complement saltationally becomes
doubled due to polyploidy. By identifying centromere sequences in the progenitor
diploid genomes and analyzing the fate of these diverged sequences in a
phylogenetically characterized suite of allopolyploid cottons, the research will
address how centromere repeats rapidly homogenize within and among chromosomes
in diploids, and shed light on the evolutionary dynamics of centromere evolution
during allopolyploid stabilization and subsequent speciation. This research will
result in a greater understanding of centromeres and their function in plants,
and represents an important but largely unexplored dimension of allopolyploid
evolutionary genomics.

Training objectives include bioinformatics, phylogenetics, high-throughput
genomics, next-generation sequencing, and chromatin immunoprecipitation. Broader
impacts include outreach, scientific training, and mentoring of students at all
levels, with the inclusion of underrepresented groups. Of particular note is a
summer internship for middle school and high school educators for which the
fellow will create and deliver a cytogenetics module intended to enrich teacher
experiences and provide opportunities for curricular change.