* 1301845
* 15th IMS New Researchers Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Aarti Singh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

The proposed meeting will take place over three days, August 1-3, 2013, at the
Centre de recherches mathematiques in Montreal.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
describes plans for the 15th New Researchers Conference, a conference series
organized &lt;br/&gt;by and held for junior researchers under the auspices of
the Institute of Mathematical Statistics (IMS). &lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
is to provide a much needed venue for interaction among new researchers in
&lt;br/&gt;statistics and probability. The proposed meeting will take place over
three days, August 1-3, 2013, at the &lt;br/&gt;Centre de recherches
mathematiques in Montreal. The meeting will be held immediately preceding the
&lt;br/&gt;Joint Statistical Meetings (JSM). Participants will be statisticians
and probabilists who have received their &lt;br/&gt;Ph.D. within the past five
years or are expecting to receive their degree within the same year. Each
&lt;br/&gt;participant will present a short expository talk and a poster. Topics
will cover a variety of areas in &lt;br/&gt;statistics and probability, from
theory and methods to applications. Senior speakers will give plenary
&lt;br/&gt;talks for inspiration and take part in four discussion panels
covering topics of importance for young &lt;br/&gt;people embarking on an
academic/research career: teaching, mentoring, publishing and funding.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This conference series is explicitly aimed at training
the future leaders and workers in statistics and &lt;br/&gt;probability. In
helping to create networks of new researchers, it lays the groundwork for future
&lt;br/&gt;collaboration and informal exchange of ideas and knowledge. It is
also critical for building professional &lt;br/&gt;cohesion within the fields of
statistics and probability and setting new frontiers for research. Meeting
&lt;br/&gt;people outside of one's research specialty area, and learning about
their research, favors a more &lt;br/&gt;comprehensive view of research, which
is important when taking editor positions and other professional
&lt;br/&gt;service activities. The conference attracts participants with
different backgrounds and nationalities, and &lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups
(women, minorities and people with disabilities) are explicitly encouraged to
&lt;br/&gt;attend. The conference website is available at
http://www.math.mcgill.ca/nrc2013.