* 1301627
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Causes of Divergent Banking Regulation, 1988-2006
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Frank Dobbin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,965.00

SES-1301627 PI: Frank Dobbin Co-PI: Kimberly Pernell Harvard University

Intellectual Merit Over the past three decades, there has been notable
international convergence in banking regulation. The scholarly attention to this
regulatory convergence has downplayed important cross-national regulatory
differences. However, cross-national variation in regulatory policy has
influenced bank outcomes during the recent global financial crisis. Regulators
from the G-10 countries did adhere to the same international regulatory
standards (i.e. the Basel Capital Accords), but these standards were flexible
and ambiguous, and national regulators interpreted and augmented them in
different ways. The goal of this dissertation is to explain how and why national
banking regulators made the divergent policy choices that they did. To this end,
the researchers undertake a comparative historical analysis of the divergent
development of banking regulation, 1988-2006, across three Basel Committee
member countries: the U.S., Canada, and Spain. Archival material and interviews
with domestic banking regulators are used to assess the relative influence of
economic, political, institutional, and cultural explanations. This project will
improve current understandings of regulatory policy development. Financial
markets have grown increasingly salient in the global economy, and it is
important to understand the factors that shape their regulation. This project
also yields new insights into the deregulation of the U.S. financial system,
through analyzing U.S. policy changes in comparative context.

Broader Impacts The findings of this study are policy relevant. Particular
regulations had serious implications for bank outcomes during the financial
crisis, and greater knowledge of the factors that contribute to more or less
effective regulation may help international and domestic regulators implement
better policy in the future. These findings will also be broadly disseminated to
interdisciplinary and non-academic audiences.