* 1301139
* Fracture Mechanics In the Presence of Reversible Martensitic Transformation in High Temperature Shape Memory Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Dimitris Lagoudas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 05/31/2016
* USD 390,195.00

The research objective of this award is a systematic experimental and
theoretical investigation of the fracture response of nano-precipitation
hardened high temperature shape memory alloys (HTSMAs) during actuation in the
course of thermo-mechanically-induced reversible martensitic transformation.
Affordable nano-precipitation hardened HTSMAs have extremely stable cyclic
actuation response and can be used as high power output &amp;#8722; an order of
magnitude higher than any other actuator material available &amp;#8722; solid
state actuators in applications related to aeronautics, energy conversion and
storage, consumer products, and automotive. Thermo-mechanical experiments will
be performed on these materials to measure fracture toughness, investigate
thermo-mechanically-induced crack growth, and identify the effect of shape, size
and coherency of the precipitates on the fracture mechanisms. In parallel, the
analytical efforts will be directed towards the understanding of the effect of
thermo-mechanically-induced martensitic transformation on the mechanical fields
near the crack tip, driving force for initiation of crack growth, and crack
growth resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these studies would
provide valuable information on the effects of shape memory performance metrics
and micro-structural features to improve those metrics on the fracture behavior
of HTSMAs. This information can eventually be used in their design and
optimization, and permit their ultimate insertion into applications. The
knowledge gained from these efforts will contribute to a new field of fracture
mechanics that needs to be explored for global anisotropic phase transformation
to be treated properly, and is expected to result in new theories for
characterizing fatigue crack growth and lifetime in SMA actuators. The
educational plan focuses on the development of teaching modules for
incorporation into undergraduate and graduate courses on smart materials and
fracture mechanics as well as on enriched international and industrial
experiences for the students involved via the partnership with the NSF
International Materials Institute (IIMEC) and the NSF - I/UCRC at Texas A&amp;M
University. Both initiatives will involve disseminating the knowledge generated
through presentations, publications, the SMART website and the Consortium for
the Advancement of SMA Research Technologies (CASMART).