* 1301109
* Strongly conjugated bacteriochlorin arrays - new near-IR fluorophores and activatable singlet oxygen photsensitizers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Marcin Ptaszek, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2017
* USD 480,769.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-B) Program of the Chemistry Division, Marcin Ptaszek from the University
of Maryland, Baltimore County will synthesize and study electronic, optical, and
photochemical properties of strongly conjugated bacteriochlorin arrays.
Bacteriochlorins, which are tetrapyrrolic macrocycles, exhibit strong absorption
and emission in the near-infrared spectral window (700-800 nm) and a high yield
of singlet oxygen photosensitization; hence they are attractive for a variety of
imaging and therapeutic applications. Assembling of bacteriochlorins into
strongly conjugated dyads with linkers, which allow extensive electronic
communications between bacteriochlorin subunits, results in pronounced
alteration of their electronic, optical, and photochemical properties. The goals
of the proposed research are to develop an understanding of structure-
photophysics relationships in conjugated bacteriochlorin arrays, and to
establish their feasibility for ultimately developing long-wavelength
fluorophores and activatable singlet oxygen photosensitizers with potential in
vivo imaging and therapeutic utility. The influence of the arrays' structure on
the absorption and emission wavelengths, quantum yields of fluorescence and
intersystem crossing, and intramolecular charge transfer will be studied in
detail. Subsequently, activation of fluorescence and singlet oxygen
photosensitization by the conversion of strongly into weakly conjugated
bacteriochlorin arrays, induced by well-defined chemical transformation, will be
studied. The proposed research will provide much deeper understanding of the
basic photochemical properties of bacteriochlorin arrays, and greatly expand
their potential as diagnostic and therapeutic agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will advance our understanding of fundamental physicochemical
properties of novel molecular architectures, strongly absorbing light in the
near-infrared region. This basic research will ultimately lead to the
development of novel, light-activated diagnostic and therapeutic agents, which
diagnostic and therapeutic functions will be activated only in the target cells.
The broader impact of proposed research also includes engagement of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students in highly interdisciplinary research,
spanning molecular design, organic synthesis, spectroscopy, photochemistry, and
biochemistry. A workshop presenting a fundamental role of photosynthetic
pigments in nature, and their diverse applications, ranging from energy-related
science to medicine, will be developed and offered for high school students.