* 1301298
* Mechanisms of Nanoparticle Generation by Laser Ablation of Thin Films in Liquids
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2017
* USD 284,059.00

This grant will support a well-integrated collaborative experimental ?
computational study of the mechanisms of nanoparticle generation in short pulse
laser ablation of thin metal films and multi-layers in a liquid environment. The
key processes that control the generation of nanoparticles will be investigated
in large-scale atomistic simulations and experiments performed for thin film
targets embedded in common liquids, such as water, acetone, and toluene, and
irradiated by short (femtosecond to nanosecond) laser pulses. The detailed
microscopic information on highly non-equilibrium processes of laser ablation
and nanoparticle formation, revealed in the simulations, will be used to guide
the experimental exploration of conditions that ensure fine control over the
nanoparticle size distribution, structure and composition. The role of the
spatial confinement of the deposited laser energy within the irradiated films
and the interaction of the ejected ablation plume with liquid environment are
among the key questions to be investigated computationally and in
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will provide
guidance for the design of experimental setups optimized for the generation of
nanoparticles with structure and composition meeting the needs of particular
applications. This will enable individual researchers to produce nanoparticles
for their research projects that are not readily available commercially, or if
they are, at a great cost. The generation of nanoparticles with a narrow size
distribution and free of contaminants has a good potential to impact many
applications, including biomedical research, nanoengineering of advanced
materials, optoelectronics, and surface catalysis. The close interaction between
Rutgers-Camden, a predominantly undergraduate institution, and the University of
Virginia, a research-oriented institution, will provide unique educational
opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students.