* 1301983
* EAGER: Coupling of Transcription and mRNA Decay in Mammalian Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Carol Wilusz, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* william eggleston
* 05/31/2016
* USD 299,999.00

Intellectual Merit: 'DNA codes for mRNA codes for Protein' is the well-
established model of gene expression in cells. Recent evidence, however,
suggests that the regulation of gene expression in our cells has many additional
nuances that were not anticipated by this simple model. The amount of mRNA in
the cytoplasm is known to be a product of both the rate of production of the
mRNA (transcription) as well as the degradation rate of the mRNA. The underlying
hypothesis for this research project is that there is a way for the status of
the cytoplasmic mRNA to be communicated back to the nucleus and influence the
rate of transcription. In other words, if the rate of degradation of a specific
mRNA in the cytoplasm is increased, a signal can be sent back to the nucleus to
increase the rate of synthesis (transcription), thus maintaining a steady-state
level of the mRNA in the cytoplasm. Preliminary evidence has been obtained to
suggest that this may well be the case and the goal of this research project is
to formally test this hypothesis in proof of concept studies. The ability of an
mRNA to send signals back to the nucleus to regulate its own synthesis is a
novel idea that has fundamental bearing on how genetic information in cells is
expressed. Thus a full understanding of this process has important implications
in a variety of biological disciplines.

Broader Impacts: The research project brings together an interdisciplinary team
that will result in the cross-training of both graduate students and
postdoctoral level researchers. Such interdisciplinary training will provide an
important skillset to these trainees for future career success. The project will
strive to recruit underrepresented populations into the research endeavors to
enhance scientific diversity. Data from the project will be incorporated into an
advanced undergraduate/graduate course to give a broad set of students exposure
to cutting-edge research. Outreach activities including posting on internet
sites and meeting with high school students at science fairs, will raise public
scientific literacy. Finally, the data, technology and models that are developed
will be deposited in easily accessible databases and disseminated widely to
promote the interdisciplinary incorporation of the potentially transformative
ideas of the project.