* 1301330
* Synthetic tools for glycobiology research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* David Mootoo, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 360,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor David R. Mootoo, of the Department of Chemistry at Hunter
College of The City University of New York, will develop a broad-based synthesis
of glycomimetics. The methodology centers on the reaction of sugar-substituted
crotyl-stannanes and boronates with chiral aldehydes. A key aspect of this study
will be the examination of how substrate effects, the choice of Lewis acid
catalyst, and the reaction conditions can be tuned to control stereoselectivity.
A major focus will be on the synthesis of two classes of glycomimetics that have
attracted much attention in glycobiology research, C- and carba-,glycoside
analogues of O-glycosides in which the glycoside or ring oxygen, respectively,
is replaced with a carbon substituent. The proposed crotylation method promises
robust syntheses of these materials and may also be appropriate for unusual
O-glycosides for which conventional O-glycoside synthesis is problematic.
Specific synthetic goals are analogues of inositol hexosamines that activate
protein phosphatases (PPs) and the immunostimulatory glycolipid alpha-
galactosylceramide, and which provide a platform for the development of the
scope of the crotylation methodology. Additional studies will include
investigation of the conformational and PP activating behavior of the hexosamine
inositol mimetics and determination of the cytokine profiles elicited by the
glycolipid analogues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful development of the
proposed research will advance the use of carbohydrate reagents and auxiliaries
in asymmetric synthesis, particularly in regard to applications in glycobiology,
and provide insight on how carbohydrate ligands interact with and control the
function of proteins, an important component of bioregulatory behavior. The
interdisciplinary underpinnings of this research provide a framework for
innovative strategies in the training of science students, from pre-
undergraduate to graduate, including groups that are historically
underrepresented in the sciences.