* 1301792
* EPSCOR RII Track 1: Managing Idaho's Landscapes for Ecosystem Services
* O/D,OIA
* 06/15/2013,11/30/2018
* Peter Goodwin, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 20,000,000.00

In this five-year project Idaho Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (ID-EPSCoR) seeks to advance understanding of feedbacks between social
and ecological systems and ecosystem services in mid-sized cities in the face of
climate change and urban growth. The program, Managing Idaho?s Landscapes for
Ecosystem Services (MILES), builds Idaho?s capacity to study complex social-
ecological processes, especially those associated with water demand and
valuation of ecosystem services. This research characterizes patterns of urban
growth and ecological change, identify social drivers of urban growth and
ecological change, identify valuable ecosystem services, construct an integrated
modeling framework, develop visualization and virtualization tools, and generate
and disseminate knowledge of social-ecological systems. The major participating
institutions in this project are: University of Idaho, Boise State University
and Idaho State University. Faculty and students from the College of Southern
Idaho, Northern Idaho College, Lewis-Clark State College, College of Western
Idaho and Eastern Idaho Technical College will also be engaged in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Idaho?s
urban areas are in a strong development phase and the border changes between
Idaho?s mid-sized cities and undeveloped land are accelerating. The development
and expansion of urban population centers and its concomitant population growth
are producing demographic and cultural shifts that are altering how ecosystem
services are defined and valued. These dynamics are occurring against a backdrop
of climate change and resource-demand change. This proposal seeks to advance
understanding of feedbacks between social and ecological systems and ecosystem
services in mid-sized cities in the face of climate change and urban growth.
MILES builds Idaho?s capacity to study complex social-ecological processes,
especially those associated with water demand and valuation of ecosystem
services. This research will characterize patterns of urban growth and
ecological change, identify social drivers of urban growth and ecological
change, identify valuable ecosystem services, construct an integrated modeling
framework, develop visualization and virtualization tools, and generate and
disseminate knowledge of social-ecological systems. Three study areas have been
selected because of their different ecosystem services demands, water
provisioning, and urban growth trajectories: Boise/Treasure Valley, Coeur
d?Alene/Post Falls, and Pocatello/Idaho Falls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential for transformative
knowledge generation that reaches beyond the place-based study and is applicable
to other semi-arid, mid-sized cities undergoing growth, both nationally and
internationally. New STEM and mentoring programs and workshops will specifically
focus on recruiting females, Native Americans, Hispanics and other minorities,
while K-12 activities will focus on underserved populations. MILES Undergraduate
Research Internships (MURI) will provide 300 undergraduate scholarships to
engage Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) undergraduates in
hands-on, paid summer and academic year research experiences. The proposers will
strive to have significant participation of URMs in the MURI activity. The
Bringing and Learning Communities program will leverage field-based MILES
experiences at each of the study sites for cohorts of college faculty, 1st year
undergraduates, high school STEM teachers, high school juniors and seniors, and
Idaho Public TV journalists. The activities are designed to foster broad
stakeholder and public engagement. Idaho EPSCoR has ambitious goals for
recruitment and retention of women, underrepresented minority (URM) students and
faculty and students from Idaho?s 100 existing STEM Pipeline K-12 programs and
five PUIs. The societal benefit of these activities will be the improved public
understanding of ecosystems and their services, and improved quality of life and
ecosystem health as a result a greater ability to provide science-based
decisions that support sustainability.