* 1301907
* Application of Transient Time Distributions to Ocean Radiocarbon Records for the Last Deglaciation
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Geoffrey Gebbie, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 04/30/2017
* USD 517,428.00

Radiocarbon (14C) is an important tracer of ocean circulation. However, although
extensive marine Delta14C records have been developed, quantitative
interpretations of these records are lacking. The proposed work, led by
researchers at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, will take a novel,
quantitative approach to Delta14C records of deep and surface waters from the
last deglaciation. The project will generate an up-to-date compilation of
Delta14C records with associated uncertainty estimates. Transit time
distribution (TTD) calculations will be applied to these records to relate
deepwater Delta14C concentrations to those in surface waters. Specifically, TTDs
derived from modern hydrographic data will be used to compute the changes in
deepwater Delta14C that are implied by the surface water records, and vice
versa. This approach will test the hypothesis that steep declines in deep and
surface water Delta14C values during the last deglaciation were jointly driven
by a change in ocean ventilation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will unite
the expertise of an ocean modeler, a physical oceanographer, and a
paleoceanographer to address a key question about ocean circulation during
conditions of deglaciation. A graduate student will be involved in the research,
and summer support for an undergraduate student will be provided. Project data,
computational software, and accompanying "how-to" documentation will be archived
at NOAA's National Climatic Data Center.