* 1302422
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Force Feedback for Fingertips
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Michael Peshkin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2017
* USD 808,000.00

Surface haptics is the creation of programmable haptic effects on physical
surfaces such as touch screens and touch pads. Unlike traditional force feedback
devices that require the operator to grasp an end effector, surface haptic
devices must provide feedback directly to the fingertips. With the dramatic rise
of touch screen interfaces in recent years, many approaches to surface haptics
have been explored, including vibrotactile, shape morphing, and variable
friction. The PI and his team have pioneered an approach in which the surface
generates controlled shear forces on each fingertip. Force Feedback for
Fingertips (F3), gives fingertips the opportunity to interact with physics-based
virtual environments, much like force feedback devices enable the whole hand to
do. With F3, fingers can interact with virtual objects that have mass, stiffness
and damping as well as more complicated dynamics (e.g., collisions, mechanisms,
and force fields). By coordinating haptic effects at multiple fingertips, even
more compelling illusions can be generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology,
underlying science, and application of F3 are, however, still in their infancy.
F3 works by coupling lateral vibrations to some form of rectification. For
example, one approach involves high-frequency lateral vibrations of the surface
synchronized with a friction reduction effect, resulting in a slip-push
transition at each oscillation. The friction is modulated by means of
electrostatic forces or acoustical stimulation. Current approaches work at
ultrasonic frequencies, but little is known about the mechanical or electrical
behavior of fingertips at these frequencies, or how energy transfer from a
surface to the finger can be optimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
produce new knowledge in three main areas: the physical underpinnings of F3,
device design and interaction design. First, both tribological and acoustic
measurements will be made to elucidate the mechanisms by which shear forces are
generated. A high-bandwidth tribometer and optical imaging system will allow
friction to be studied, and a custom-built exciter will allow the propagation of
acoustic energy in the fingertip to be studied. Laser Doppler vibrometry will be
used to measure surface wave propagation while magnetic resonance elastography
will be used to study shear wave propagation within the subcutaneous tissues.
Fractional calculus and finite element techniques will then be used to build
biologically plausible models of fingertip tribology and mechanics that match
the data. Second, a new generation of high-performance F3 devices will be
developed. Armed with good models, it will be possible to design impedance-
matched devices so that force production is maximized and energy wastage is
minimized. Additionally, these new devices will provide control over the force
vector at each of multiple fingertip locations. Thirdly, novel multi-finger
interactions will be designed. The key idea is that sophisticated percepts, such
as "objects" that can be grasped and that feel as though they are moving
relative to the surface, can emerge from properly coordinated fingertip forces
due to Gestalt-like grouping principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Historically, the PI and his team have had greatest impact when providing
technology to and collaborating with colleagues in human-computer interaction.
Inspired by this, an open source F3 kit will be developed and shared. In
addition, undergraduate and high school students will participate in the
research, developing software routines and sample applications for the open
source kit. Finally, the kit will be integrated with two pedagogical innovations
already implemented by the investigators: flipped classrooms and portable
laboratories.