* 1302488
* Collaborative Research: Tunable Nanoscale Ferroelectric Photonic Crystals: Materials and Fabrication, Photonic Crystal Structures, and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Richard Osgood, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 06/30/2017
* USD 317,999.00

Objective: This program uses new advances in ultrathin ferroelectric-film
fabrication, nano-poling, and simulation methods for nonlinear-optical devices,
to realize new tunable photonic-crystal devices.

Intellectual Merit: This photonics program will investigate a new class of
tunable second-order optical susceptibility nano-photonic device, by nano-
structuring ferroelectric thin-film photonic crystals to tailor their optical
response. The main challenges are ultrahigh-resolution poling, electrode-
structure design, and thin-film device implementation. Key elements are nano-
fabrication methods, design and testing of the tunable crystals, and two model-
device fabrications. Its transformative aspect arises from its nanometer scale,
providing unprecedented control of phase matching due to light confinement.

Broader Impacts: This program involves photonic devices, an area with broad
impact for sensors in medical and biological science, data transmission and
processing, and metrology. The research will be integrated into the education
mission of Columbia and the University at Albany to foster an interdisciplinary
examination of artificial nonlinear metamaterials and to enable the two groups
with a strong history of interactions to collaborate. This work will involve
students interaction and travel to their partner universities. The program will
recruit diverse student collaborators. Recruitment will be done via five yearly
outreach talks to undergrads at Columbia and Albany and participation in
Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program at Columbia. The project will
enable students to collaborate with the Nanocenter at Brookhaven National
Laboratory, which one of the PIs was the founding director, and with the Ion-
Beam Facility at Albany. This program involves overseas research collaboration
with University of Bonn (Soergel) and University College London (Panoiu).

This project is jointly funded by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic
Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) and by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program (EPM) in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR).