* 1302774
* First Science from the Epoch of Reionization with the 21cm Line
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jonathan Pober, Pober                   Jonathan
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,667.00

Dr. Jonathan Pober is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Washington. This project involves observations to understand the formation of
the first galaxies in the Universe. This period of cosmic history, called the
Epoch of Reionization (EoR), occurred when emission from the first galaxies fed
back into the intergalactic medium (IGM) and ionized it. The Fellow is a
developer of the NSF-funded Precision Array for Probing the Epoch of
Reionization (PAPER), an experiment to detect a radio signal from the EoR.
Ultimately, measurements of 21cm radio emission from both the EoR and other
epochs offer a unique, 3-dimensional cosmic probe with the potential to
revolutionize our understanding of cosmology as the cosmic microwave background
has done in the past two decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments like PAPER
have been limited so far by the intrinsic faintness of the cosmological 21cm
signal, and the presence of significantly brighter astrophysical foreground
emission. This project will benefit from recent developments in infrastructure
and data analysis to overcome these obstacles, and it may offer the first
meaningful constraints on the nature of the galaxies responsible for
reionization to come from observations of the 21cm line. Because the first
generation of results from PAPER will be low signal-to-noise, the Fellow will
support his principal analysis with a campaign to investigate systematic effects
in 21cm EoR experiments to maximize the scientific impact of these measurements.
His collaboration with sponsoring scientist Miguel Morales at the University of
Washington will provide access to data from the Murchison Widefield Array (MWA),
another array targeting a detection of the EoR signal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component. The
fellow will take over the development of the Gamma-ray Burst All-Sky
Spectrometer Experiment (GASE), a unique resource for the educational component
of this program. GASE is an interferometer designed to detect low-frequency (30
MHz) radio emission from a gamma-ray burst (GRB). GASE is currently being
commissioned by a team of community college transfer students, recruited and
trained as part of an NSF CAREER award (AST-0847753). These students begin
working on GASE prior to transferring, and as a result, they develop a network
of support and mentoring relationships to help fight against "transfer shock"
and increase their retention rate. The fellow will take over direction of the
GASE project and be the principal supervisor for these students. He will also
lead them to develop the GASE system, including a new correlator to enable
continuous observations. The fellow's ultimate vision for the project is for
GASE to be deployable at multiple institutions and for it to be a hands-on,
education-focused interferometer that until recently was beyond the reach of
most undergraduate physics and astronomy departments.