* 1302139
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Comparative Analysis of Arizona and Texas Groundwater Institutions
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,11/30/2015
* Zachary Sugg, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2015
* USD 16,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the factors that
promote and hinder the effectiveness of different approaches to governing
groundwater pumping in the context of rapid urban growth and competing water
demands. As cities in the Western U.S. continue to grow and water demands
increase, questions regarding the reallocation of already over-allocated water
supplies are becoming increasingly critical. Despite some achievements in
conservation, policy results have been uneven and often have been unable to
bring long-term aquifer declines under control. It therefore is important to
evaluate approaches to governing groundwater in order to identify important
weaknesses and propose reforms. This research project will compare the more
localized groundwater districts and Edwards Aquifer groundwater cap-and-trade
system in Texas to the more centralized, permit-based Arizona approach. Paying
special attention to the different institutions (systems of working rules) that
shape human use of water resources, this doctoral student will investigate how
groundwater districts manage groundwater in two major Southwestern metropolises,
Phoenix and San Antonio. The three main questions on which this project will
focus are: (1) How do the institutional arrangements in centralized and
decentralized groundwater governance systems produce differences in the
incorporation of new groundwater uses and management of conflicts? (2) How does
market-based trading compare to administrative permitting in the reallocation of
groundwater from rural to urban users? (3) How important are groundwater
districts for controlling aquifer depletion relative to state laws, state
administration, and regional political economic factors? Documentary evidence
will consist of relevant water rights laws and court cases, regulatory statutes,
records of rulemaking by groundwater districts, and media reports on water-
related issues and conflicts. Historical water-trading and permitting data will
also be collected, and interviews will be conducted with numerous stakeholders.
The student will triangulate among these different sets of evidence,
comparatively analyzing the planning and decision-making processes, incidence
and management of groundwater conflicts, frequency and type of rulemaking, and
frequency and amount of rural to urban water reallocation for the districts in
the two metro areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's analysis of the Phoenix
and San Antonio cases will help explain failures to alleviate groundwater
overdraft and identify laws and policies that might be worth copying or not by
other states. By comparing centralized and local groundwater districts, permit-
based systems and market-oriented ones, this project will contribute to academic
and policy debates about the merits of decentralized governance and the degree
of "fit" of different organizational forms for managing common pool water
resources. The project also will highlight negative socioeconomic impacts on
rural communities that can result from the reallocation of water from rural to
urban uses. Findings will be disseminated through scholarly publications as well
as through documents developed for stakeholders. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish an independent research career.