* 1302448
* III: Medium: Meta-analysis reinterpreted using causal graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2019
* Judea Pearl, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,120,781.00

Statistical conclusions from research studies may often be misleading due to a
variety of reasons including small sample sizes for the studies or confounding
factors which are unknown to the investigators of the study. One way to reduce
the possibility of misleading conclusions is to combine the results of multiple
research studies using a technique referred to as "meta-analysis." Meta-analysis
is one of the most widely used techniques to infer knowledge from data in
science. The idea behind meta-analysis studies is that the combined statistical
conclusions from multiple research studies reflect the information in all of the
studies and are more likely to be accurate. The conclusions from meta-analyses
are considered "better" or "more likely to generalize" than conclusions from
single studies. However, this notion is not well formalized and formalizing this
question is a goal of this project. In addition, existing meta-analysis methods
do not take into account any knowledge of the similarities and differences
between the studies. Taking advantage of these similarities and differences can
improve the effectiveness of meta-analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
takes advantage of recent developments in the area of "causal inference" which
is the study inferring cause and effect relationships from data. These types of
inferences utilizes a type of graph called a causal graph which graphically
represents cause and effect relationships. This project develops an alternate
framework for meta-analysis based on a novel type of causal graph, a selection
graph. A selection graph formally represents the similarities and differences
between the studies. This project provides a unifying framework and powerful
powerful methodology for meta-analysis. The methods developed in this project
are applied to genetic studies where meta-analyses have discovered thousands of
variants involved in common human disease in the past few
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Causal graphs have had a major impact on the way
causality is taught and understood in cognitive science, statistics, and the
health and social sciences. The proposed research promises to have similar
impacts by transforming the approach to meta-analysis, one of the work horses of
statistical inference in the physical, life and social sciences. The resulting
techniques will be used to perform meta-analyses of genetic studies which can
lead to the discovery of variation involved in disease. The results of the
project, including publications, software, data sets, and course materials will
be made freely available through the project web site:
http://zarlab.cs.ucla.edu/causal-meta-analysis/.