* 1302755
* GV: Small: Collaborative Research: Supporting Knowledge Discovery through a Scientific Visualization Language
* CSE,IIS
* 08/31/2012,10/31/2015
* Jian Chen, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 10/31/2015
* USD 173,593.00

This collaborative research brings together computer scientists from University
of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) and Brown University and neuroscientists
from the University of Mississippi Medical Center (UMMC) to study the design of
a scientific visualization language (SVL). Despite the numerous visualization
approaches already devised, visualization remains more of an art than a science.
Grounded in theories and methods from human-centered computing, machine
learning, and cognitive psychology, this work is to develop and evaluate a
scientific visualization language (SVL) to provide a principled way to help
scientists understand how and why visualizations work. Tools and theories
developed in this project can lead to efficient knowledge discovery to help
neuroscientists study brains using diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging
(DTI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has the following specific objectives and
outcomes: (1) close collaboration with scientists to discover, refine, and
verify a symbol space, (2) a semantic space that describes the relationship
among symbols, (3) a testbed that implements SVL for neuroscientists to compose
visualizations, (4) development of new and enhanced courses at University of
Southern Mississippi and Brown University, and (5) wide dissemination of the
research outcomes through open-source software, experimental data, open labs,
publications, and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected
to have broad impact. It may lead to significantly better approaches to human
knowledge discovery and decision making in many disciplines where visualizations
have found successful application, including neuroscience, biomedicine,
bioinformatics, biology, chemistry, geosciences, business, economics, and
education. Undergraduate and graduate students are expected to participate in
the research through our courses, and student exchanges are planned between USM
and Brown. K-12 students can visit the USM lab while the project is in progress.
Software and results will be disseminated via the project Web site
(https://sites.google.com/site/simplevisualizationlanguage).