* 1302662
* RI: AF: Medium: Learning and Matrix Reconstruction with the Max-Norm and Related Factorization Norms
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Nathan Srebro, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 03/31/2019
* USD 915,986.00

Matrix learning is fundamental in many learning problems. These include problems
that can be directly formulated as learning some unknown matrix, as well as a
broader class of learning problems involving a matrix of parameters. The most
direct matrix learning problem is matrix completion, completing unseen entries
in a partially observed matrix. Matrix completion has recently received much
attention both in practice in collaborative filtering (notably through the
Netflix challenge), and theoretical analysis as an extension to compressed
sensing. Matrix learning has also been used for clustering, transfer and multi-
task learning, and similarity learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dominant
approach to matrix learning in recent years, especially in the context of matrix
completion, has used the matrix trace norm (developed in part by the PI on this
award). Indeed, trace norm-based methods enjoy much success in a variety of
applications. This project develops and studies alternative matrix norms to the
trace-norm, most importantly the promising max-
norm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning with the max-norm was initially presented in
2004 (along with the trace norm), but has not received the same attention,
despite many theoretical and empirical advantages. This project identifies
domains where the max-norm and related norms can be beneficial, develops
computational methods for using these norms, and promotes the adoption of these
norms. A central aim is to develop optimization methods for max-norm regularized
problems that are as efficient as the corresponding methods for trace-norm
regularized problems, such as singular value thresholding and LR-type methods.
Beyond matrix completion, the project applies the max-norm both to problems
where the trace-norm has been previously applied, and in novel settings. Novel
applications include clustering, binary hashing, crowdsourcing, modeling
rankings by a population, and similarity learning.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Research under this project links the machine learning and theory-of-
computation research communities (where SDP relaxations essentially
corresponding to the max-norm have played a significant role in recent years).
The project forms bridges between the communities, enabled in part by cross-
disciplinary tutorials. Through collaboration with sociologists the PIs reach
out to the social sciences, and increase the broad impact of the work by
presenting it in an approachable and useable way to this audience.