* 1302297
* SHF:Medium:Collaborative Research: Electrical-thermal Co-Design of Microfluidically-Cooled 3D IC's
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Muhannad Bakir, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2019
* USD 515,853.00

The technical goal of this project is to develop and refine the micro-fluidic 3D
IC cooling technology. While 3D integration offers significant potential for
improving the performance, energy efficiency and functionality of electronic
systems, the problem of heat removal is significantly exacerbated. Conventional
air cooling alone would be incapable of addressing the future 3D IC heat removal
requirements. In this project, the PIs are investigating use of aggressive
micro-fluidic cooling technology for cooling 3D ICs. The team comprises
researchers from University of Maryland and Georgia Institute of Technology. The
Georgia Tech team would bring forth significant expertise in fabrication and
modeling of 3D ICs with interlayer micro-fluidic cooling. The Maryland team will
bring forth expertise in VLSI design methodologies. The primary focus of this
proposal is: development of techniques and tools for co-design of micro-fluidic
embedded cooling and electrical aspects of 3D ICs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal would directly support several PhD students in different disciplines.
Because of the cross disciplinary nature of this proposal, these students would
need to learn diverse set of topics pertaining to fluidics, chip design and
thermal management. Undergraduates will also be involved through various
programs at Georgia Tech and Maryland. The outcomes of this research will be
published in respectable venues in both electrical/computer engineering and
mechanical engineering. The tools, models and experimental data will also be
made available on the web. The PIs plan to organize tutorials at various
conferences and educational forums. Special emphasis will be givenon minority
involvement via collaboration with local HBCUs.