* 1302930
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Struggles for Sovereignty: Escaped Slaves, Colonial Governance, and Race in the French Caribbean, 1790-1850
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Jamie Winders, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 03/31/2016
* USD 13,268.00

This doctoral dissertation project is about the relationship between resistance
practices of maroons, established communities of escaped slaves, and colonial
governance practices in the Caribbean at the turn of the nineteenth century.
Maroon settlements were typically located in less desirable locations such as
swamps and hills surrounding plantations and were endemic to plantation
landscapes across the Americas during colonial times. While they played a
central role in historical events such as the Haitian Revolution, scholarly
research has largely overlooked them. This project will contribute to this
understudied field by examining the extent to which colonial responses to
marronage, the act of escape among slaves, transformed ideas about race in the
Americas and altered strategies for securing political and economic control over
colonial territories. Findings from this investigation will advance
understandings of how notions of racial difference were produced in the
nineteenth century and later, and how forms of colonial governance took shape in
the Americas. By focusing on the French Caribbean, it contributes to filling a
gap in historical studies that overlook Francophone aspects of the Atlantic
world. This project will investigate three questions about the relationship
between strategies of French colonial governance and resistance practices of
maroons. First, how did colonial authorities understand marronage across the
French Caribbean at the turn of the nineteenth century, particularly in relation
to its role in daily plantation operations and its effects on colonial ideas
about race and sovereignty? Second, what institutional actions, such as new laws
or changing military strategies, did French colonial authorities take in
response to the real or imagined threat of marronage after the Haitian
Revolution, and were these changes implemented in the same way across the French
Caribbean? Third, how did maroons in different parts of the French Caribbean
respond to such changes in governance practices? Through archival research at
key sites in the French colonial archive, this study will analyze historical
documents such as correspondence between colonial administrators, military
reports, and court proceedings pertaining to escaped or fugitive slaves, in an
effort to better understand the geographic complexity of the struggle between
maroons and colonial authorities. In the process, new knowledge about the social
construction of race and struggles over sovereignty in the Atlantic world will
be generated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The struggle between maroons and French
colonial administrators played an important role in shaping the economies,
social structures, and cultural landscapes of the Caribbean, even into the
present. Studying the influence of maroons on such processes can improve our
understanding of how the region developed historically and why it looks the way
that it does today. The role played by maroons, however, is not merely a relic
of the past, as the tensions and legacies of their struggle linger into the
present and have implications for the future. In many places across the
Caribbean and Latin America today descendants of maroons claim a heritage of
resistance to reframe ongoing struggles over cultural, political, and land
rights. This project will help reveal the historical roots of contemporary
attempts to revise maroon narratives. It will also highlight the broader
implications of such efforts for communities of maroon descendants struggling to
maintain their cultural identities and access to traditional lands in an age of
heritage tourism and resurgent national politics. Findings and results generated
by this research will be disseminated through the publication of journal
articles, presentations at professional conferences, and public lectures. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.