* 1302338
* HCC: Medium: Combining Crowdsourcing and Computer Vision for Street-level Accessibility
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* David Jacobs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2019
* USD 1,199,034.00

Despite comprehensive civil rights legislation for Americans with disabilities,
many city streets, sidewalks, and businesses remain inaccessible. The problem is
not just that street-level accessibility affects where and how people travel in
cities but also that there are few, if any, mechanisms to determine accessible
areas of a city a priori. Traditionally, sidewalk assessment has been conducted
via in-person street audits, which are labor intensive and costly, or via
citizen call-in reports, which are done on a reactive basis. And while efforts
exist for visualizing the walk-ability, bike-ability, and availability of public
transport in cities, there are no analogous efforts for accessibility. Thus,
wheelchair users, for example, often avoid going to new areas of a city where
they don't know about accessible routes. The PI plans to address this problem by
means of a two-pronged approach in which he will first develop scalable data
collection methods for acquiring sidewalk accessibility information using a
combination of crowd-sourcing, computer vision, and online map imagery; he will
then use the new data to develop and evaluate a novel set of navigation and map
tools for accessibility. To these ends, the PI and his team will collect and
analyze interview and survey data both from mobility impaired persons and from
ADA streetscape design experts, and will seek to understand how people with
mobility impairments can make use of interactive mapping information to enhance
mobility. They will study methods for efficiently and effectively crowd-sourcing
map labeling tasks, evaluating existing approaches empirically and designing
novel, more effective approaches. They will develop new computer vision
algorithms for the analysis of street scenes, which will be used to help scale
the data collection by focusing human labeling efforts on locations that are
most likely to contain significant problems. And they will design, implement and
evaluate new accessible-aware map-based tools to aid people with mobility
impairments in navigating their cities. As appropriate for each phase of the
research, user evaluations will include both lab and field
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Roughly 30.6 million individuals
in the United States have physical disabilities that affect their ambulatory
activities, and nearly half of these individuals report using an assistive aid
such as a wheelchair, cane, crutches, or walker. The outcomes from this research
will have a significant impact on the ability of these Americans to travel
independently, by transforming the ways in which accessibility information is
collected and visualized for every sidewalk, street, and building fa√ßade in
America. Project outcomes will include a publicly accessible web site where both
the labeled data collected during this work and the new prototype tools
developed will be made available for general use. Furthermore, the PI and Co-PI
will advise and mentor both graduate and undergraduate students throughout the
course of the project, including two PhDs and two MS students who will obtain a
cross-disciplinary education in human-computer interaction and computer vision.