* 1302346
* Modeling and Observational Study of Decadal El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Modulation and Tropical Pacific Decadal Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Yuko Okumura, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 04/30/2017
* USD 482,434.00

The El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon provides an important source
of climate predictability on interannual time scales. The research aims for
mechanistic understanding of the processes important to the decadal modulation
of ENSO and tropical Pacific decadal variability through model experiments and
observational analysis. It is hypothesized that the low frequency components of
stochastic atmospheric variability in the North and South Pacific, namely, the
North Pacific Oscillation (NPO) and Pacific-South American (PSA) variability,
independently drive tropical Pacific decadal variability. Furthermore the
tropical Pacific decadal variability driven by NPO interacts with ENSO and
modulates its amplitude through meridional displacement of the mean
intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ). The PSA variability, on the other hand,
appears to drive ENSO-like decadal variability associated with the Pacific
Decadal Oscillation (PDO), affecting precipitation in the South Pacific
convergence zone (SPCZ). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These hypotheses will be tested
through detailed analysis of climate and atmospheric model experiments. The
model results will also be validated with observational analysis of various
instrumental data and paleoclimate proxy records for the past 100-200 years. The
observational analysis will show if the ITCZ and SPCZ vary independently on
decadal-interdecadal time scales and how their decadal variability is associated
with the decadal ENSO modulation. The results obtained from the project will not
only shed light on the nature of tropical Pacific climate variability but also
provide guidance in understanding the uncertainty of future ENSO behavior and in
interpreting paleoclimate proxy records of ENSO.