* 1302682
* SHF: Medium: Bridging the Software/Hardware Gap Towards Efficient, Heterogeneous, and Predictable Datacenters
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Dean Tullsen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 750,000.00

Much of today's computational capability is housed in massive cloud computing
infrastructures sometimes known as "Warehouse Scale Computers." This transition
has given rise to a new class of emerging applications that run on hundreds of
thousands of powerful cores, and access petabytes or exabytes of storage; these
applications include web search, media streaming, big data analysis, etc. This
centralization of the world's computing means that inefficiencies in those
systems are magnified to a high degree -- in other words, if we can improve the
efficiency of those systems, we measurably improve the efficiency (improve
performance, reduce energy drain) of the world's computing infrastructure. This
research addresses several sources of inefficiency, including increasingly
inaccurate assumptions of hardware homogeneity, unpredictable interference
between applications, and poor models of low-level resource sharing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses these inefficiencies by (1)
creating a heterogeneity-aware execution framework for cloud platforms that not
only accounts for the heterogeneous capabilities of the hardware that are
expected to increase over time, but intentionally employs heterogeneity (at
multiple levels) to improve efficiency in running diverse workloads; (2)
creating a holistic runtime system for shared resource management that accounts
for resource sharing at all levels, including low-level sharing on CMPs and
multithreaded cores, allowing threads to be more aggressively co-scheduled; and
(3) creating new precise prediction models for performance and quality of
service that can drive more intelligent scheduling decisions.