* 1302231
* III: Medium: Mining petabytes of data using cloud computing and a massively parallel cyberinstrument
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Bulent Yener, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

There is a growing need for effective approaches to mining very large, i.e.,
petabyte scale data sets in many areas of science, engineering, and
business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to design, analyze, and
implement a number of fundamental matrix-mining and graph-mining operations that
are scalable to petabyte-sized inputs. Such efforts guarantee the continuation
of the phenomenal growth in analyzing, visualizing, and extracting information
from massive matrices and graphs. Project leverages Rensselaer's unique
computing platform in the form of a massively parallel machine (a Blue Gene/Q)
with access to approximately 1.2 petabytes of storage, as well as a data-staging
layer, named the RAM Storage Accelerator (RSA) with 512 computational nodes and
a a total of 8TBs of fast RAM. The platform is configurable to allow the
computational nodes at the RSA level to be used to pre-process data from the
secondary storage in a cloud-like fashion. The project aims design and analyze
approximation algorithms for matrix and graph mining tasks that follow an
iterative, two-step approach: given petabytescale data, first, using
computationally inexpensive approaches to obtain compact data sketches using the
RSA layer as a "cloud" in order to reduce their size from the petabyte scale to
the terabyte scale. The resulting data sketches are processed using
computationally demanding approaches on the Blue Gene/Q. This process is
iterated using the approximate solutions in order to improve the quality of the
sketches and the approximation guarantees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team expects to release software and libraries for matrix and graph mining
algorithms that implement our two-phase approaches for PB-scale matrices and
graphs. The resulting tools will be applied to the analysis of petabytes of data
from computer simulations of the dynamics of biomolecular systems. The
investigators plan to involve students and researchers from other institutions
in the design, analysis, and development of the proposed methods through an
internship program. The project also offers increased opportunities for
research-based training in Data Analytics and High Performance Computing to
graduate and undergraduate students at RPI. The results of the research will be
made available to the academic community through the project web site.