* 1302423
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Spatial Data and Trajectory Data Management on GPUs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2022
* Jianting Zhang, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,847.00

Although locating and navigation devices embedded in smartphones have already
generated large volumes of location and trajectory data, the next generation of
consumer electronics are likely to generate even larger volumes of location-
dependent data where spatial and trajectory data management techniques will play
critical roles in understanding the data to facilitate decision making. Modern
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are capable of general computing. Current
generation of commodity GPUs have large numbers of processing cores, support
even larger numbers of current threads and provide high memory bandwidth, yet
are available at affordable prices. The massively data parallel computing power
of GPUs makes the hardware ideal for spatial and trajectory data management
which is both data and computing intensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops parallel indexing structures and query processing algorithms for
spatial and trajectory data on GPUs to provide high performance which is crucial
in speeding up existing applications and enabling new scientific and business
inquiries. The project achieves its goals by developing: 1) novel spatial
indexing techniques on GPUs; 2) novel spatial joins on GPUs; 3) novel trajectory
segmentation and indexing techniques and trajectory similarity query processing
techniques on GPUs; and 4) an end-to-end prototype system incorporated with open
source database and GIS systems for performance evaluations and real world
applications. Compared with existing spatial and trajectory data management
systems that are mostly disk-resident and adopt a serial CPU computing model,
the performance of GPU accelerated main-memory based systems is expected to
achieve several orders of magnitude speedup and brings the performance of
spatial and trajectory queries to a new level. The research results are
beneficial to many applications, such as transportation, urban planning, wild
bird ecology, and epidemiology of infectious diseases. Collaboration is carried
out with transportation engineers at the University Transportation Research
Center in New York City and ecology scientists at the University of Oklahoma?s
Earth Observing and Modelling Facility. The project also makes important impacts
on education as it provides training for students in the areas of national
critical needs: database research, high performance computing, GPU programming,
GIS, transportation, mobile and ecology applications. The developed algorithms
and prototype system, real datasets and performance evaluation results are made
available to the public at the Website: http://www.cs.ou.edu/~database.