* 1302336
* NeTS: Medium: Massive Mobile Broadband Communications with Millimeter Wave Picocellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Sundeep Rangan, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project considers cellular systems based in the millimeter wave (mmWave)
bands, between 30 and 300 GHz, where the available bandwidths are much wider
than today?s cellular networks [4-6]. Indeed, available spectrum at these
frequencies can be easily 200 times greater than all cellular allocations today
under 3 GHz. Moreover,the very small wavelengths of mmWave signals combined with
advances in low-power CMOS RF&lt;br/&gt;circuits enable large numbers of
miniaturized antennas to be placed in small dimensions. These multiple antenna
systems can be used to form very high gain, electrically steerable arrays,
fabricated at the base station, in the skin of a cellphone, or even within a
chip. Due to the limited range of mmWave signals, the proposal envisions
cellular systems based on large numbers of mmWave ?picocells? (100 to 200m
radius), each using highly directional antennas for improved range and spatial
separation. Combining dramatically increased bandwidths with spatial
multiplexing gains from the high-dimensional multiple antenna transmissions such
mmWave picocellular systems offer the possibility of of 1000 times more capacity
than current commercial networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
a basis for bringing mmWave technologies to a multiuser, multi-cellular setting
and enable mmWave systems for wide-area networks with mobility. With
partnerships from leading device vendors in this space, the PIs aim to drive the
innovation forward in terms of device and protocol development, and train a new
generation of students at the graduate and undergraduate level in this emerging
area of wireless communications. The enhanced throughput gains that could
approach 1000x current wireless cellular network throughputs would revolutionize
the wireless broadband industry and lead to improved delivery of network
services to users.