* 1302558
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Cost of Failure: Gender and Risk-taking Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Cecilia Ridgeway, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 10,990.00

Cecilia Ridgeway&lt;br/&gt;Susan Fisk&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers study whether women face greater
social and employment penalties for unsuccessful risk-taking behavior than
otherwise similar men, which may provide some insight as to why women generally
take fewer risks than men. The study pairs two interrelated experiments to test
whether women receive greater sanctions for unsuccessful risk-taking behavior
than otherwise similar men. The first experiment has been completed, and found
that women who made riskier bets on their own performance were less likely to be
picked as a research study partner than otherwise identical men. The second
study examines the economic and employment consequences of unsuccessful risk-
taking for women and men. Non-profit lenders and high-tech workers will evaluate
fictitious profiles of women and men in the workplace. These profiles include
examples of unsuccessful risk-taking behavior: for instance, starting a business
that failed after a year, or introducing a new initiative at a corporation that
had the potential to be very profitable, but which ended up losing money. The
goal is to see whether women are viewed as less hirable, competent, fundable,
and likeable than otherwise identical men if they have taken an unsuccessful
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
has implications for gender inequality, as risk-taking behavior is powerfully
tied to resources, power, and status. Indeed, one often has to take a risk to
reap a reward. It is likely that women engage in fewer risk-taking endeavors if
they face greater penalties then men, whether through decreased employment
prospects, lessened funding opportunities, or dislike by others. If this is true
many of the individuals with the most status, power and resources in society
(e.g. successful businesspersons, entrepreneurs, investors, and politicians)
took risks to achieve their current positions. Sanctions against women for risk-
taking may effectively limit the opportunities they have to acquire these valued
resources. Beyond increasing gender inequality, this phenomenon may be
decreasing economic efficiency. If talented women take fewer risks due to fear
of sanctioning, society may have fewer innovative ideas and products, businesses
that create jobs, and effective leaders. Conversely, if men face fewer
sanctions, it may encourage some men to engage in high-risk, high-reward
behavior that leads to ruin for themselves or others (e.g. the recent financial
crisis). Awareness of this phenomenon could potentially allow institutions to
improve their decision-making processes to increase efficiency.