* 1302563
* CSR:  Medium:  Multicore Real Time Virtual Partitions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Marco Caccamo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,049,481.00

Multicore computer chips pose new challenges for hard real-time systems, because
of the complex temporal coupling between processing cores' shared last level
cache, shared memory driver bandwidth, and shared I/O bandwidth. The project
addresses this challenge by 1) integrating resource partition mechanisms and
their implementation, 2) optimizing resource allocation algorithms, and 3)
developing schedulability analysis technology to create real time virtual
partitions (RTVPs) on each core. The goal is for each RTVP to be able to be
analyzed as if it were a standalone single core chip, independent of the
workloads in other cores and partitions. In a multicore chip, a task's worst
case execution time (WCET) depends on the partition's allocated memory driver
bandwidth, the last level cache size, and I/O bandwidth. To optimize the
resources allocated to a RTVP, one needs to know if the tasks in the RTVP are
schedulable with a given resource allocation. To perform schedulability
analysis, one needs to know tasks' WCETs. To determine tasks' WCETs, one needs
to know the resources allocated to the RTVP. The approach taken by this project
to break such circular dependency is to first find an initial pessimistic but
feasible solution, then apply an interactive optimization method to find a near
optimal solution. Our nation has a large body of certified real time safety and
mission critical software developed for single core chips, using certification
procedures developed for single core chips. Now those chips are becoming
obsolete, and newer chips are being designed with slower clock rates but
multiple cores. Without a technology like RTVP, the change of workload in one
core could adversely impact the schedulability of tasks in other cores,
triggering the recertification of applications in other cores. The time and
costs of such recertification is economically unsustainable. This problem is
especially critical for the aircraft industry. To help ensure the usability of
this project's research outcomes, the project team has collaborative contacts
with Freescale Semiconductor whose multicore chips are widely used in avionics,
Lockheed Martin who develops multicore chip based avionics for the US Department
of Defense, and with Rockwell Collins who cooperates with Boeing and the FAA on
the development and certification of multicore chip based civilian avionics, as
well as the FAA. Key elements of the research are to be incorporated into the
educational program of the host institution.