* 1302449
* CCF: SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: A Static and Dynamic Verification Framework for Parallel Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2018
* USD 431,994.00

Human society is faced with an increasing number of problems
including&lt;br/&gt;stubborn diseases and international security/climate
threats. The&lt;br/&gt;computer simulations and advanced data management methods
necessary to&lt;br/&gt;solving these societal problems can only be realized
through increased&lt;br/&gt;use of parallel computing at all system scales,
including desktops,&lt;br/&gt;servers and the cloud. Efficient large-scale
parallel computing&lt;br/&gt;however requires advanced parallel programming
methods. Such methods,&lt;br/&gt;unfortunately, have a greater proclivity for
software bugs that&lt;br/&gt;increase cost through lost cycles on super-
computers and these same&lt;br/&gt;bugs undermine confidence in simulation
results. This research&lt;br/&gt;addresses the challenge of developing parallel
computing software by&lt;br/&gt;creating new scalable methods to support
advanced parallel programming&lt;br/&gt;models that provide rigorous guarantees
on program correctness. The&lt;br/&gt;societal impacts of this work stem from
increasing reliability of&lt;br/&gt;software powering the national
infrastructure, advanced educational&lt;br/&gt;methods to train future
generations, and pedagogical material in the&lt;br/&gt;form of course notes and
software for broad dissemination. It also&lt;br/&gt;helps maintain the United
States in a leadership situation with&lt;br/&gt;respect to the available talent
pool in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing rigorous guarantees on
correctness of existing parallel&lt;br/&gt;computing software requires that two
classes of methods be developed,&lt;br/&gt;evaluated, and taught widely:
scalable code-level (static) checking&lt;br/&gt;methods, and downstream detailed
(dynamic) checking methods. This&lt;br/&gt;project develops these novel and
much-needed correctness checking&lt;br/&gt;methods around the Habanero Java
programming and compilation&lt;br/&gt;system. The research is to augment the
system with correctness&lt;br/&gt;obligations emitted during compilation and
checked at all later stages&lt;br/&gt;of translation and deployment. A key
highlight of the project's&lt;br/&gt;approach is that it allows some of the
correctness obligations to be&lt;br/&gt;checked statically in the context of
safe subsets of Habanero Java.&lt;br/&gt;Obligations that are not able to be
statically checked, especially for&lt;br/&gt;larger subsets of the Habanero
language, are marked for checking&lt;br/&gt;dynamically through novel active-
testing methods. An Operational&lt;br/&gt;Semantics written in the Coq notation
lends cohesion to the work by&lt;br/&gt;ensuring that the division of
correctness checking between static and&lt;br/&gt;dynamic techniques is sound.
In summary, this research helps advance&lt;br/&gt;the science of parallel
programming in terms of rigorous correctness&lt;br/&gt;checking methods, while
at the same time contributing to the broad&lt;br/&gt;practice of programming at
all scales from desktop to cloud&lt;br/&gt;computing and high-end scientific
simulations.