* 1302778
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Networks and Organized Crime
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Donald Tomaskovic-Devey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2014
* USD 7,293.00

SES-1302778&lt;br/&gt;Donald Tomaskovic-Devey&lt;br/&gt;Chris
Smith&lt;br/&gt;University of Massachusetts Amherst &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation improvement research continues to build a unique relational
database on early 1900s Chicago organized crime. To date, over 4,000 pages of
archival documents and secondary sources have been coded for information on more
than 2,800 individuals and their nearly 14,000 social ties. This dissertation
asks: How did relationships between men and women contribute to the structures,
activities, and dynamics of organized crime groups in early 1900s Chicago?
Social network methods focus this research agenda on three substantive and
testable questions: (1) What were women's roles in organized crime networks? (2)
Were women structurally important to organized crime networks? (3) Were there
locations of equality for men and women in illicit networks? Answers to these
questions have the potential to change theory by adding gender and family to
social network scholarship and revealing locations of gender equality in illicit
organizations during a historical moment when formal organizations were severely
gender segregated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a network analysis
approach to examine women?s roles and positions in organized crime before,
during, and after Prohibition in Chicago. Social network analysis offers
theoretical and methodological tools to investigate organized crime groups as
enmeshed systems of relationships between high profile criminals, but also
family members, workers, and lesser-known individuals. At the boundaries of
Chicago's early 1900s organized crime networks were configurations of wives,
girlfriends, sisters, mothers, daughters, and female cousins and neighbors who
contributed to organized crime's size, strength, structure, and durability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are twofold. First,
this project brings network science to the study of organized crime groups,
which is a growing information gathering strategy for law enforcement. Applying
network techniques to a historic topic of broad public interest "gangster era
Chicago" improves our understanding of organized crime groups and provides
relevant insights to public policy and law enforcement tactics. Second, this
project continues the building efforts of a historic relational database on a
topic of popular interest. Upon completion of analysis and publication, this
database will be archived online and made publicly available.