* 1302873
* California State University Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP) Senior Alliance (2013-2018)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Jill Trainer, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2018
* USD 4,000,000.00

This project is a continuation of the NSF-supported California State University-
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP). Initiated in
1993-1994, CSU-LSAMP is an alliance of the 23 campuses of the California State
University (CSU) system, which supports a coordinated and comprehensive system-
wide approach to broadening participation in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. CSU-LSAMP's overall goal for the project is
to contribute to the development of a STEM workforce, which is broadly
inclusive, globally competitive, and prepared to participate at the frontiers of
science. Specifically, CSU-LSAMP aims to: &lt;br/&gt;a)Enhance the academic and
professional preparation of CSU-LSAMP participants, most of whom are students
from underrepresented minorities (URM), for careers in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;b)Further improve persistence and graduation rates for CSU-LSAMP
participants. &lt;br/&gt;c)Increase aggregate production of STEM degrees awarded
by the CSU to URM students.&lt;br/&gt;d)Increase the number of CSU-LSAMP
students who advance to STEM graduate study. &lt;br/&gt;e)Document, disseminate,
and replicate undergraduate intervention models that increase access to, and
success in STEM baccalaureate degree programs and facilitate admissions to STEM
graduate programs.