* 1302770
* Collaborative Research: Texas-Oklahoma Representations and Automorphic forms (TORA)
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Charles Conley, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

The conference Texas-Oklahoma Representations and Automorphic forms IV will take
place on March 23-24, 2013, at the University of North Texas. Additional
information can be found on the confernce website:
http://www.math.unt.edu/~richter/TORA/TORA4.html

Over the last century, the theories of automorphic forms and representations
have grown enormously. Important applications impact various fields of research,
ranging from number theory, coding theory, algebraic geometry, and topology to
Kac-Moody algebras and quantum field theory. The interplay of automorphic forms
and representation theory has been especially fruitful, and many surprising and
deep results have emerged. The TORA conference series will emphasize the
interplay between automorphic forms and representations, both in the classical
and adelic languages, and related topics like analytic number theory and
harmonic analysis.

The TORA mathematics conference series consists of semi-annual meetings hosted
by the University of North Texas, Oklahoma State University, and the University
of Oklahoma on a rotating basis. This award provides support for three weekend
conferences, one at the University of North Texas in Spring 2013 (TORA IV), one
at Oklahoma State University in Fall 2013 (TORA V), and another at the
University of Oklahoma in Spring 2014 (TORA VI). Each conference will feature
two or three prominent guest speakers from outside the Texas-Oklahoma region, in
addition to other participants including students, post-doctoral researchers,
and junior faculty. Regional graduate students and researchers will also give
talks describing their work. These conferences will facilitate collaborations
and interactions among the students and researchers in the region who work in
the areas of Automorphic Forms, Representation Theory, and Number Theory.