* 1302285
* III: Medium: Geometric and topological approaches to biomolecular structure and dynamics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Yang Wang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,016,489.00

Experimental exploration of self-organizing biomolecular systems, such as
viruses, molecular motors and proteins in Alzheimer's disease, has been a
dominating driving force in scientific discovery and innovation in the past few
decades. Unfortunately, quantitative understanding of biomolecular structure,
function, and dynamics severely lags behind the pace of the experimental
progress. An average protein in human body has about 5500 atoms, which, together
with its surrounding water molecules, involve about 100,000 degrees of freedom.
The dimensionality increases dramatically for complex biological processes and
biomolecular systems. The real time structure optimization, dynamic simulation,
and data analysis of molecular motors and/or viruses in human cells are
intractable with full-atom models at present. A crucial question is how to
reduce the number of degrees of freedom, while retaining the fundamental physics
in complex biological systems. The proposed research may be transformative. As
the first differential geometry based multiscale/ multiresolution approach to
biomolecular systems, it will open a new direction and foster similar approaches
in multiscale modeling of other large data systems in future research.
Additionally, new persistently stable manifold strategy can be applied to other
fields, such as image processing, computer aided design, and fluid mechanics.
Furthermore, the proposed new coupled equations will lead to new research topics
in geometry, topology, PDE analysis and mathematical biology. Finally, our new
theoretical framework is directly integrated into popular software packages to
ensure extensive usage by the community of researchers throughout mathematics,
computer science and biology. The proposed research has a solid educational
component. The project will support the training of student and junior
researchers in mathematical modeling, data analysis and algorithm development.
The enhancement of curricula from the proposed research is planned as a
continuation of PIs teaching-research practice. Special curriculum development,
outreach program and annual workshops are designed to further broaden
educational and societal impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research addresses grand challenges in the structure, function and dynamics of
self-organizing biomolecular systems due to exceptionally massive data sets.
These challenges are tackled through the introduction of a new differential
geometry based multiscale model, together with a multiresolution coarse grained
method based on persistently stable manifolds in molecular dynamics data. This
proposal offers innovative new approaches to an important area in massive data
management, dimensionality reduction, computational mathematics and mathematical
modeling. This project uses a number of geometric and topological approaches to
address the scaling issues.. First, the multidisciplinary team will use
multiscale framework which reduces the dimensionality and number of degrees of
freedom by a macroscopic continuum description of the aquatic environment, and a
microscopic discrete description of biomolecules. To further reduce the
dimensionality of excessively large biomolecular systems, they introduce a
multiresolution coarse-grained approach based on persistently stable manifolds
in molecular dynamics data. A total free energy functional is introduced to
bring the macroscopic surface tension and microscopic potential interactions on
an equal footing. The differential geometry theory of surfaces is utilized to
describe the interface between macroscopic and microscopic domains. Potential
driven geometric flows are constructed to minimize the total free energy
functional. Euler characteristic and total curvature are employed to analyze the
topology and corresponding function of biomolecules. Frenet frames are utilized
to characterize the local geometry and associated stable manifolds in dynamical
data of biomolecular systems. Machine learning algorithms are proposed to
extract stable manifolds. In the last step, a strategy is introduced to explore
the persistence of stable manifolds, which provides the assurance for the
reliability of the coarse grained model. In addition to promising and extensive
preliminary results illustrating the power of this approach, extensive
validation and application have been proposed to ensure that this methodology
yields robust and powerful tools for biomolecular structure optimization and
dynamical simulation.