* 1302067
* Collaborative Research: Paleoanthropological investigation of the Ledi-Geraru hominin site (Afar, Ethiopia)
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2015
* David Braun, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2015
* USD 60,131.00

The northern Awash region of Ethiopia is famous for its abundant fossil remains
of the early hominin Australopithecus afarensis (e.g., "Lucy"), as well as
evidence for the origins of our own genus, Homo, and the world's earliest stone
tools. Due to a regional unconformity, however, appropriately aged sedimentary
deposits that bridge the critical interval between A. afarensis and Homo
unfortunately are missing from most of the northern Awash. This research project
builds upon recent paleoanthropological work in the Afar Ledi-Geraru (ALG)
region of the northern Awash that has identified paleontologically-rich
sediments that fill this time gap, providing a rare window into understanding
the origins and the evolutionary and paleoenvironmental contexts of early Homo,
and of lithic technology, a hallmark of the human lineage. This field project
also contributes to our understanding of the interval between 2.5 and 3.0
million years ago, one of the most fascinating periods in human evolutionary
history, and one which encompasses both the first and last appearance dates of
several other hominin species as well as significant changes in mammalian fauna
and flora throughout Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique preservation of the
ALG sequence enables a multidisciplinary team of paleoanthropologists,
paleontologists, archaeologists, and geologists to 1) determine the
paleoenvironmental context directly relevant to the morphological change and
last appearance of A. afarensis, and the subsequent appearance of early Homo and
stone tools in the northern Awash region; 2) extend spatial analyses of A.
afarensis habitats from adjacent paleoanthropological sites into the ALG region
to better understand the lateral variation in paleoenvironments; 3) collect
evidence from fauna, hominin-modified fauna, and artifacts that existed in the
ALG region during the earliest development of lithic technology; and 4) utilize
transect excavations where potential hominin-modified bones were recovered, to
document further evidence of possible early carnivory among
hominins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes training in relevant field
and lab techniques for a diverse group of graduate students, including women,
Ethiopians, and other Africans, students typically under-represented in this
field. Data from this project also will be incorporated into teaching materials
developed for K-12 teachers via internet download from the Arizona State
University Outreach website.