* 1302719
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: GOALI: Adaptive and Flexible Spectrum Optical Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2018
* USD 899,047.00

This project will study and develop technology for Elastic Optical Networks
(EONs). In EONs flexible amounts of spectral bandwidth may be allocated to each
data channel without requiring adherence to a fixed wavelength grid. Such an
approach is well-suited for supporting a wide range of dynamic traffic demands
in a bandwidth-efficient manner. Key enabling technologies, optical arbitrary
waveform generation&lt;br/&gt;(OAWG) and optical arbitrary waveform measurement
(OAWM), will enable elastic optical networking over a large spectrum by dividing
the spectrum into spectral slices and dynamically processing information at
lower rates compatible with CMOS electronics. The project will leverage these
technologies as a basis for innovative hardware and software solutions for EON
technology, architectures, protocols, network control and management, system
integration, and testbed integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in the
basic architecture and technology for optical networking is important for US
competitiveness. The project will work with several US-based industrial
organizations as a means of technology transfer. The research results and
publications will likely to impact standardization activities of flexible grid
networking (e.g. International Telecommunication Union ITU-T SG15 on flex grid).
The project will link education and research and serve as a rich platform for
crossdisciplinary education in optical and higher-layer networking, and in
computer engineering.