* 1302715
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Consequences of Status Inconsistency.
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Alexander Watts, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 11,919.00

SES-1302715 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Shelley Correll&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Alec
Watts&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Across the social
sciences, research has demonstrated that status is an omnipresent and
consequential cultural concept associated with both social categories (e.g.,
race, gender) and social roles (e.g., occupations). This dissertation research
is concerned with the interactions of status, focusing specifically on the
consequences of a person occupying a social role that is culturally associated
with a level of generalized status, respect or esteem that is inconsistent with
their social category. Examples of such individuals are black women engineers,
stay-at-home dads, male secretaries, and college students who pursue majors
atypical for their gender. This project refines the concept of status
inconsistency and develops an original, general theoretical model of the
consequences of occupying a status-inconsistent role. The project is centered on
three primary research questions: 1) How does status inconsistency bias
judgment? 2) What are the tangible consequences of these biases? And 3) In what
ways do justifications for being status-inconsistent moderates these biases and
consequences? The research will use social science experimental techniques to
measure participants' perceptions, attitudes, and justifications of those
responses in a variety of contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The contribution of this project is to develop a single,
general model of how status inconsistency can shape an individual's experiences
in a social role. The generalizability of the model allows for its applicability
across a vast range of situations, such as diversity recruitment in higher
education and high status occupations, as minority individuals are often status-
inconsistent in these settings. As another example, stay-at-home dads are
status-inconsistent and the negative social consequences men face as caretakers
may be partly responsible for the dearth of men being more involved in housework
and childcare. Thus, this project contributes to understanding inequalities in
education, workplaces, and in homes.