* 1302693
* SHF:Medium: Energy Efficient and Stochastically Robust Resource Allocation for Heterogeneous Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Howard Siegel, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2017
* USD 850,000.00

Parallel and distributed computing systems are often a heterogeneous mix of
machines. As these systems continue to expand rapidly in capability, their
computational energy expenditure has skyrocketed, requiring elaborate cooling
facilities, which themselves consume significant energy. The need for energy-
efficient resource management is thus paramount. Moreover, these systems
frequently experience degraded performance and high power consumption due to
circumstances that change unpredictably, such as thermal hotspots caused by load
imbalances or sudden machine failures. As the complexity of systems grows, so
does the importance of making system operation robust against these
uncertainties. The goal of this award is to study stochastic-based models,
metrics, and algorithmic strategies for deriving resource allocations that are
energy-efficient and robust. The research focus is on deriving stochastic
robustness and energy models from real-world data from heterogeneous computing
machines; applying stochastic models for resource management strategies that co-
optimize performance, robustness, computation energy, and cooling energy;
developing novel schemes for real-time thermal modeling; and driving and
validating the research with feedback collected from real-world petascale
systems (Yellowstone at National Center of Atmospheric Research and Jaguar at
Oak Ridge National Lab) and terascale systems (Colorado State University's ISTeC
cluster and clusters at Oak Ridge National Lab).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is expected to realize resource management strategies that are
resilient to various sources of uncertainty at run-time while also considering
the dynamics of temperature variations and cooling capacity to meet performance
guarantees with unprecedented gains in system energy-efficiency in high
performance computing environments. By lowering the energy costs and impact of
uncertainties associated with computing, this research will ultimately render
high performance computing accessible to a wider population of researchers and
scientific problems. In the long term, the theoretical foundations and tools
that emerge from this research will play a vital role in achieving the grand
promise of sustainable computing at extreme scales within realistic power
budgets. The broader impacts of the research include: incorporate research
results into all levels of teaching, including graduate, undergraduate,
secondary, and even elementary education; increase participation by
underrepresented groups; and foster close ties with industry and government labs
to transfer the developed knowledge quickly into real-world deployments.