* 1302114
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Distributed coherence: fundamental building blocks, system concepts, and experimental demonstration
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Upamanyu Madhow, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 06/30/2018
* USD 345,490.00

Over the past two decades, advances in multi-antenna wireless systems have
opened up the possibility of tremendous increases in wireless communication
throughputs. The practical realization of these increases in real-world wireless
networks is constrained by size and cost considerations that limit the number of
antennas, especially for mobile devices. This research aims to achieve the gains
from multi-antenna techniques in a distributed fashion by having groups of
wireless transceivers pool together and cooperatively act like a virtual antenna
array. The concept of virtual arrays has broad transformative potential for
wireless networks by extending the numerous benefits of multi-antenna systems to
networks of single-antenna devices. We will prototype and demonstrate virtual
array techniques experimentally on a software-defined radio platform, and we
plan to share our implementations as reusable building blocks to stimulate
technology transition and to promote interactions between the academic, open-
source software community and radio hobbyist communities. The elements of a
virtual array have an unknown, typically time-varying, geometry and are driven
by independent oscillators, each with stochastic drift; the main technical
challenge is in maintaining distributed coherence in the array in the presence
of these effects. While this is a very challenging problem, recent results have
demonstrated the feasibility of virtual arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will establish a solid theoretical foundation for distributed coherence
and chart a clear path to technology transfer by applying the theory and
techniques to the cross-layer design of concept systems based on virtual antenna
arrays. Specifically we will develop a state space framework for tracking and
prediction of oscillator dynamics and mobility, and scalable architectures for
distributed transmission and reception appropriate for large distributed arrays
of low-cost single-antenna devices. We will also identify fundamental tradeoffs
and scaling laws for virtual arrays. We will apply and integrate the theory and
techniques to two concept systems of great societal significance: Distributed
base station provides multi-antenna capabilities even for low carrier
frequencies where standard antenna arrays would be too bulky (e.g., white space
frequencies). Distributed 911, enables a cluster of nodes to communicate with a
possibly moving distant rescue vehicle which would be out of range for any one
of the nodes. Our goal is to perform design and performance evaluation in
sufficient detail to clear conceptual hurdles for implementation.