* 1302209
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climate Change and the Disease Ecologies of US Dengue Fever
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Melinda Butterworth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2016
* USD 16,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates the socio-ecological
factors underpinning the changing geography and epidemiology of dengue fever,
focusing on the recent dengue fever outbreaks in Key West, Florida. Dengue
fever, a viral disease spread by infected Aedes mosquitoes, was once thought to
be close to eradication. However, the disease has seen a global resurgence in
recent years with increasing cases and a broadened geographical distribution.
Typically conceived of as a disease of poor, urban areas in developing
countries, outbreaks have also occurred in rural communities, arid and sub-
tropical climates, and in wealthier developed countries, including several
states in the southern US. These outbreaks have generated calls within the
health community to better understand the changing geographic and
epidemiological dimensions of dengue fever. A broadened understanding of dengue
ecology is particularly important amidst projections that climate change may
facilitate infectious disease spread through temperature and precipitation
impacts on the mosquito and virus. Particularly important to discussions of
climate and disease are the socio and political contexts of outbreaks that
influence the abilities of local actors to respond to these projections. This
includes social causes of vulnerability, and citizen and institutional responses
to epidemics. Of particular importance is understanding the patchwork of actors
involved in managing, controlling, and eradicating mosquito breeding spaces,
often with divergent interests and goals. As the most recent outbreak to occur
in the US, Key West provides an ideal location to study the socio-ecological
factors of dengue in a place of recent re-emergence. To do so, this project uses
a mixed methods approach that combines dynamic mosquito modeling using climate
data and climate change scenarios with neighborhood focus groups, and interviews
with residents, public health and vector control officials. The ultimate goals
of this research are to identify: 1. Current and projected future impacts of
climate on dengue virus and mosquito populations in Key West and other parts of
the southern US, 2. How mosquitoes are differentially managed across the city,
3. How socio-ecological variables constrain or enable individuals to adhere to
dengue and mosquito control messages, and 4. How control strategies and
responsibilities are understood and internalized by local officials and
citizens. A fuller understanding of the socio-ecological conditions surrounding
the Key West outbreaks will shed light on the causes of similar outbreaks in
places such as Texas and Hawaii. Additionally, the results of the study will
highlight important complexities to consider in discussions of vulnerability and
adaptation to disease under climate change in the southern US, and more globally
as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public health programs are continuously
confronted with multiple community health issues to address. Changing socio-
ecological conditions can shift the borders of infectious diseases, re-situating
nuisance vectors as health concerns. Confronting climate change projections will
require long-term planning and adaptive strategies that consider not only
biophysical characteristics of the mosquito, but take into account processes
that can create and eliminate social vulnerability. Understanding the
complexities surrounding mosquito control will be of use for counties at risk
for dengue emergence, as well as other diseases established in the US such as
West Nile virus, La Crosse encephalitis, or nuisance mosquitoes. The findings of
this work will be available through academic journals, public talks, and science
outreach blogs. The climate scenarios generated will be made available to assist
with long-term planning efforts. This doctoral dissertation research improvement
award will provide support to enable an exceptionally able student to establish
an independent research career in a high-visibility field of national and
international relevance to major social and environmental challenges.