* 1302360
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Decision-Making on Uncertain Spatial-Temporal Fields: Modeling, Planning and Control with Applications to Adaptive Sampling
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Marin Kobilarov, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 05/31/2018
* USD 199,605.00

Inland bodies of freshwater are a resource that is critical for the Nation's
health and safety. This project is developing a new spatio-temporal field
representation suitable for modeling, planning and control under uncertainty in
order to improve monitoring of such water systems. The project's focus is on a
reconfigurable aquatic sensor-actuator network designed to capture data from
coupled physical, chemical, and biological processes that occur across space and
time-scales. The key advantages of this sensor-actuator network in its
application to this domain include synoptic volume coverage, adaptive sampling,
flexible control and robustness to component failure. The research objective is
to build models of dynamic processes for which high resolution sampling is
necessary at special locations. Toward this end, this project is contributing
new methods, data-structures, algorithms, and implementations validated by field
testing a heterogeneous system consisting of stationary and mobile (robotic)
underwater node. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides unique
interdisciplinary opportunities for education of both graduate and undergraduate
students via new course work that blends projects and research topics directly
into courses and newly developed seminars. It provides a multi-disciplinary
experience for students while developing their engineering skills. Relevant
components of computer science, computer engineering, and mechanical engineering
are integrated together by using the project's aquatic platform and experimental
scenarios as a focal point. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances the
state-of-the-art for such systems because it integrates low-level dynamic
processes with high-level planning and distributed optimization. The research
represents a change in the scale of robotic aquatic sampling away from immense
bodies of&lt;br/&gt;water in oceanographic research, toward bodies of water that
have a more immediate affect on our well-being as they are sources and stores of
drinking water. The impact of datasets which lead to better understanding of
managed and natural inlets, differing topography including dam walls and man-
made structures, regions of turbulence, and seasonal algal growth are immense.