* 1302828
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Risk and Consequences of Parental AbsenceDoctoral
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Sara McLanahan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1302828&lt;br/&gt;Sara Mclanahan&lt;br/&gt;Lauren
Gaydosh&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the
literature on family structure in American sociology focuses on the effects of
father absence as a result of divorce or single motherhood. While prolific and
robust, the research has focused on the nuclear family and largely ignored the
role of kin and extended family as participants in childrearing. The notable
exceptions are primarily ethnographic studies that are unable to quantify the
influence of complicated family structures on the population at large. The
demographic literature on African families focuses similarly on the negative
outcomes associated with non-two parent family structures Rather than focusing
on divorce and single motherhood as the primary causes of parental absence as in
the US, this literatures focuses overwhelmingly on AIDS orphanhood. The research
in both the United States and Africa therefore tends to focus on the negative
consequences of particular family structures resulting from specific causes of
parental absence. This dissertation project investigates parental absence and
considers children's experience with parental absence, how this absence
influences children's health and education, and how parents make decisions about
their children's living arrangements. The researchers are using longitudinal
data from demographic surveillance surveys in Tanzania to provide the first
quantification of the risk of parental absence to which children are exposed, to
decompose the various sources of this risk, and identify the consequences of
parental absence for children's wellbeing. Drawing from original qualitative
data, the researchers will study how families negotiate childrearing
arrangements in response to the needs of children exposed to parental absence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this
research have implications beyond Tanzania. Recent attempts to institutionalize
support for children experiencing parental absence in sub-Saharan Africa have
focused on AIDS orphans to the exclusion of children exposed to parental absence
for other reasons. This approach ignores the role of familial safety nets in
caring for children, and policies have consequently been of limited success. The
results are relevant for all countries trying to improve the welfare of children
in the face of social changes that challenge traditional family forms. In
addition, the importance of kin in Tanzania may demonstrate the taken for
granted role of extended family members in child rearing practices in the United
States. Finally, the successes and shortcomings of the Tanzanian family can shed
light on solutions to the problems faced by American families