* 1302688
* NeTS: Medium: KnowOps-Making Network Management and Operations Software Defined
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Sneha Kasera, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,140,746.00

The operational complexity of networks and the resulting operational expense
(OPEX) count among the top challenges faced by network operators. This
complexity arises, in part, because of the scale and continued growth of modern
networks, the inherent complexity and intricate dependencies of the protocols
that these networks run, and the increased expectations of network users due to
the increasing importance that network connectivity and networked services play
in society. This complexity has been heightened by recent developments that make
networks much more dynamic, adding a whole new dimension to the complexities of
network management and operations (M&amp;O). The resulting state of affairs acts
to impede the pace of innovation and change in networks. The research on network
M&amp;O has not kept pace with the research transforming the networks
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses these issues by
designing and building a Knowledge-Centric Software-Defined Network Management
and Operations architecture (KnowOps). KnowOps will represent a significant step
in moving M&amp;O towards fully autonomic operation. The project will generalize
database-like abstractions to create a network operations fabric (NOF) as a
systematic and principled foundation for comprehensive network management and
operations. The PIs will combine this foundation with information centric data
mining methods to create a structured information base which captures, in a
systematic manner, the status of the network and expose it to other network
management functions. The end result will be a knowledge base capable of
systematically capturing operational procedures and policies as specified by
domain experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network OPEX is a major challenge for
continued penetration of digital technologies into application areas in the home
and small business. The project will involve collaboration with a large,
national network operator but also with a small, mostly rural carrier. Improved
network management tools are particularly important for smaller regional
operators serving cyber-disadvantaged communities, who often do not have the
technical breadth and depth of larger operators, but who, nonetheless, face the
same operational challenges.