* 1302596
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Self-Coordination in Cooperative Smart Camera Networks Incorporating System-On-Chip Reconfiguration
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Christophe Bobda, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 538,697.00

The number of cameras in our lives and the scale of camera systems are
continuously increasing as technological advances and falling prices in camera
systems create new opportunities and applications. In addition to personal uses,
cameras are widely employed in military, public and commercial applications for
surveillance and statistics gathering. There are an estimated 30 million
surveillance cameras in the U.S. capturing 4 billion hours of footage a week.
Besides the traditional use of cameras for surveillance purposes, projects such
as Google Glass are driving the development of miniature and low-cost cameras
with local processing and communication capabilities. For future camera systems,
local intelligence and autonomous collaboration among components will provide
the capability to solve more complex tasks, which requires a unifying
perspective to simultaneously address the challenges of hardware/software co-
design, real-time operation, high accuracy and self-coordination and self-
adaptation in run-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a holistic
and novel approach for the design, deployment and self-coordination of a set of
collaborative embedded smart cameras, with the goal of monitoring large areas
with the highest accuracy and smallest latency. One objective is designing
synthesis approaches and computing infrastructure for the embedded smart cameras
that allow hardware restructuring and systematic swapping of tasks between
hardware and software on-the-fly. Another objective is to develop self-
configuration approaches to autonomously adapt system behavior and optimally
deal with run-time environmental changes, including node
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to enable development
of new real-time, fully automated, collaborative and highly accurate camera
systems by providing a systematic approach for the design and deployment of such
systems, and testing new methods at laboratory and campus scales. Potential
applications include smart surveillance systems, multi-camera-based driver
assistance systems, assistance in nursing homes, quality control on production
lines based on 3D reconstruction, and remote surgery. The project also
integrates research with the undergraduate and graduate programs of two
institutions and contributes towards increasing the involvement of under-
represented groups through the University of Arkansas Engineering Career
Awareness Program, Arkansas Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation and
George Washington Carver Project, and the WiSE program at Syracuse University.
Students from under-represented groups are to be recruited and involved in the
design, implementation, and deployment of collaborative multi-camera networks.