* 1302435
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: New Approaches to Robustness in High-Dimensions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Constantine Caramanis, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2019
* USD 695,369.00

Rapid development of large-scale data collection technology
has&lt;br/&gt;ignited research into high-dimensional machine learning.
For&lt;br/&gt;instance, the problem of designing recommender systems, such as
those&lt;br/&gt;used by Amazon, Netflix and other on-line companies,
involves&lt;br/&gt;analyzing large matrices that describe users' behavior in
past&lt;br/&gt;situations. In sociology, researchers are interested in
fitting&lt;br/&gt;networks to large-scale data sets, involving hundreds or
thousands of&lt;br/&gt;individuals. In medical imaging, the goal is to
reconstruct&lt;br/&gt;complicated phenomena (e.g., brain images; videos of a
beating heart)&lt;br/&gt;based on a minimal number of incomplete and possibly
corrupted&lt;br/&gt;measurements. Motivated by such applications, the goal of
this&lt;br/&gt;research is to develop and analyze models and algorithms
for&lt;br/&gt;extracting relevant structure from such high-dimensional data sets
in&lt;br/&gt;a robust and scalable fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research leverages tools from convex optimization, signal&lt;br/&gt;processing,
and robust statistics. It consists of three main thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Model
restrictiveness: Successful methods for high-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;data exploit
low-dimensional structure; however, many real-world&lt;br/&gt;problems fall
outside the scope of existing models. This proposal&lt;br/&gt;significantly
extends the basic set-up by allowing for multiple&lt;br/&gt;structures, leading
to computationally efficient algorithms while&lt;br/&gt;eliminating negative
effects of model mismatch. (2) Non-ideal data:&lt;br/&gt;Missing data are
prevalent in real-world problems, and can cause major&lt;br/&gt;breakdowns in
standard algorithms for high-dimensional data. The&lt;br/&gt;second thrust
devises relaxations and greedy approaches for these&lt;br/&gt;non-convex
problems. (3) Arbitrary Outliers: Gross errors can arise&lt;br/&gt;for various
reasons, including fault-prone sensors and manipulative&lt;br/&gt;agents. The
third thrust proposes efficient and randomized algorithms&lt;br/&gt;to address
arbitrary outliers.