* 1302012
* LSAMP BRIDGE TO THE DOCTORATE - ILLINOIS LSAMP BRIDGE TO THE DOCTORATE AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT CHICAGO 2013-2015
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* William Walden, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2017
* USD 980,500.00

The central goal of the Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation Bridge to the Doctorate Program at the University of Illinois at
Chicago (UIC) is to increase the number of underserved populations who attain
access to graduate education. The program provides Bridge to the Doctorate (BD)
students with the academic and professional social skills to function at the
highest levels of competency. Pre-matriculation, staff and faculty monitoring,
research lab rotations, research projects and professional interactions along
with intensive evaluation protocol helps to ensure that these students complete
their PhD or MD/PhD. Upon completion of the program, the BD students will be
ready to go into a postdoctoral program at any institution in the country or to
obtain upper level STEM employment. One of the creative aspects of these
activities is the inclusion of MD/PhDs among the cadre of PhD students that are
being produced.

The Illinois LSAMP BD Program at UIC has four primary objectives:

1. To recruit a minimum of twelve highly motivated students from local and
regional LSAMP alliances to UIC PhD programs; 2. To prepare matriculating BD
Fellows to study and train towards the PhD; 3. To facilitate activities that
will encourage BD Fellows to persist in PhD studies; and 4. To implement a
series of activities designed to enhance the education and training of Illinois
LSAMP BD Fellows and help them transition to postdoctoral fellowships, placement
in the academy, or other positions requiring doctoral level STEM education.

Ethnic minorities comprise a disproportionately small fraction of graduate
students, post-doctoral fellows and faculty in the STEM disciplines, including
health sciences. The Illinois LSAMP BD Program at UIC will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups including women, ethnic and racial
minorities. The program will not only help to close the gap created by the
paucity of underrepresented individuals who are functioning creatively at the
PhD level, it will also encourage others who have been reticent to attempt
graduate work because of the lack of qualified role models.