* 1302283
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Mobile Microrobot Platform for Advanced Manufacturing Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Michael Zavlanos, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 06/30/2017
* USD 184,482.00

The goal of this research is to create a flexible, micro-scale additive
manufacturing platform utilizing a team of untethered micro-scale robots and
modular, multifunctional building blocks to create smart micro-devices and
structures. Externally applied magnetic fields are commonly used for the power
and actuation of individual magnetic mobile microrobots. However, in order to
achieve different behaviors from individual robots within a team of microrobots,
there must be either significant variation in their design or in the magnetic
control signals applied to each microrobot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research, therefore, lies in the novel approach to
create a specialized magnetic potential field generating substrate from MEMS-
fabricated planar microcoils and the related control methodology to enable truly
independent control of multiple mobile microrobots. Thus, the research
objectives of the proposal are: the design and fabrication of the micro-coils
and related control electronics; motion control for mobile magnetic microrobot
swarms; and magnetic microrobot and modular component design and fabrication,
based on specialized micro-components with various material properties and
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of the objectives will
result in a transformative mobile microrobot swarm platform capable of executing
various advanced additive manufacturing tasks. Potential applications include
very high-density energy storage, high strain actuation, energy harvesting, very
low power communications devices, and composite structures with integrated
sensors. Further broader impacts of this project reside in disseminating the
research output in industry and academia along with an educational agenda
spanning related outreach activities from the K-12 through graduate levels.