* 1302986
* COACh: Strategic Networking and Career Building Programs for increasing the Retention and Success of Women Scientists and Engineers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Geraldine Richmond, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,050,000.00

This award to the University of Oregon supports activities by the Committee on
the Advancement of Women Chemists (COACh) to increase the number and success of
women in academia in chemistry and allied fields. It is co-funded by NSF's
Division of Chemistry and NIH's National Institute of General Medical Sciences.
Under the direction of Prof. Geri Richmond, COACh (1) develops and offers
professional skills workshops that assist women scientists and engineers in
achieving their full career potential at the graduate, postdoctoral, and faculty
and administrative levels; (2) targets minority women scientists and engineers
through professional meetings with high minority attendance; (3) assesses the
short and long term impacts of these workshops, and disseminates results of the
assessment to the scientific community; (4) assists with transformational change
in departments and institutions to insure the recruitment and retention of
underrepresented groups in science and engineering; (5) works with science and
engineering departments and their faculty to identify and break patterns that
can create different potentials for men, women, and minority students to be
innovative; (6) fosters and strengthens mentoring and networking among women
academic scientists and engineers; and (7) partners with other organizations on
gender equity issues in science Technical merit stems from new insights into
obstacles and opportunities for underrepresented groups. The activities have
broad impact through their effects on the careers of participants and their
colleagues both domestically and internationally.