* 1302057
* The structure of free resolutions in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Daniel Erman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2016
* USD 132,562.00

The PI's research aims to provide a deeper understanding of the structure of
free resolutions and their use algebra and geometry via several specified
projects. One such project will continue the systematic development of Boij-
Soederberg theory. This theory was recently developed by Eisenbud and Schreyer,
and it provides results for understanding free resolutions in terms of specified
atomic building blocks. This is a powerful new theory, and there remain many
open questions about both the foundations and the reach of the theory. Another
project aims to develop a new framework for homological algebra in the context
of smooth toric varieties. The work of David Cox and others suggests the
potential for a far-reaching algebraic/geometric dictionary that largely
parallels the powerful dictionary between the algebra of the graded polynomial
ring and the geometry of projective space. Yet many of the results from
homological commutative algebra have no satisfying analogue in the context of
toric varieties. A more robust homological theory would rely on connections
between multigraded commutative algebra, algebraic geometry, and combinatorics.
A third project involves the asymptotic structure of the free resolutions of
high degree Veronese subrings. This aims to fill a gap in the literature:
whereas the study of the free resolutions of high degree Veronese subrings for
curves has been fruitful and widely applied, little is known about the free
resolutions of higher dimensional varieties under a very positive embedding.
Free resolutions are built from matrices of polynomials. They arise naturally in
many algebraic contexts, with connections to topics in commutative algebra,
algebraic geometry, computational algebra, and more. Matrices of polynomials
have a richer structure than the matrices of scalars that arise in linear
algebra, and so basic questions about free resolutions remain unresolved. The
PI's research projects aim to provide overarching structural results about free
resolutions, and to apply these new structural insights to open problems in
commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. These research projects all offer
potential for explicit computations, providing research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as leading to new software packages
to be developed for Macaulay2. The PI will also continue his outreach projects
on K-12 education, which often involve collaborative efforts between research
mathematicians, educators, and public or nonprofit groups.