* 1302757
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Modern Pollen Spectra from Coasts and Lowlands of the Dominican Republic and Their Application to the Interpretation of Sedimentary Pollen Records
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Lisa Kennedy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2014
* USD 14,795.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine whether neotropical
lowland and coastal vegetation is represented by unique assemblages of pollen
taxa through analysis of modern pollen from surface soils and sediments. While
reconstructions of past vegetation, climate, and environment have been
successfully derived from tropical sedimentary records, the lack of modern
pollen records has limited knowledge about pollen-vegetation relationships and
restricted the interpretation of tropical sedimentary pollen. Several modern
pollen studies have been conducted in mainland tropical America, but few studies
have been conducted on Caribbean islands. Furthermore, of the modern pollen
studies examining tropical dry or seasonal vegetation types, few have examined
spectra from mature lowland seasonally-dry forests. This doctoral dissertation
research project will focus on the modern pollen spectra of lowland and coastal
Dominican Republic, which includes sites in seasonally-dry forests. The doctoral
student and colleagues will collect modern pollen samples from a variety of
vegetation types, including grasslands, sedge wetlands, mangroves, coastal
scrubs, lowland seasonally dry forests, moist lowland semi-deciduous forests,
and humid forests. The samples will be processed using standard techniques with
pollen and spores counted via light microscopy. Discriminant analysis will be
used to classify pollen data into groups representing vegetation types and allow
the generation of a predictive model. This model then will be applied to the
interpretation of fossil pollen assemblages from previously collected sediment
cores (and future ones) in the southwestern Dominican Republic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first study of modern pollen
spectra from coastal and lowland vegetation in the Greater Antilles. It will
contribute to knowledge about Caribbean vegetation types, including the
floristic composition and diversity of seasonally-dry tropical forests, which
are rapidly disappearing from the Caribbean region. This project will strengthen
the interpretation of sedimentary pollen records from lowland and coastal lakes
on Hispaniola and throughout the Caribbean, thus providing improved
understanding of Caribbean vegetation and climate dynamics across long time
scales. Project results will assist in the preservation of natural resources of
the Dominican Republic. Modern pollen data and metadata will be submitted to the
Latin American Pollen Database, a collection of free-to-download fossil and
modern pollen data, thereby facilitating future research by other researchers.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish an independent research
career