* 1302852
* Moving Workshop in Synthetic Biology to be held in Boston, Metro DC and San Francisco from November 6-13, 2012
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Theresa Good, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jill Zeilstra-Ryalls
* 10/31/2013
* USD 29,160.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic Biology is a relatively new field that
sits at the intersection of biology and engineering, where practitioners use
engineering tools and systems approaches to design novel biological systems,
including genetic circuits and whole cells, with which to explore governing
principles behind complex biological processes or to develop new functionalities
that can be exploited. Given the increasing global nature of science, exchanges
between leading researchers from different areas of the world are becoming
increasingly important. The workshop will begin in Boston, MA on November 6-7,
2012, then move to Arlington, VA, Nov 8-9 and conclude in San Francisco Nov
12-13. This workshop will bring together leading scientists and policy makers
from Europe with the best US practitioners in synthetic biology research; the
best innovators in the translation of synthetic biology to the market place;
representatives and policy makers from various US funding and governmental
agencies to discuss investments, needs and concerns related to Synthetic
Biology. The EU delegation will meet with leading innovators and companies in
three cities, Ginkgo Bioworks (Boston, MA), J. Craig Venter Institute (Silver
Spring, MD), Amyris (Emeryville, CA) and Refactored Materials (San Francisco,
CA). These four companies represent different models for translation of
synthetic biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this meeting
are to:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Inform one another on current and future activities
related to the synthetic biology research from the perspective of the funding
agencies, researchers and companies;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Discuss the translational
potential, as well as the challenges and concerns associated with synthetic
biology technologies;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Explore the educational needs to ensure a
well-trained and responsible workforce in the area of synthetic
biology;&lt;br/&gt;(4) Assess common ground and opportunities to collaborate and
consider issues such as standards and repositories, societal and ecological
concerns on an international scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will contribute to the enhancement and
improvement of scientific, engineering and/or educational activities by bringing
together a leading group of European Union researchers and US researchers along
with funders and policy makers from various member countries and their US
counterparts. In addition, this meeting will provide the foundation for
international collaborations between researchers in the US and Europe. The
workshop chairs are leaders in the field of synthetic biology, with one being
female. In addition, the workshop leaders have taken into the consideration the
inclusion of early career scientists and underrepresented minorities in this
workshop. Of the US scientists included, 7 out of 20 are women, and 2 out of 20
are African American. The synthetic biology field is rather young but among the
scientists are members of the National Academy and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. Finally, the meeting conveners will produce a report that will be
distributed to the participants and sponsoring organizations (NSF and EC) and
will be posted for the public on sys-bio.org.