* 1302233
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Cross-Scale Assessment of Spatiotemporal Patterns and Drivers of Fire Effects in Mixed-Severity Fire Regime Forests of the Northern Rockies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2016
* USD 15,983.00

This doctoral dissertation research project is about the influence of climatic
variability and topographic gradients on the spatial and temporal variation of
landscape patterns of fire severity from the 1700s to the present. Both fire
frequency and the annual area burned are strongly related to regional climate
and have exhibited increasing trends over recent decades in relation to global
warming. However, the ecological effects of increased fire activity are not
clearly understood. As a measure of tree mortality, fire severity directly
describes one of the major ecological impacts of wildfires. But how sensitive
fire severity is to climatic factors or other controls (i.e. topographic
factors, vegetation characteristics) is poorly understood. Because fire severity
in many forest ecosystems varies over both space and time, long time series of
fire severity that quantify spatial patterns of heterogeneity are necessary,
both to capture the full range of fire effects and to identify the key drivers
of this variation. This is especially true for forests characterized by mixed-
severity fire regimes where fire severity is known to be highly variable. This
research will adopt a spatially explicit nested research design combining
intensive tree-ring sampling, extensive analyses of historical high resolution
aerial photography and satellite-based change detection methods to address three
primary research goals: 1) to quantify the spatiotemporal variability of fire
severity within multiple watersheds from about 1700-present; 2) to evaluate the
strength of climatic and topographic controls on landscape patterns of fire
severity; and 3) to compare fire severity patterns between historical and
contemporary wildfires to assess the role of climate change on fire regime
shifts between the two periods. These questions will be examined for Douglas fir
(Pseudotsuga menziesii) dominated forests and mixed-conifer western larch (Larix
occidentalis) dominated forests, two of the dominant low-middle elevation
forests in the northern Rocky Mountains known to exhibit mixed-severity fire
regimes.

Information about how spatiotemporal patterns of fire severity have varied over
time and which factors have driven this variability is an important framework
for scientists, land managers and others interested in past and future
ecological effects of wildfires. The detailed understanding of climate-fire
severity relationships provided by this research is a novel and necessary
foundation for accurate modeling of future fire severity and land management
planning in response to currently shifting climatic conditions. Results from
this research will be published in various publications and presented to
academic and management audiences. Findings will also be broadly disseminated
through ongoing partnerships with National Park Service (NPS) managers, U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service managers and researchers, and
investigators at other several universities involved in related research. The
project involves the training of undergraduate and graduate students, and as a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award will provide needed support to
a promising doctoral student at a critical stage of career development.