* 1302412
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Enabling Flexible Middlebox Processing in the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Vyas Sekar, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 04/30/2014
* USD 120,630.00

Enterprises rely on specialized network appliances or middleboxes such as load
balancers, intrusion detection and prevention systems, and WAN optimizers in
order to meet critical performance optimization, security, and policy compliance
requirements. With the advent of cloud computing, such middlebox processing will
play an increasingly critical role in cloud deployments due to two key factors:
1) As enterprises move their IT infrastructure to the cloud, they want to
leverage the same performance and security benefits for applications running in
the cloud; and 2) Enterprises want to reduce their infrastructure and management
costs by offloading middlebox functionality to cloud providers to leverage the
elastic scaling and migration benefits offered by cloud computing.
&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, cloud customers and providers today lack the necessary
abstractions and mechanisms for enabling this transition. At a high-level, the
problem is that these workloads are drastically different from traditional
computation and storage services for which cloud computing has been extremely
successful. This raises fundamental challenges along several dimensions: the
need for flexible composition or chaining of network services; the increased
impact of network-level performance on such workloads; the inherent difficulty
in identifying bottlenecked resources in multiplexed cloud deployments; and the
inability to reason about correct and consistent operation of stateful network
processing in dynamic deployment scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will bridge this disconnect by addressing foundational issues in the design and
implementation of (1) policy frameworks, elastic scaling algorithms, and
software-defined controllers for enterprise administrators to translate their
requirements into an actual physical realization; (2) algorithms for intelligent
network-level placement, traffic engineering, and topology design for cloud
providers to support such workloads; and (3) new abstractions for managing and
manipulating the middlebox-associated state of the network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This work will inform the critical
industry evolution as enterprises and cloud providers are attempting to realize
the benefits of ?network virtualization?. Furthermore, the project will enable
new dimensions of flexibility for network deployments that do not exist today---
democratizing the benefits of middleboxes to small businesses; providing the
ability to elastically scale network-level services to meet application demands;
and enabling live migration of entire enterprise deployments across physical
infrastructures. The project will generate new course materials on software-
defined networking and cloud computing and tightly integrate research with
education to help students become experts in these emerging domains. The
software tools and benchmark measurement data produced by the research will
inform the industry transition and future academic work on such middleboxes-in-
the-cloud deployments. Finally, while the project focuses on middleboxes in
cloud deployments, the technical foundations developed therein will apply to
traditional enterprise and ISP networks as well.