* 1302924
* Probing Inflationary Cosmology with CLASS
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Thomas Essinger-Hileman, Essinger-Hileman        Thomas
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 05/31/2016
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Thomas Essinger-Hileman is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics
Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at
Johns Hopkins University. The fellow's research program is to measure the
polarization of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) with the Cosmology Large
Angular Scale Surveyor (CLASS). The proposed research addresses fundamental
questions of the origin and nature of the Universe and helps astrophysicists
test competing theories of the birth of the Universe. Such measurements were
regarded a top scientific priority in the 2010 Decadal Survey of Astronomy and
Astrophysics.

This project will facilitate the creation of high-sensitivity polarization and
temperature maps of the CMB and directly test inflationary models of the very
early, energetic Universe. Cosmological inflation would produce a gravitational-
wave background at a level that directly corresponds with the vacuum energy
density at the end of inflation. By looking for the odd-parity signature of a
gravitational-wave background in the CMB polarization, the so-called "B modes,"
CLASS will investigate physics on grand-unification-theory (GUT) energy scales
of 10^16 GeV. In contrast, the Large Hadron Collider is designed to probe
energies up to 7x10^3 GeV. CLASS will form a multi-frequency observatory at a
high-altitude site, and it is unique among current and planned ground-based
experiments in aiming at the reionization bump in the B-mode power spectrum at
large angular scales. The PI will lead the development, commissioning, and field
calibration of the 90 GHz receivers for CLASS. This will include the design of a
novel focal plane architecture for monolithic arrays of feedhorn-coupled,
transition-edge-sensor polarimeters, as well as unique thermal filtering
strategies incorporating silicon-powder filters of his own design.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
The fellow will undertake a program of educational outreach in partnership with
the Johns Hopkins Center for Educational Outreach to convey exciting
developments in cosmology to high school students in a predominantly African-
American school district over a two-year period. As the research progresses, the
fellow will communicate developments through audio and video media, weblogs, and
photographs. He will meet with a group of 10th- and 11th-graders monthly to
engage the students in the research happening in the lab and at the telescope in
Chile. The presentation materials developed for this program will then be
expanded to reach a broader audience through existing programs such as the
annual physics fair at Johns Hopkins, as well as through an interactive
presentation on the World Wide Telescope web site. This narrative tour of the
sky as seen by project telescopes will present the project's results in
cosmology to a broad, global audience.