* 1302269
* SHF:Medium:Overcoming the Intuition Wall: Automatic Graphical Analysis of Programs to Discover and Program New Computer Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Gail Kaiser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 12/31/2016
* USD 400,654.00

Workload characterization is central to development of new computer
architectures. The rise of the mobile-cloud paradigm has increased the diversity
and rate at which applications are created thus challenging computer architects'
ability to build optimized systems for them. In the past, architects have been
able to examine software codes of interest (often through slow laborious manual
inspection if necessary) when releases were far and few in between to derive
intuition necessary to make architectural and microarchitectural discoveries.
But this method does not scale to emerging applications that are literally
hammered out in the hundreds by the day. Further, new languages and platforms
have behaviors that are quite different from legacy codes and there is an urgent
need for intuition on these applications. Without new methods to characterize
emerging workloads, computer architects risk running into an intuition wall.
This risk might prove calamitous if unmitigated, given the added reliance on
(micro)architects to develop more energy efficient designs to compensate for the
losses due to slowdowns in Dennard's scaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in
machine learning provide an opportunity to overcome the intuition wall. In the
last decade there have been many major advances in machine learning on graphs
motivated by need/benefits of mining behaviors in social networks and enabled by
cheap commodity computing. In this project, the PIs plan to leverage these
advances to discover and program new computer architectures. By viewing program
execution as a graph, clustering these graphs, and mining them for similarities,
the PIs plan to discover new behaviors that architects and microarchitects can
use to develop new on-chip acceleration structures. The PIs also plan to study
how legacy code can semi-automatically be converted to execute on the
architectures with the new accelerators.