* 1302206
* III: Medium: Selective Search of Large-Scale Text Collections
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Jamie Callan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,083,395.00

This project develops an alternative architecture for large-scale text search in
which the document corpus is decomposed into index shards that are expected to
have skewed utility distributions, thus enabling most index partitions to be
ignored for most queries. This selective search architecture is as effective as
conventional search engine architectures, but has far lower computational costs
and reveals new challenges and opportunities in large-scale search. The
decomposition process creates text collections, thus inviting research on what
characteristics are desired or to be avoided in a text collection to enable
accurate search. New resource selection algorithms are developed to address
efficiency problems in existing algorithms and dynamically adjust search costs
based on query difficulty. The project includes collaboration with three
research groups at other universities, to help their research, leverage their
expertise in designing new approaches to problems, and investigate the
effectiveness of our research in more varied situations. The result is an "off-
the-shelf" method that provides an order of magnitude reduction in search costs
over the current state-of-the-art, especially on corpora of more than a billion
documents, and that can be easily customized or extended to support varied
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selective search is significant in part because it
provides a new perspective on how to organize a very large collection of
documents so that it can be searched accurately and efficiently. This new
understanding reveals new research problems and undiscovered weaknesses in
existing algorithms that will have impact within the scientific community. Text
search is one of the most widely used computer science technologies; hence
selective search is of practical significance. The state-of-the-art in many
areas of industry and science is increasingly associated with large-scale
datasets, which makes it difficult for organizations with modest computational
resources to compete. This project reduces the computational costs of searching
large-scale text collections by an order of magnitude or more. It has the
potential to reduce the energy and other costs associated with the data centers
of large search providers, which has important economic and societal benefits.
Research results from this project are disseminated via project web site
(http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~callan/Projects/IIS-1302206/); in research publications;
in the Lemur Project's open-source search engines, which are used by a broad
international scientific community; and in the Lemur Project's ClueWeb public
search services, which integrate research and education by enabling scientists
and classroom students to do experiments on large, state-of-the-art text
corpora.