* 1302182
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Leveraging Physical Layer Advances for the Next Generation Distributed Wireless Channel Access Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Panganamala Kumar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2017
* USD 380,000.00

This project aims at addressing the fundamental problem of how to maximize the
efficiency of access to the wireless medium. In recent years, new information-
theoretic solutions have emerged, some of which can now be implemented due to
technological advances. Also, long engrained notions, such as half duplex, are
being challenged. It has been shown that through a combination of strategies at
the physical layer and signal processing, full duplex systems are indeed
feasible. These developments have radically altered the very notion of what a
spatio-temporal resource is. These developments have necessitated a thorough
redefinition and appraisal of the problem of efficient access as addressed in
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the years, developments have taken place
in parallel and somewhat in isolation in the physical layer community and in the
protocol community. By bringing together a broad-spectrum of expertise from both
areas, this project envisages fundamental advances in wireless networking at the
access layer. The core challenge is how to use the scarce resources of 'space'
and 'time' as efficiently as possible. In addition, distributed operation,
channel fading, time-varying channel conditions, and fast time-scales of
transmission opportunities and decisions, exacerbate the problem. This project
has the potential of making a transformative advancement in the science of
medium access.