* 1302179
* AF: Medium: Algorithmic Foundations for Phylogenetic Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2019
* Luay Nakhleh, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,025,725.00

Phylogenies, or evolutionary histories, play a central role in biology as a
framework within which to understand all of Life's diversity. In Charles
Darwin's Origin of Species, the depiction of an evolutionary history of species
took the shape of a tree. Ever since, trees have been the most commonly used
structure to model evolutionary histories. However, while trees capture how, for
example, one species splits into two that subsequently diversify and how genetic
material is transmitted from ancestor to descendants, they fail to capture other
evolutionary events. For example, some plant species arise due to hybridization
between pairs of other species. In the microbial world, bacteria transmit
genetic material horizontally by various means. In these cases, a tree gives an
incomplete picture of the evolutionary history at best, and a very misleading
one in the worst case. Indeed, a more appropriate model of evolutionary
histories in these cases is a phylogenetic network, which extends the tree model
by incorporating evolutionary events such as hybridization and horizontal gene
transfer. Despite an increased research activity in the area of phylogenetic
networks in recent years, their reconstruction and evaluation remain largely ad
hoc processes and limited in their applicability to specific datasets.

To enable the development of methodologies for systematic reconstructing and
evaluating phylogenetic networks, this project is aimed at developing (1)
algorithms for evaluating the quality of phylogenetic networks using genomic
data, and (2) algorithms for searching the phylogenetic network space to enable
automatic inference of evolutionary histories.

The outcome of the proposed work will help significantly extend the
applicability of phylogeny to groups of organisms for which trees are
inappropriate, as well as to understand the phylogenetic network model, thus
allowing for a more systematic development of methodologies for its accurate
reconstruction. Further, the results will enable a more accurate reconstruction
of the Tree of Life, help unravel microbial genome diversification, facilitate
the reconstruction of hybridization scenarios in plants and other groups of
organisms, and help understand the mechanisms by which microbes develop
resistance to antibiotics. The project provides outstanding opportunities for
training graduate and undergraduate students in an interdisciplinary research
area.