* 1302698
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Scaling Machine Learning to Massive Datasets---A Logic Based Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Tyson Condie, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 667,000.00

Machine learning (ML) algorithms have become ubiquitous across applications as
diverse as science, engineering, business, finance, education and healthcare.
However, development of ML software that can scale to massive datasets and that
are also easy-to-use remains a challenge in part due to the fact that developing
an ML tool currently requires the implementation of a deep software stack, from
the actual runtime (i.e., how an ML algorithm is executed) to the API exposed to
the users.

This project aims to develop DeML, a system to support the authoring and
execution of ML tools. Specifically, DeML would allow ML algorithms to be
formulated in the form of a declarative query over the training dataset. DeML
optimizes the execution of the query over a computing platform (e.g., Amazon EC2
or SQL Azure), taking into account the characteristics of the algorithm, the
data, and the available computational resources. Adoption of DeML would greatly
reduce the effort required to develop scalable implementations of ML algorithms.
The project is organized around three thrusts: (i) Development of a declarative
query language, based on extensions of Datalog; (ii) Analysis of runtime of DeML
queries; (iii) Optimization of dataflow of DeML queries based on the
characteristics of data sources and the capabilities of the underlying execution
platform. The resulting open source DeML prototype implementation will be made
freely available to the community through the project web page at:
http://deml.cs.ucla.edu.

The availability of the DeML could greatly lower the effort needed to author
scalable implementations of ML algorithms for analysis of massive datasets,
which in turn would increase the availability of such tools to the broader
community. Experience gained by implementing and deploying ML algorithms at
scale over modern cloud-computing platforms, could help inform critical design
choices in the development of future cloud computing platforms for big data
analytics, and hence impact a broad range of scientific, engineering, national
security, healthcare and business applications of big data analytics. The
project offers enhanced opportunities for research-based advanced training of
graduate and undergraduate students, including members of groups that are
currently under-represented in computer science, in databases, machine learning,
and cloud computing.