* 1302013
* Conference:  Conference Support for Developmental Biology of the Sea Urchin XXI  Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, Massachusetts October 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Charles Shuster, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 10/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

The development of a fertilized egg into a fully-grown person relies on a basic
toolkit of genes that are conserved in all animals. Identifying the components
of the toolkit and understanding their function is not only essential for
understanding human development, but also for understanding the diversity of
body forms we find in nature. Humans share many genes with sea urchins,
including those that turn on and off during embryonic development. Sea urchins,
along with starfish, sea squirts and other marine invertebrates are therefore
powerful models for studying development, because their embryos rapidly develop
outside the mother, and also because they are closely related to vertebrates and
humans. This conference brings together an international group of scientists and
students that use sea urchins, sea stars and other invertebrates to study the
basic mechanics and evolution of development. This conference brings together
investigators applying cutting edge genomic, bioinformatic and imaging
approaches to share their findings in a small meeting format. The meeting also
provides opportunities for junior faculty and students to present their
findings, with 60% of speaking slots offered to postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students, and funds will be used to support the participation of these
scientists in training. Lastly, sea urchin embryos provide a powerful
educational tool, and the conference supports the travel of faculty and their
students from primarily undergraduate institutions We will host a panel session
on the use of these organisms in K-12 and undergraduate education. In summary,
this award will not only support a small but vibrant community of scientists
dedicated to understanding one of the most complex problems in biology, 'How
does an egg develop into a human? but will also foster the next generation of
developmental biologists. as well as supporting faculty and undergraduates from
primarily undergraduate institutions.