* 1302216
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative: Transfer Learning in Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Timothy Menzies, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2015
* USD 271,553.00

The goal of the research is to enable software engineers to find software
development best practices from past empirical data. The increasing availability
of software development project data, plus new machine learning techniques, make
it possible for researchers to study the generalizability of results across
projects using the concept of transfer learning. Using data from real software
projects, the project will determine and validate best practices in three areas:
predicting software development effort; isolating software detects; effective
code inspection practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will deliver new
data mining technologies in the form of transfer learning techniques and tools
that overcome current limitations in the state-of-the-art to provide accurate
learning within and across projects. It will design new empirical studies, which
apply transfer learning to empirical data collected from industrial software
projects. It will build an on-line model analysis service, making the techniques
and tools available to other researchers who are investigating validity of
principles for best practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
research will be to make empirical software engineering research results more
transferable to practice, and to improve the research processes for the
empirical software engineering community. By providing a means to test
principles about software development, this work stands to transform empirical
software engineering research and enable software managers to rely on
scientifically obtained facts and conclusions rather than anecdotal evidence and
one-off studies. Given the immense importance and cost of software in commercial
and critical systems, the research has long-term economic impacts.