* 1302797
* CAREER:  Influences of plant traits on wood decomposition rates across scales: From fungal microbe communities to carbon turnover
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Amy Zanne, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 580,564.00

Forest systems contain approximately half of the carbon held on the planet. Much
of this forest carbon is locked up in woody stems either in living plants or as
dead wood fallen on the ground. The rate that carbon is released from wood back
into the atmosphere has large implications for global climate change. Climate
also influences both decomposition rates of wood and forest tree mortality.
Variation in how wood is chemically and physically constructed by trees
regulates each of these relationships. This project is part of a long-term
career goal to determine the influence of plant anatomy, chemistry, and
functional traits, e.g., density of wood, height of trees, on rates of wood
decomposition. This project focuses on temperate forests of the Ozark Highlands,
MO, USA, one of the largest forested ecosystems between the Rocky and
Appalachian Mountains. The project is developed around three interrelated
themes. Variation in tree traits will be related to variation in decomposition
rates, this variation will be linked to changes in the fungal community (the
predominant cause of wood decomposition and thus carbon release from wood), and
variation in decomposition rates will be scaled up to variation in carbon
release across the landscape. The three themes will be linked together to
explore possible management implications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of Missouri - St. Louis, which has a predominantly metropolitan student body,
lacks any field courses in its undergraduate biology curriculum. As part of this
project researchers will develop an undergraduate research course, focusing on
the diversity of ecological interactions among plants, fungi, insects and other
taxa, and human impacts on these taxa. This course will have field and
laboratory components and will bring students into contact with local
naturalists and the biodiversity of the region.