* 1302272
* HCC: Medium: Scientists and their Software: A Sociotechnical Investigation of Scientific Software Development and Sharing
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Charlotte Lee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2017
* USD 515,635.00

Scientific research is increasingly reliant on advanced social and technical
infrastructures called cyberinfrastructure (CI). In turn, the cornerstone of
scientific cyberinfrastructure is Scientific Cyberinfrastructure Software (SCIS)
that enables data collection from digital instruments, analysis of data through
the execution of mathematical algorithms, data visualization and sharing of data
through standardized file formats and widely accessible databases. Despite the
importance of SCIS for data-intensive research, too little is known about how
scientists actually use, adopt and develop scientific software. More research is
needed to explore how software, software development and software sharing
practices are, and can be, community products, resources or practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will examine how scientists develop
SCIS as part of their day-to-day research practice through a qualitative,
ethnographic study of 6 research groups using observations, semi-structured
interviews, and document analysis. The researchers will investigate how
decisions about SCIS are made; document, classify and analyze actual practices
for using, adopting, developing or sharing software; identify scientists'
incentives and disincentives to share software at the local, organizational and
community levels; and discern the impacts, intentional and unintentional, that
SCIS systems have on scientific data and the scientific research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding SCIS development and sharing is
necessary to ensure continued integrity of datasets shared within and among
communities, facilitate the sharing of the tools and practices that are
developed using national research funds and most importantly, support a
fundamental tenet of scientific research: the open communication of the
processes and practices behind published research findings. Furthermore,
understanding these practices will support the education and training of our
nation's future generations of scientists and engineers. This project will thus
benefit domain scientists, SCIS developers, Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW) and Software Engineering (SE) scholars and policy makers by providing
conceptual tools that will provide guidance when considering how and when
software can be designed and supported to be accessible and useful to the
broader research community.