* 1302978
* Bridging the Gap: Connecting Galactic and Extragalactic Studies of Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Amanda Heiderman, Heiderman               Amanda         L
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 09/30/2016
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Amanda Heiderman is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Virginia and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory. The Fellow's project will
provide a foundation for interpreting studies of star formation and gas content
in external galaxies by directly comparing the star formation rate and gas
content in Milky Way star forming regions to spatially resolved regions in
spiral and starburst galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will explore the
rate at which molecular gas is converted into stars through detailed studies of
Galactic low and high mass star forming regions as well as spatially resolved
multi-wavelength observations of gas-rich nearby spiral and
starburst/interacting galaxies. The current availability of observational
photometric and spectroscopic Galactic surveys is well matched to study star
formation from individual young stellar objects (YSOs) to properties of their
parent molecular clouds in the Milky Way. The Fellow will build a statistical
sample of star forming regions in the Milky Way by associating Galactic source
catalogs with catalogs of molecular clouds as traced by CO. Since extragalactic
studies often utilize CO maps to trace the total amount of molecular gas mass in
a galaxy, comparing CO in Galactic clouds and associated YSOs will test the
efficacy of CO as a tracer of total amount of molecular gas in galaxies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include a significant
educational component. The fellow will undertake a program of educational
outreach in partnership with Piedmont Virginia Community College (PVCC) in
Charlottesville. The project focuses on filling in the gap between K through 12
and 4-year college outreach programs by seeking the diverse student population
at PVCC. The Fellow will begin a mentoring program for underrepresented students
at PVCC. The Fellow will hold an "Astronomy Science Night" at PVCC to find
potential mentees that will highlight the work done by young scientists at UVa
and NRAO to PVCC students and encourage their interest in science. The main goal
of this mentoring program will be to help underrepresented students interested
in science to pursue Bachelor's and higher degrees. Encouraging minority
students at PVCC to transition to a 4-year college or university will help
diversify the student body at these institutions and strengthen the likelihood
that more first generation college and ethnic minority students will pursue
higher degrees and careers in science.