* 1302267
* CGV: Medium: Collaborative Research: A Heterogeneous Inference Framework for 3D Modeling and Rendering of Sites
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Holly Rushmeier, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Organizing and using 3D data related to physical sites is important in many
applications such as historical reconstruction, architectural design, and urban
planning. However, no method has been developed that exploits the full range of
data types available for such sites. Useful data often comes from historical
sources, and requires substantial processing to be useful. Some of this
processing can be automated, but some of it must be done by humans. An as-yet
unsolved problem is how to coordinate human effort to efficiently carry out this
process. In the current project the PIs will address quantitative and
qualitative accuracy issues in reconstructing 3D sites so as to allow for input
and participation by different populations in building data sets, and will
demonstrate a variety of applications using a heterogeneous 3D site
representation. Specifically, the work will make the following contributions:
new techniques for annotating heterogeneous input will be developed, balancing
automated and human input; new techniques for coordinating digital computation,
human computation, and machine learning will be devised; new tools for
architectural analysis and design, and for material weathering analysis, will be
developed based on the new 3D representation; and new ideas for storytelling
from 3D data will be demonstrated. Project outcomes will include a new
organization of heterogeneous data for 3D sites, new insights into the relative
contributions of automated techniques and human computation in the domain of 3D
site data (which will be applicable to other challenging problems involving
large complex data sets), new algorithms for reconstructing 3D models, and new
techniques for conducting studies in architecture and in cultural
heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will have a strong
impact on architectural-design and cultural heritage documentation,
interpretation and communication. The various phases of the project will involve
students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels, and in diverse
disciplines including computer science, architecture, and art history. The PIs
will produce teaching modules based on this work targeted at computer science,
architecture, and cultural heritage.