* 1302886
* Presentations, Cohomology,  Representations of Finite Groups and Coverings of Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Robert Guralnick, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2017
* USD 231,000.00

This project will involve the study of finite and algebraic groups and in
particular their actions on linear spaces and varieties. One important aspect of
the project is to improve bounds for the sizes of low degree cohomology groups.
This should lead to profinite presentations of the finite simple groups with two
generators and a very small number of relations. There will also be a study of
discrete presentations of the finite simple groups building on earlier work of
the proposer and others showing that with the possible exception of one family,
every finite simple group has a presentation with at most 50 relations. The
project will also consider the notion of adequate representations of finite
groups. This is a weakening of a condition used by Taylor and Wiles to prove
certain representations are automorphic (and used in the proof of Fermat's last
theorem). The idea is to show that many representations do satisfy this
condition (and also constructing others that do not). This notion has already
been used to great effect by Clozel, Thorne, Gee, Dieulefait and others. Another
part of the project will be to attempt to generalize the Tits alternative. The
conjecture is that any finitely generated Zariski dense subgroup of a semisimple
algebraic group contains a strongly dense free subgroup. Here strongly dense
means every nonabelian subgroup is Zariski dense in the algebraic group.
Finally, certain problems related to mappings of smooth algebraic curves will be
studied using the group theory results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major
motivations for this project has been the major advances in computational group
theory. These advances are not just based on improvements in computing power but
very innovative programs which use the theory in a crucial way. The
presentations mentioned above are already being implemented into MAGMA (a very
powerful computational algebra software package) and is used to recognize
groups. The results on adequate representations have already been used in some
significant advances in showing representations are automorphic and should help
in the fundamental Langlands program. The results on strongly dense subgroups
have already been used in proving new results on expander graphs. These are
graphs that are relatively sparse but are also very highly connected. These have
sparked a revolution in computer science in the last decade. The new results
will have even more applications to this field. Deep results in group theory
have led to major advances in basic problems about bijective polynomials over
finite fields (viewed as mappings on a smooth projective curve) and has had
applications to cryptography and solved problems over a century old.