* 1302630
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Interference-Aware Cooperation via Structured Codes: Creating an Empirical Cycle
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* richard brown
* 07/31/2017
* USD 398,296.00

The classical approach to wireless communication is to isolate communication
links by maximizing signal strength and minimizing interference between users.
This simple philosophy is supported by a rich theoretical foundation which has
inspired powerful coding techniques and protocols that lie at the heart of
modern wireless systems. However, these systems have recently become victims of
their own success as the rising density and data requirements of wireless
devices have led to a surge in interference. Fortunately, an emerging body of
work indicates that the phenomenon of interference may in fact represent an
untapped opportunity for increasing the spectral and energy efficiency of next-
generation wireless systems. Although many interference-aware communication
strategies have been proposed in the literature, the promised gains have been
mostly limited to the theoretical realm.

The objective of this project is to create practical interference-aware wireless
protocols that can operate near the performance predicted by theoretical bounds
in terms of throughput, energy efficiency, and reliability. The project is
organized into three complementary thrusts that encompass theory, algorithms,
and practice. The first thrust investigates lattice-based constellations and
low-complexity codes for the compute-and-forward strategy, which enables
receivers to decode linear combinations of transmitted codewords. Compute-and-
forward can in turn be used as a building block for realizing interference-aware
protocols such as physical-layer network coding and multiple-user MIMO (multi-
input-uulti-output) systems. The second thrust aims to implement these protocols
on a three-node WARP (Wireless Open-Access Research Platform) testbed. A series
of carefully designed experiments will be used to compare the performance of
interference-aware strategies while accounting for overhead costs. The third
thrust leverages the data collected from these experiments to revise channel
models to capture key features that impact the performance of interference-aware
strategies such as asynchronism and channel fluctuations. These models will be
used to revisit the theoretical foundations of interference-aware strategies and
tailor them to the channels encountered in practice. This project features
several outreach efforts including undergraduate research experiences connected
to the WARP testbed and a public repository of training modules and videos.