* 1302196
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Neural Control of Powered Artificial Legs
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2013,10/31/2013
* He Huang, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2013
* USD 141,243.00

Recent breakthroughs in the mechatronics of powered lower limb (LL) prostheses
hold the promise of enabling restoration for the large and growing population of
lower limb amputees of a broad spectrum of functionality (e.g., standing up when
seated in a chair, climbing stairs, and even running). The PIs argue that to
realize this potential it is essential to provide neural control of artificial
legs. The application of existing upper limb (UL) neural control approaches is
inappropriate to this end, because the UL and LL neural control mechanisms are
significantly different. In particular, most activities involving the lower
limbs recruit both involuntary (spinal cord) and voluntary (supra-spinal) neural
control, present high dynamics, and require multi-joint coordination and control
of unstable locomotion, characteristics which combine to make the design
specifications for neural control of LL prostheses much more demanding than
those for UL devices. In this project the PIs will address this challenge by
developing an innovative neural control system for powered artificial legs that
can recognize and exploit multi-scale user intent (e.g., general motor commands
such as intended task vs. detailed motor commands such as intended joint motion)
to modulate intrinsic (autonomous) control of multiple LL prosthetic joints for
locomotor and nonlocomotor task performance. The goals are to support reverse-
engineering of the neural control of human locomotion while creating innovative
neural-machine interfacing (NMI) technology that enables users to control the
dynamics of LL prostheses in a natural, adaptive and flexible way. Inspired by
what is currently known about the neurological organization and function of the
human motor control system, the PIs' approach is to design a novel NMI based on
a combination of noninvasive scalp electroencephalography (EEG) and surface
electromyography (EMG). The hypothesis is that fusion of low-level peripheral
and high-level central neural control sources can achieve multi-scale user
intent recognition with higher accuracy and more rapid response time than can be
realized with either EEG or EMG alone. A hierarchical control scheme for powered
LL prostheses, in which multi-scale user intent identified by the NMI modulates
intrinsic (autonomous) control, will support intuitive and efficient prosthesis
use in dynamic, multi-joint coordinated movements while significantly reducing
the mental burden of the prosthesis user in locomotion because the cyclic motion
is achieved autonomously (this is desired because we rarely think about knee and
ankle control when walking). The PIs will also explore correlation across EEG
and EMG signals, which may provide insight into neural adaption and the time
course of cortical control during the initiation and generation of gait,
including how the brain initiates walking and regulates motor output in
anticipation of key events such as foot placement at landing or during stepping
up and down, weight acceptance, and push-off into swing phase. Finally, the PIs
will use translational research to validate their novel approach in patients
with trans-femoral amputations (a high and challenging amputation
level).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PIs' long-term objective is to
develop true bionic prostheses that feel and work just like real legs. Their
approach in this project represents a paradigm shift in the control of lower
limb wearable prosthetics. As such, project outcomes will directly impact both
the Human-Robot Interaction and Brain-Machine Interface research communities.
The findings will also be relevant to the neuroscience and rehabilitation
communities, in that they will help elucidate the adaptive spinal cord and
cortical contributions to human locomotion, while providing innovative and
functional neuro-prosthetics solutions to improve the lives of lower limb
amputees.