* 1302246
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Workload-Aware Storage Architectures for Optimal Performance and Energy Efficiency
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Arie Kaufman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 513,900.00

The most significant performance and energy bottlenecks in a computer
are&lt;br/&gt;often caused by the storage system, because the gap between
storage device&lt;br/&gt;and CPU speeds is greater than in any other part of the
machine. Big data&lt;br/&gt;and new storage media only make things worse,
because today's systems are&lt;br/&gt;still optimized for legacy workloads and
hard disks. The team at Stony&lt;br/&gt;Brook University, Harvard University,
and Harvey Mudd College has shown that&lt;br/&gt;large systems are poorly
optimized, resulting in waste that increases&lt;br/&gt;computing costs, slows
scientific progress, and jeopardizes the nation's&lt;br/&gt;energy
independence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the team is examining modern workloads
running on a variety of&lt;br/&gt;platforms, including individual computers,
large compute farms, and a&lt;br/&gt;next-generation infrastructure, such as
Stony Brook's Reality Deck, a&lt;br/&gt;massive gigapixel visualization
facility. These workloads produce combined&lt;br/&gt;performance and energy
traces that are being released to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second,
the team is applying techniques such as statistical
feature&lt;br/&gt;extraction, Hidden Markov Modeling, data-mining, and
conditional likelihood&lt;br/&gt;maximization to analyze these data sets and
traces. The Reality Deck is&lt;br/&gt;used to visualize the resulting multi-
dimensional performance/energy data&lt;br/&gt;sets. The team's analyses reveal
fundamental phenomena and principles that&lt;br/&gt;inform future
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, the findings from the first two efforts are
being combined to develop&lt;br/&gt;new storage architectures that best balance
performance and energy under&lt;br/&gt;different workloads when used with modern
devices, such as solid-state&lt;br/&gt;drives (SSDs), phase-change memories,
etc. The designs leverage the team's&lt;br/&gt;work on storage-optimized
algorithms, multi-tier storage, and new optimized&lt;br/&gt;data structures.