* 1302284
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Optimal Communication for Faster Sensor Network Coordination
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Michael Zavlanos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2017
* USD 259,990.00

The goal of this project is to develop a new framework where teams of mobile
robots self-engineer the structure of their communication network in order to
improve on the performance of distributed algorithms used for team coordination.
The key idea that enables this work is the representation of the network
structure in terms of metrics that depend on the full eigenvalue spectrum of the
network's adjacency and Laplacian matrices, but can be approximated in a very
efficient and decentralized way. These metrics can then be related to the
performance of popular, distributed, coordination algorithms, such as consensus,
gossiping, and viral information dissemination. The intellectual merit of this
research lies in the development of a hybrid network of mobile robots that is
controlled jointly in the space of network configurations and robot positions.
The study of the integrated system requires the synthesis of new theoretical
results drawing from control theory, spectral graph theory, wireless networking,
and optimization. This hybrid network combines the following interrelated
objectives: Spectral analysis and distributed control of robot networks;
Integrated network and mobility control; Richer models of the communication
space; Platform deployment and validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
completion of this research will provide these necessary components in
facilitating the design of mobile autonomous systems and fostering their
adoption. Wide availability of such systems can have a significant societal
impact on, e.g., search, rescue and recovery operations, environmental
monitoring for homeland security, or surveillance and reconnaissance missions.
The broader impact of this project lies on disseminating the research output in
the industry and academia.