* 1302327
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research:   FRP for Real
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Paul Hudak, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2019
* USD 866,000.00

Functional Reactive Programming, or FRP, is a declarative programming paradigm
based on two fundamental abstractions: a continuous (functional) modeling of
time-varying behaviors, and a discrete (reactive) calculus of user and process
interaction. FRP provides a novel and effective approach to solving problems in
which there is a combination of both continuous and discrete entities such as
found in computer animation, robotics, control systems, GUIs, and interactive
multimedia. FRP?s broader impact is seen in its adoption by several other
research projects, and its use in several applications different from those at
Yale. The proposed work will strengthen these existing projects, and further
broaden the applicability of FRP. The proposed improvements in implementation
will make FRP more suitable for compute-intensive applications, such as
interactive 3D graphics and real-time audio processing. It will also benefit the
modeling and simulation community, which often uses declarative approaches to
specifying and solving problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Previous research at Yale
helped to establish the foundations of FRP, and demonstrated its utility in
several application domains. Despite this preliminary success, more work is
needed to make "FRP for real." That is, to develop a system that facilitates
writing natural and concise descriptions of reactive behaviors, responds well
enough to satisfy most common real-time constraints, reifies real-world objects
as first-class signal functions, runs efficiently through program optimization
and parallel execution on multicore architectures, and has been validated in a
real-world application domain, specifically audio signal processing. The
proposed research will advance the overall FRP methodology in three areas:
Language Design (type system extensions to capture resource constraints, a
redesign of the mediation between the discrete and continuous, and a better
syntax to capture the essence of FRP); Language Implementation (program
optimizations, multicore execution, asynchronous sub-processes); and Validation
and Testing (with a focus on real-time audio signal processing).