* 1302884
* Collaborative Research: AON:  Continuing the Beaufort Gyre Observing System to Document and Enhance Understanding of the Beaufort Gyre Freshwater Reservoir Transformations and Fate
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Bill Williams, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 06/30/2019
* USD 4,463,674.00

This Arctic Observing Network (AON) project will continue Beaufort Gyre
Observing System (BGOS) operations begun in 2003 during 2013-2018 to document
the unprecedented changes in sea ice and ocean parameters that are presently
occurring in the Beaufort Gyre (BG) region. The BG is a unique circulation
component within the Arctic Ocean physical environmental system reflecting a set
of specific atmospheric, sea-ice, and oceanic conditions that have significant
interrelationships with the Arctic-wide as well as global climate systems. We
will continue measuring time series of temperature, salinity, currents,
geochemical tracers, sea ice draft, and sea level using bottom-anchored moorings
and shipboard measurements. BGOS moorings plus two Japanese moorings (at no cost
to this project) will acquire precise data on the variations of the vertical
distribution of seawater properties, bottom pressures, sea ice draft and surface
waves (during open water conditions) at scientifically important sites within
the BG system. Ship-based synoptic sampling covering the Beaufort Gyre will
continue to be performed each summer in collaboration with scientists in Canada
and Japan, with shared logistics expenses, to augment the year-round mooring
measurements. Temperature, salinity, oxygen, nutrients, barium, and 18O will
continue to be measured and analyzed at standard locations along sections at
140W, 150W, ~ 75N and ~78N using a shipboard CTD/rosette to continue the long-
term time series started in 2003. Samples that provide information on longer
time-scales, such as CFCs and carbon tetrachloride, alkalinity, total CO2,
dissolved inorganic carbon and tritium/3He, will be collected less frequently.
Between CTD/rosette casts, expendable CTDs that profile to 1100 m depth will
continue to be used to increase spatial resolution of the temperature and
salinity fields. The proposed work will be coordinated with the basic elements
of AON to enhance effectiveness and interconnections of observational
activities, and the field program will continue to accommodate other AON and NSF
funded projects when able. Data will be made available on the project website
with a metadata pointer in ACADIS.