* 1302054
* Explaining Prehistoric High-Altitude Hunter-Gather Residential Occupations in  Wyoming's Wind River Range
* SBE,BCS
* 08/09/2012,05/31/2013
* Christopher Morgan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 58,620.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Christopher Morgan, David Rhode
and Richard Adams will conduct one season of archaeological research in the
subalpine and alpine regions of the Wind River Range, in western Wyoming. The
team brings together experts in hunter-gatherer and mountain archaeology and
ecology, prehistoric settlement and subsistence systems, and paleoenvironmental
reconstruction to explain the economic, environmental, and social contexts
leading to the anomalous and intensive occupation of a hunter-gatherer village
known locally as High Rise Village. This site is at an elevation of 10,700 ft
and, for a hunter-gatherer village, very large (19 acres). It contains at least
52 flattened housefloors representing the remains of ancient living structures
and a diverse and dense archaeological deposit composed of hunting, plant
processing, and tool making remains. Pilot study radiocarbon dating indicates
site occupations between 4500 and 150 years ago, making it the largest, oldest,
and longest-running, continuously-occupied high-altitude prehistoric village in
North America.

The Wind River project will generate new empirical and theoretical information
about North American prehistory and human adaptation to marginal habitats like
high mountains. Its intellectual merit rests on its testing of fundamental
models of human behavior in such settings and expressing in concrete,
quantitative terms how and why humans move to and settle in such regions,
ultimately coming to populate nearly every terrestrial ecological niche on the
planet.

The fundamental questions driving the proposed research are: were High Rise
Village inhabitants pushed to live in a marginal, limiting habitat, or where
they pulled into a habitat that was so seasonally productive as to offset the
costs of living at the site? The goal of the project is to answer these
questions by reconstructing prehistoric investments in technology and
subsistence relative to the economic benefits of living at the site, with high-
cost, low return behaviors indicating people being pushed to occupy the site,
and the opposite incentive for doing the same. This research requires data that
provides meaningful measures of the time and energy expended constructing the
houses, manufacturing the tools and feeding the populations who lived at the
site, as well as a reasonable estimate of the size of the groups who lived there
at any one time, all within a context of overall environmental productivity.
Generating these types of data entails excavating a large sample of the site and
its house features and analyzing house construction methods, tool types and
subsistence remains and other indicators of past environmental conditions.

The project's broader impacts rest on its engagement and training of a large and
diverse group of undergraduates, Native Americans and graduate students in
cutting-edge archaeological inquiry, countering trends in declining scientific
literacy in American students and among historically disenfranchised groups
while developing increased scientific capacity and infrastructure among public
universities in five states (Utah, Wyoming, Nevada, Washington, and California)
and private laboratories from Maryland to California.