* 1302557
* SHF: Medium: Breaking the Physical Divide between Computation and NAND-Flash Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2017
* USD 800,000.00

Almost all application segments today experience data explosion, meaning that
they need to store, access, manipulate and transform extremely large amounts of
data stored in different mediums in a fashion that is simultaneously
performance-aware and energy-aware. These data-hungry market segments include
(i) consumer applications in the mobile and home electronics segment, (ii)
desktop applications that are providing rich content and user experience, (iii)
scientific applications that generate petabytes of data for analyzing
experiments and real-world phenomena on temporal and spatial scales unheard of
before, (iv) enterprise applications which tirelessly store all kinds of
data/knowledge for auditability, analytics, and optimization, (v) datacenters
and cloud platforms which use storage to hold large virtual machine images of
the workloads for consolidation across different servers, (vi) Internet services
and social networking platforms which need to store, track and manage user
patterns, and (vii) cyber-physical applications which continuously sense and
store physical world data for real-time analytics and control. Current computer
infrastructures are poorly equipped to cope with this data demand. The primary
reason for this is the inherent physical divide between computation and storage.
While both computation and storage technologies have undergone tremendous
improvements in the last decades, the interactions and interfaces between them
have not, thereby limiting the performance of critical data-intensive
applications. If not addressed in a timely fashion, this problem has the
potential to slow down scientific discoveries and engineering breakthroughs.

This project addresses the data management problem by breaking the physical
divide between computation and NAND-flash storage. Doing so can potentially
allow the communication bandwidth between computation and storage to scale
together with the parallelism-driven scaling of both computation resources and
storage resources. It can also allow each to become more aware of the intentions
and operations of the other, opening a wide spectrum of possibilities in more
ef&#64257;ciently managing storage. This will in turn allow better co-design,
co-management, and co-evolution of the two for better scalability in the future,
as applications start imposing even more stringent computing and storage
demands. Specifically, this project investigates three main strategies for
bridging the physical divide between compute and NAND-flash storage. The first
strategy enables better cooperation between flash storage and host; the second
strategy elevates NAND-flash storage to directly interface with the processors,
similar to main memory DIMMs (dual inline memory modules) interfacing to the on-
chip cores through memory controllers; and the last strategy explores different
placement options for tighter integration of NAND-flash storage with
computational resources. The broader impacts of this research include student
training, participation of under-represented groups, recruiting workshops,
incorporation of educational modules into existing and future courses, and
public domain simulation tools. Further, through the Visit In Engineering
Weekend (VIEW) program, the project fosters interest in computer science and
engineering. The project provides hands-on-design activities to motivate the
VIEW participants in new areas of computer science and engineering related to
storage system and data management.