* 1302765
* Dynamical Evolution of Planetary Systems in Star Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Aaron Geller, Geller                  Aaron          M
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 05/31/2017
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Aaron Geller is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Northwestern
University. The fellow's project involves exoplanets. Today, astronomers are
discovering a rich panoply of exoplanets in our Galaxy. Many of these exoplanets
are in multi-planet systems. Some show surprisingly different characteristics
from our own Solar System that pose serious problems for standard isolated
planet formation theories. Strong evidence indicates that the majority of stars
form in clusters, many of which dissolve within the age of the Universe.
Therefore, many of the exoplanets observed today---in stars clusters and the
field of the Galaxy---may have been born inside star clusters and subjected to
past perturbations from nearby stars. Understanding how stellar encounters
within this birth environment affect the dynamical evolution of planetary
systems is paramount to interpreting the characteristics of all the newly
discovered exoplanets and how these relate to the planet formation epoch.

To address these important questions, the fellow work with a team of experts to
complete development of the first computer code to self-consistently simulate
the dynamical evolution of multi-planet systems in realistic star clusters. Dr.
Geller and collaborators have already completed a pilot code demonstrating the
feasibility of the most critical and innovative components, and the full code
will be completed early in the first year of the fellowship. The fellow will
then use this code to model nine open star clusters, including four in the
Kepler field that have been surveyed comprehensively for transiting exoplanets.
Each cluster will be modeled with multiple different initial planet populations
to cover the range in characteristics of observed exoplanets. The simulations
will be analyzed, accounting for the unique sensitivity limits of each transit
survey, and the results will be compared directly with the observations. This
project will reveal---for the first time self-consistently---how stellar
encounters within star clusters of a wide range in age, density, mass, etc.,
influence the dynamical evolution of multi-planet systems including those like
our Solar System and how the characteristics of exoplanets observed today in
both clusters and the field may have been modified in the past by their birth
environment.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
The fellow will undertake a program of educational outreach in partnership with
the Northwestern's NSF-funded GK-12 and CE21 programs to develop, test, and
disseminate about 15 high school lesson plans based on the scientific research
of this project. The fellow will work directly with a Northwestern graduate
student to develop around five classroom-tested high school lesson plans each
year. To supplement the lesson plans, the fellow will also develop a web-based
student-friendly interface to both analyze the products of the proposed
simulations and to allow students to run simulations of their own. During years
2 and 3 the fellow will integrate these lesson plans into teacher professional
development workshops, which the PI will co-lead. Through these workshops, the
fellow will train about 20 Chicago Public School and area teachers to use his
lesson plans, thereby reaching about 2000 students with his curricular materials
by the end of the fellowship. Both the GK-12 and CE21 programs are well
established at Northwestern University and have been running successfully for
years. This is a natural and mutually beneficial partnership that will help
train the fellow for a future career teaching computational thinking methods in
undergraduate physics and astronomy courses.