* 1302771
* Toward a Deeper Understanding of Type-Ia Supernovae and Their Utility as Cosmological Distance Indicators
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Jeffrey Silverman, Silverman               Jeffrey        M
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 05/31/2016
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Jeffrey M. Silverman is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics
Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the
University of Texas at Austin (UT). The fellow's research project centers on
improving an important tool for measuring precise cosmological parameters: Type
Ia supernovae. Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) are thermonuclear explosions of white
dwarf stars, and because such features as their peak brightness and the rate at
which they fade away are reliably predicable, they are used to measure distances
to other galaxies. As a result, these supernovae help astrophysicists to measure
cosmological parameters and to determine the expansion history of the Universe.
Their use ultimately led to the discovery of the accelerating Universe, for
which the Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded in 2011. The fellow will apply new
distance measurement methods that utilize spectral observations in addition to
photometric data in order to refine their use.

Despite their cosmological utility, astrophysicists still do not fully
understand the process by which the exploding white dwarf reaches the
Chandrasekhar limit, whether it actually reaches the limit (or significantly
exceeds it in some cases), what progenitor scenarios and environments lead to
SNe Ia, or the details of how the explosion itself occurs. To help resolve these
and other issues, Dr. Silverman will explore the population of SN Ia host
galaxies as well as undertake detailed studies of both "normal" and "peculiar"
nearby, bright SNe Ia. Data for these in-depth investigations will be obtained
at the very earliest times (i.e., hours after explosion) to 1--2 years past
maximum brightness. These data will allow analyses of SNe Ia, their progenitor
systems, and their explosion physics. Through this work Dr. Silverman aims to
build up a more detailed picture of SNe Ia.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
The fellow will undertake a program of educational outreach in partnership with
the McDonald Observatory to create new content for their multi-day summer
Teacher Professional Development Workshops. He will base the new materials for
the workshops around topics that are closely tied to his areas of expertise,
such as supernovae, stellar evolution, and cosmology. Dr. Silverman will also
develop new "Live From McDonald Observatory" video-conference programs for
students throughout the state of Texas with associated hands-on activities. This
material will be field-tested and refined with the help of local teachers and
will be presented to teachers and science educators from around the state at the
annual Conference for the Advancement of Science Teaching. This education
program will directly impact hundreds of teachers and thousands of students in
Texas, most of whom come from underrepresented populations and economically
disadvantaged backgrounds.