* 1302373
* WORKSHOP: The TEI 2013 Graduate Student Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2013
* Thomas Moher, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2013
* USD 18,048.00

The technological advances of the past decade have given rise to an increasing
number of creative practices and research areas that seek to overcome the long-
standing separation between the physical and digital worlds. One key area of
innovation has been tangible computing, which pushes the user interface beyond
the screen into the physical world by means of mobile devices, graspable
interfaces and interactive surfaces. Closely related is embedded interaction in
which the everyday objects and environments we interact with are computationally
augmented in new ways. As physical artifacts acquire new computational
behaviors, they become reprogrammable, customizable, repurposeable, and
interoperable in rich ecologies and diverse contexts. They also become more
complex, and require intense design effort in order to be functional, usable,
and enjoyable. Designing such systems requires interdisciplinary thinking, and
making them encompasses not only technical knowledge of software, electronics,
and mechanics, but also the use implications of a system's physical form and
behavior as well as its impacts on society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is
funding to support a Graduate Student Consortium (workshop) of about 12
promising doctoral students (7 from the United States, who alone will be
supported by this grant), along with 4 distinguished research faculty. The event
will take place in conjunction with the ACM SIGCHI 2013 International Conference
on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI 2013), which will be held
February 10-13, 2013 in Barcelona, Spain. Launched in 2007 and now in its
seventh year, the annual TEI conference series is about creating compelling
experiences that bridge bits and atoms through research in human-computer
interaction, design, interactive arts, tools and technologies. TEI brings
together researchers, designers, engineers, and artists who provide an
innovative and cross-disciplinary perspective on physical/digital interaction
design and technological innovation. The intimate size of this single-track
conference (about 200 participants in recent years) provides a unique forum for
exchanging ideas through talks, interactive exhibits, demos, posters, art
installations and performances. More information about the conference may be
found at http://www.tei-conf.org/13/. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TEI 2013
Graduate Student Consortium will immediately precede the main conference, and
will take place on Saturday evening, February 9, and all day Sunday, February
10, with follow-up activities during the conference's main technical program. On
Sunday, students will present their research to their peers and the faculty
mentors, who will constructively critique the students' work from diverse
viewpoints. The students will also get to show their work in posters at the
conference, and their short papers will be included in the conference
Proceedings. A dinner event on Saturday evening before the Graduate Student
Consortium will serve to set the stage for the following day's learning activity
and allow participants to become acquainted with one
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This workshop will sharpen the
research skills of a new generation of scientists, engineers, and designers who
will shape human-centered computing as it takes place in physical things and
places. Already we are observing the impact of this field in our daily lives, as
computing becomes embedded in our phones, our bus stops, and soon even our
clothing. Now is a critical moment in the field, as a wave of early exploratory
prototypes begins to give way to disciplined investigations, the development of
toolkits, and more rigorous evaluation methods. Mentoring a next generation of
TEI researchers is crucial if the field is to retain its initial vigor and
openness as it gains foothold in the academic establishment of human-computing
research. The TEI Graduate Consortium organizing committee will make special
efforts to recruit a diverse set of student participants, particularly seeking
members of groups that are under-represented in computer and information science
and engineering, including women and members of U.S. minority populations. The
committee is particularly concerned with increasing participation of
underrepresented groups and will also ensure that the meeting is accessible to
participants with disabilities.