* 1302438
* CIF: Medium:Collaborative Research: Nonasymptotic Analysis of Feature-Rich Decision Problems with Applications to Computer Vision
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Svetlana Lazebnik, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2018
* USD 669,212.00

This project deals with theory and efficient algorithms for statistical decision
problems that are radically different from those that have been studied to date
in two key aspects: First, the decision-maker may choose among a large class of
observation channels (features) of varying complexity and quality; and second,
the total cost of computational resources that can be used prior to arriving at
a decision is limited. Computer vision is a paradigmatic source of such feature-
rich decision problems, requiring the use of multiple heterogeneous feature
types, integration of diverse sources of contextual information, and possibly
even human interaction.

This project entails the development of a rigorous mathematical framework for
feature-rich decision problems in accordance with three specific aims: (1)
structural characterization of features as stochastic belief-refining filters;
(2) universal cost-sensitive criteria for numerical comparison of features in
terms of expected information gains; and (3) optimal value-of-information
criteria for sequential feature selection that take into account both feature
extraction costs and terminal decision losses. As corollaries, this research
investigates connections to asymptotic information-theoretic characterizations
of optimal feature selection rules and decisions. The fourth specific aim of the
project is the development of practical algorithms for two challenging computer
vision problems: active visual search and fine-grained categorization. This
component of the project leverages theoretical aims (1) and (2) to develop
practical cost- and loss-sensitive feature compression techniques. Theoretical
aim (3) targets algorithms that function as autonomous decision-making agents.
Faced with an inference task on an image, they apply cost-sensitive non-myopic
value- of-information criteria to decide at each time step whether to extract a
new feature from the image or to stop and declare an answer.