* 1302739
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Historical Geography of Electricity in Eastern North Carolina
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Scott Kirsch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 12,365.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation improvement grant
is jointly supported by the Science, Technology, and Society program and the
Geography and Spatial Sciences program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In eastern North
Carolina, some towns charge electricity rates nearly double those in nearby
towns. These differences result from the patchwork of electricity providers that
serve the region. These electric utilities can be grouped into three ownership
types: investor owned, municipally owned, and cooperatively owned. The proposed
research seeks to understand how and why this patchwork of electric utilities
and varying prices emerged. It is guided by two interlocking hypotheses. First,
electric utilities were compelled to overcome a series of obstacles, including
difficulty obtaining capital investment for infrastructure; a necessity to
increase revenues from electricity sales; and ongoing attempts to stave off the
devaluation of fixed assets. Second, the developing electric utilities both
shaped, and were shaped by, local and regional social, economic and political
geographies. As electric utilities began operating in eastern North Carolina,
varying alliances and configurations worked to undermine the interests of
African Americans and the working classes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research employs geographic approaches to
research electric utilities, including archival research, GIS mapping, and
interviews with key informants, to consider how the ownership and financing
models of the different electric utilities developed in relation to the
ideologies of the Progressive Era and Jim Crow segregation. It also considers
electricity's development in the American South, a region previously unexamined
by historians of electricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides insights into how electricity
infrastructures are developed, and how they influence the development of the
cities they power. This will inform current debates over the relations between
the industry, the state, and infrastructure, and in eastern North Carolina will
inform ongoing debates over electricity prices. Project outputs include a
geodatabase of historic power plant information, and an interactive online
mapping tool that allows users to explore the development of electricity in
several North Carolina towns.