* 1302570
* CCF: SHF: Medium: Collaborative: A Static and Dynamic  Verification Framework for Parallel Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Vivek Sarkar, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Human society is faced with an increasing number of problems including stubborn
diseases and international security/climate threats. The computer simulations
and advanced data management methods necessary to solving these societal
problems can only be realized through increased use of parallel computing at all
system scales, including desktops, servers and the cloud. Efficient large-scale
parallel computing however requires advanced parallel programming methods. Such
methods, unfortunately, have a greater proclivity for software bugs that
increase cost through lost cycles on super-computers and these same bugs
undermine confidence in simulation results. This research addresses the
challenge of developing parallel computing software by creating new scalable
methods to support advanced parallel programming models that provide rigorous
guarantees on program correctness. The societal impacts of this work stem from
increasing reliability of software powering the national infrastructure,
advanced educational methods to train future generations, and pedagogical
material in the form of course notes and software for broad dissemination. It
also helps maintain the United States in a leadership situation with respect to
the available talent pool in this area.

Providing rigorous guarantees on correctness of existing parallel computing
software requires that two classes of methods be developed, evaluated, and
taught widely: scalable code-level (static) checking methods, and downstream
detailed (dynamic) checking methods. This project develops these novel and much-
needed correctness checking methods around the Habanero Java programming and
compilation system. The research is to augment the system with correctness
obligations emitted during compilation and checked at all later stages of
translation and deployment. A key highlight of the project's approach is that it
allows some of the correctness obligations to be checked statically in the
context of safe subsets of Habanero Java. Obligations that are not able to be
statically checked, especially for larger subsets of the Habanero language, are
marked for checking dynamically through novel active-testing methods. An
Operational Semantics written in the Coq notation lends cohesion to the work by
ensuring that the division of correctness checking between static and dynamic
techniques is sound. In summary, this research helps advance the science of
parallel programming in terms of rigorous correctness checking methods, while at
the same time contributing to the broad practice of programming at all scales
from desktop to cloud computing and high-end scientific simulations.