* 1302691
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Towards Building Time Capsule for Online Social Activities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Chen-Nee Chuah, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2018
* USD 609,000.00

The capability to preserve, model, and predict information cascades over online
social networks has many theoretical and practical implications, e.g., for
marketing, recommendation filtering, and studying of societal behavior. Massive
empirical data sets on users' online social activities are being collected, but
they are often too big to analyze. The goal of this project is to design graph
generative models and summarization techniques that can preserve pertinent
information about online social interactions that lead to interesting events,
e.g., viral diffusion of information or drastic change of user behavior. Towards
this end, the project will develop generative models that can capture the
dynamic evolution of user activity graphs (UAGs), which represent a sequence of
inter-user communications/actions. At the microscopic level, the project will
investigate user influence in the recruitment process. In addition, the project
will design graph summarization techniques that can achieve good tradeoffs
between data compression ratio, computational complexities, and accuracy in
answering fundamental queries, such as identifying 'influential' sources of
information cascades.

Broader Impact: If successful, this project will provide efficient methods for
storing/archiving massive graph data to support longitudinal study on the
dynamics of online social interactions, which has potential impact on multiple
disciplines (e.g., economics, history, political sciences, and social science).
This project will help train future researchers and practitioners in online
social networking and network science through classroom curriculum development
and online teaching. The PIs will continue ongoing diversity recruitment and
outreach to K-12 students. Transfer of technology into commercial practice is
made feasible through partnership with industry.