* 1302668
* Collaborative Research: RI: Processing Opinion Sharing Dialogue in Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Pranav Anand, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,070,556.00

When people make decisions or form beliefs, they often discuss them with others,
seeking out others' opinions and sharing their own. Recently such conversations
are occurring online, providing a public source of information of interest to
companies, the military, the government, public policy bodies, and educators.
Moreover these dialogs occur at scale, allowing researchers in natural language
processing access to large-scale dialog datasets for the first time. However,
automatically processing such dialogs is challenging, because current tools are
targeted to traditional language resources such as newspaper articles. This
project develops innovative algorithms for automatically processing and
identifying important phenomena in such dialogs including: (a) stance -
participants' views on a topic; (b) subjective dialog acts - including sarcasm
and humor; and (c) central propositions - core ideas in the dialog, by combining
methods of crowd-sourced annotation, bootstrapping and machine learning, and
cognitive science. A critical project output is a new corpus, including
annotations and dialogic summaries.

Longer term impacts include public policy, providing government and the military
with methods to discover what "the man on the street" is saying about current
topics. Educators can re-use the corpora and tools to expose children to
compelling arguments about important issues. Greater understanding of opinion
sharing dialog enables new cognitive experiments and theory: automatically
identifying compelling arguments allows political science and social psychology
researchers to examine learning and opinion formation. The project trains
undergraduate and graduate students in interdisciplinary research combining
social media, human computer interaction, computational linguistics and natural
language processing.