* 1302954
* Illuminating Explosive Events Near and Far
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Bevin Zauderer, Zauderer, Bevin A
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2014
* USD 178,000.00

Dr. Bevin A. Zauderer is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Harvard
University. The fellow's program utilizes radio observations of extremely
energetic transient events to probe conditions in the early Universe and to
illuminate their underlying physics. The fellow will execute an intensive
observational program of the most energetic transient astrophysical phenomena in
the Universe: gamma-ray bursts, supernovae, and tidal disruption of stars by
supermassive black holes. These transient events release large amounts of energy
in high velocity outflows, which approach the speed of light in some cases. As
these outflows interact with the gas in the immediate surrounding environment,
synchrotron emission is produced, which generally peaks at radio wavelengths.
Radio observations from hours to months after the initial discovery provide
unique and crucial information on the energy and geometry of these explosive
events as well as the surrounding environment. The fellow will use world-class
observatories to lead the rapid radio followup: the Very Large Array, the
Combined Array for Research in Millimeter Astronomy, the Smithsonian
Submillimeter Array, and the Atacama Large Millimeter-submillimeter Array. The
fellow will measure the radio brightness of these transient events as a function
of wavelength and time and will produce rich data sets to supplement the
optical, infrared, and high-energy X-ray and gamma-ray observations. These radio
observations will be synthesized to study the composition of the high-velocity
outflow ejecta in gamma-ray bursts, to improve our understanding of the special
population of gamma-ray bursts found at extreme distances in the early Universe,
to determine characteristics of the environment around a previously dormant
supermassive black hole, and to determine how often relativistic outflows are
formed in supernovae and tidal disruption events.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
The fellow will undertake an educational program that will focus on the public's
misconceptions of the concepts of her research involving high energy
astrophysics, supermassive black holes, relativistic jets, and extremely distant
galaxies. The fellow will work with a leading science educator in the Harvard
Science Education Department to hone her skills teaching and communicating
science, particularly to address common misconceptions. Her education and public
outreach will have a broader impact in public policy through her work at the
National Academy of Sciences on a report or workshop related to understanding
and mitigating scientific misconceptions held by the public at large.