* 1302785
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hydropower Development and Indigenous Youth Agency
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Sara Smith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2015
* USD 15,967.00

This DDRI project investigates a social movement led by indigenous youth to
protect a sacred reserve threatened by hydropower development. Within geography,
significant work has been done with regards to environmental social movements
especially within the sub-discipline of political ecology. However the role of
indigenous youth and social media technology in these movements is relatively
under-theorized. Social media technology and the way young people interact with
it is rapidly changing how these movements organize, interact with state
authorities and build networks of support nationally and internationally. These
interactions are important in analyzing strategies employed by marginalized
minority groups in negotiating their rights with the state. The intellectual
merit of this project lies in its exploration of how indigenous youth become
political subjects through their interactions with state sponsored hydropower
projects, social media technology and global indigenous politics. More
specifically this research will explore three questions: How are indigenous
youth asserting new political identities? What productive spaces of political
action have opened up at the intersection of hydropower development and
indigenous youth activism? How do state-led technology and indigenous activism
interact with and adapt to each other? This research will use a mix-methods
approach to answer these question- interviews with government officials,
indigenous youth (both pro and anti-hydropower), ethnographic observation of the
reserve and participatory documentary and photography. Data will be analyzed for
the divergence and convergence of opinions of state and non-state actors. The
documentary project will provide rich visual data into the cultural life of the
reserve and shifting political identities of indigenous youth. This research
will offer valuable insight into youth agency, natural resource struggles and
shifting political identities and claims of marginalized
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research site is based in the Eastern Himalayan
state of Sikkim, India. While the research is region specific it has widespread
implications as questions of indigeneity and marginalization are being echoed in
several different contexts in Latin America, Asia and Africa. Findings from this
study will be widely disseminated to academic audiences in Geography, South
Asian Studies, Himalayan Studies and Political Ecology through key journals in
these fields. These findings will be shared with environmental organizations and
activist groups working closely with similarly marginalized communities. Upon
completion of this research audio-visual materials will be compiled into a short
documentary with the help of a local cinematographer and be shared with broader
audiences. The researcher also plans to work closely with local organizations to
encourage audio-visual media projects within the community and its use as an
educational and research tool for both community members and other researchers.
Due to the wide-ranging political and social consequences of hydropower
development the researcher hopes to generate policy level debate at both the
local and national level. Within the university the researcher plans to
encourage participatory research methodologies using visual media for
undergraduate and graduate classes. And finally as a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish an independent research career.