* 1302709
* HCC: Medium: Multi-lifespan Information System Research and Design
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Batya Friedman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project seeks to identify principles by which information and computer
scientists can design solutions for systems that will span periods extending
beyond a single human lifespan. The challenge is not simply that hardware,
software, and information infrastructure change, but also that culture and
social institutions change. Thus the research will develop information systems
that can adapt to shifting socio-technical conditions as they unfold; provide a
delicate balance among remembering, forgetting, and speaking sensitive to
different generations; support public discourse; and link distributed digital
heritage across technology, institutions, and time. To achieve these goals, the
project will leverage the existing Tribunal Voices testbed within four research
strands: (1) multi-lifespan envisioning; (2) tagging and meaning making across
generations; (3) supporting public discourse in shifting socio-technical
conditions; and (4) constructing multi-lifespan policy and
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-lifespan systems must be resilient to
shifting societal, political, and technological conditions over an extended
period of time. A fundamental challenge is to understand what those shifts might
be, and how to support such future shifts from a technical perspective in
today's designs. This project will explore conceptual, technical, and policy-
oriented mechanisms for adapting and supporting such shifts. Another fundamental
challenge is determining how to involve the public in interacting with deployed
multi-lifespan systems, with sensitivity to multi-generations. This project will
develop innovative methods to support public discourse for digital forums and
public exhibits with attention to generational perspectives and secure
participation. Multi-lifespan systems will need mechanisms for supporting the
permanence of data, even as technologies change, as well as the intended
impermanence of data. This project will develop integrated technical mechanisms
and interaction designs to support a balance among remembering, forgetting, and
speaking about difficult topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be the first
large-scale research and design investigation from a multi-lifespan design
approach. The goals are two-fold: First, achieving technical progress by
generating general design knowledge and methods for multi-lifespan information
system design. Second, achieving social progress by contributing meaningful
information system designs in support of advancing international justice and
reconciliation between groups that had been in conflict with each other. In its
broadest framing, through the development and refining of the core theory and
methods of multi-lifespan information system design, this project seeks to shape
the future of human-centered computing such that the next generation of
scientists is well positioned to frame and address problems on a longer-term
societal level.