* 1302117
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Information Foraging Theory: From Scientific Principles to Engineering Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Scott Fleming, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 327,862.00

Modern software systems are notoriously large and complex, often made up of
hundreds and thousands of interconnected modules, and lines of source code that
can number in the millions. Consequently, software developers waste a
considerable portion of their time trying to find and get to information in that
code. To address this problem, this research project will investigate a
scientific theory to describe how developers go about seeking this information.
The project will then use the expanded theory to identify ways of helping
developers to more efficiently find information, and in the process, increase
their productivity. This contribution will in turn be put to practical use by
providing to builders of today?s software tools new practical ways to apply this
scientific theory to their tools, so as to reduce the effort required in today?s
software development projects.

In particular, this project will (1) expand Information Foraging Theory to
describe how learning affects developers? navigation through code and related
artifacts, (2) generate theory-grounded design patterns explaining how to design
tools that aid developers' information foraging, (3) develop a design method
enabling tool builders to apply these patterns, and (4) evaluate the validity
and effectiveness of (1)-(3). Broader impacts will include (a) helping with
teaching and learning for software tool builders, professional software
developers, graduate students, undergraduates and high schoolers, (b) broadening
participation of students from underrepresented groups, (c) producing publicly
available infrastructure consisting of design patterns and training materials,
(d) disseminating results via publications, software, and workshops, and (e)
providing a scientific foundation for future efforts aimed at training
developers and designing tools for their use.