* 1302225
* CSR: Medium: Provisioning and Harnessing Energy Storage for Datacenter Demand Response
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Anand Sivasubramaniam, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 998,477.00

Power consumption of datacenters poses economic, societal and environmental
concerns. A large datacenter spends millions of dollars in yearly operational
expenditures (op-ex) paying its electricity bills, and in provisioning the power
delivery network, to accommodate the peak power draw, even if this draw is
rarely sustained. Re-shaping the power draw temporally (over time) and spatially
(across regions of the datacenter, or even across datacenters), broadly referred
to as Demand Response (DR), is a common technique to reduce cap-ex and op-ex
costs. Until now, datacenter DR has primarily used computing knobs --
consolidation, scheduling, migration, and power state modulation -- to manage
the power draw.

This project will investigate a novel set of complementary techniques leveraging
Energy Storage Devices (ESDs) in the datacenter for DR. The project will explore
specific issues related to provisioning -- type, capacity and location -- ESDs
in the datacenter power hierarchy. It will also develop control techniques for
sourcing from these devices, and coupling their usage with current computing DR
techniques, all the while optimizing for performance, cost, availability and ESD
health related criteria. This research will have a direct impact on datacenter
power cost reduction and the ability to source renewable energy. The platforms,
models and power traces from this work can be useful to further ESD research in
datacenters. This project will also enhance interdisciplinary curriculum in the
related areas, and lead to new undergraduate honor's thesis projects.