* 1302813
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Places of Gathering: Orange Pottery Variability and the Social Scale of Late Archaic Shell Mound Interaction in Northeast Florida
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Zackary Gilmore, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 23,310.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Kenneth Sassaman, Zackary Gilmore will analyze ancient
pottery from Florida to investigate the role of large-scale, monumental places
in facilitating social interaction among culturally diverse groups of
prehistoric hunter-gatherers. Important archaeological places exist worldwide
where disparate groups gathered together for purposes of exchange, ritual, and
monument construction. Frequently, the interaction fostered by these places
produced new types of social formations and affected the historical trajectories
of entire regions. Between 7200 and 3500 years ago, the inhabitants of Florida's
St. Johns River Valley built dozens of mounds out of freshwater shellfish
remains. Evidence suggests that these places were at the center of pivotal
regional developments including the construction of early monumental
architecture, the adoption of pottery technology, and the establishment of
sedentism and distinct tribal identities. Despite this fact, little agreement
has been reached regarding even their most basic functions and meanings within
the societies that built and inhabited them.

This research is designed to identify the types and scales of social interaction
engaged in during the construction and use of shell mounds at the Silver Glen
Run (SGR) complex in northeast Florida. Occupied for most of the past 7,000
years, between 2,500 and 2,000 B.C., this complex's inhabitants constructed two
of the region's largest shell mounds and deposited hundreds of pottery vessels
associated with one of the continent's earliest ceramic technologies. To better
understand the economic and social importance of the complex, this project
employs two complementary types of pottery analysis. First, related sourcing
techniques (Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis [INAA] and petrography)
will be used to characterize the chemical and mineralogical constituents of the
SGR sherds. Comparing these results to clay reference samples with known source
locations will help determine the geographic origins of the various constituent
groups who gathered at SGR. Second, technological and stylistic analysis will
reveal the intended functions (cooking, serving, storage, etc.) for which
vessels were manufactured, along with the social conditions (e.g., small
domestic meal vs. large communal feast) in which they were used. Together, these
analyses provide the opportunity to gain a more nuanced understanding of the
role played by this and similar sites in the social histories of Florida's
prehistoric hunter-gatherers.

Beyond its direct archaeological significance, this research contributes to
undergraduate education by providing opportunities for volunteer participation
in the sorting and cataloging of archaeological pottery. It is also inter-
institutional in nature, bringing together resources and expertise from three
public research institutions, as well as a private organization. Technological
analysis will be conducted at the University of Florida (UF). The petrographic
analysis will be conducted at the Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) and
INAA at the University of Missouri Research Reactor Center. All of these will
make use of extant collections at the FLMNH. In addition, this research will
compile and analyze data that will be disseminated to public and private
organizations on whose land the Silver Glen Run complex is located. Results of
the investigations will be made available in the form of presentations,
technical reports, and other printed materials that will make the institutions
more knowledgeable and effective stewards of the considerable archaeological
resources under their control. Results and raw data will also be made publicly
available on the LSA website (http://www.anthro.ufl.edu/LSA/).