* 1303077
* Frobenius singularities and related invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Kevin Tucker, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 02/28/2014
* USD 144,000.00

Singularities and numerical invariants defined via the Frobenius endomorphism
are an important part of the study of Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
in positive characteristic. To that end, the program proposed by the PI will
focus on the F-signature and other related so-called F-invariants, including
Hilbert-Kunz multiplicity and test ideals. Central to the investigations of the
PI is the interaction with geometric methods in characteristic zero stemming
from complex algebraic geometry. One of the main objectives of the program is to
better describe the geometry and broader connections of F-signature, as well as
its many generalizations. The PI aims to approach various problems related to a
number of long standing open questions in the field, including the equivalence
of weak versus strong F-regularity and the direct summand conjecture.
Furthermore, the PI plans to build upon recent work describing test ideals via
regular alterations in exploring the local and global geometry of algebraic
varieties in positive characteristic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commutative Algebra
and Algebraic Geometry are among the oldest and yet most active disciplines in
mathematics. The fields have strong ties to such diverse areas as complex
analysis, topology, and number theory, and are used in a wide variety of applied
settings. Applications range from error-correcting codes in computer science and
genomics to control theory and modeling in engineering. These fields seek to
understand geometric objects (algebraic varieties) given locally as the
solutions to polynomial equations. For instance, a plane curve is the zero set
of a polynomial in two variables (such as the cusp y^2 = x^3). The richness and
simplicity of polynomial equations make algebraic varieties fascinating objects
of study. The particular questions the PI proposes to study will hopefully lead
to a deeper understanding of the varieties and singularities in positive
characteristic, i.e. over number systems having the property that a prime number
vanishes. In particular, these systems include the finite fields at the heart of
essentially all electronic computation.