* 1303538
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Racial Disparity in American Incarceration, 1868-1950
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Bruce Western, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2015
* USD 6,760.00

Bruce Western Christopher Muller Harvard University

Between 1970 and 2010, the U.S. imprisonment rate increased fivefold, from
roughly 100 per 100,000 residents to roughly 500 per 100,000 residents. No other
nation incarcerates such a large proportion of its population. As the
incarceration rate increased, it retained a striking racial disparity. African
Americans today are imprisoned at about six times the rate of whites. The
dissertation research proposes that racial disparity in incarceration had
different sources in different periods of U.S. history. Immediately following
the Civil War, racial differences in incarceration in the South were driven by
transformations in the agricultural and industrial economy. During the Great
Migration, racial disparity rose in the North due, in part, to status conflicts
between migrating African Americans and the recent European immigrants who
dominated northern police forces. Today, racial disparity persists not only
because of the War on Drugs, but because of suburban voters' influence over
urban criminal justice policy. These three hypotheses will be tested using
archival records, secondary historical materials, and quantitative data.

Broader Impacts

In recent years, severe racial disparities in incarceration have been the
subject of public and scholarly concern. Some scholars trace a direct path
between former institutions of social control, such as slavery and Jim Crow, and
high rates of African-American incarceration today. This project aims instead to
study empirically the sources of racial disparity in three periods of U.S.
history. Understanding these sources will better enable us to understand the
problems that have led to vast racial inequality in punishment today.