* 1303685
* Understanding Polarimetric Radar Tornadic Debris Signatures Using Modeling, Simulations, and Field Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Sebastian Torres, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2018
* USD 887,818.00

The recently completed dual-polarimetric upgrade of the national WSR-88D Doppler
radar network has provided a wide variety of new capabilities for weather
observations. One notable area of improvement that has as-yet not been the
subject of focused research is the ability to detect tornadoes through analysis
of polarimetric variables within zones of lofted debris, collectively known as
the Tornadic Debris Signature (TDS). While these observations are already being
accessed, user confidence in (and hence impact of) these new data is limited in
part because the scattering characteristics of tornadic debris are not well
understood in a quantitative sense. This multi-pronged project will make use of
observations, simulations and modeling to further knowledge on how tornadic
debris is observed by weather radars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project embodies
four primary thrusts and associated tasks, which will in-turn enable the study
of several scientific questions. The researchers plan to begin their
investigation by cataloging radar cross-section (RCS) for common tornadic debris
types using theory, simulations and laboratory-type anechoic chamber
measurements. Sample objects will include distributions of straight and small
twigs, free-standing leaves absent significant roughness and bending effects,
small pieces of wood, hydrometeors, and dust. Numerical simulations of
polarimetric radar data using the RCS database and 3D wind fields (as generated
via prior tornado-scale numerical modeling efforts) will then be conducted. The
PIs also plan to collect additional new high-resolution observational data from
the Rapid scanning X-band polarimetric (RaXpol) mobile radar and nearby fixed-
based network radars, and to evaluate these data in tandem with detailed post-
tornado damage surveys. These tasks will subsequently drive development of a
suite of signal processing algorithms to improve detection and meaningful
characterization tornadic debris signatures with the goal of distinguishing
debris type, size, and concentration. The main scientific objectives are to: 1)
Investigate the two main hypotheses for negative ZDR in tornadoes, Mie
scattering and common scatter alignment, and 2) Examine the physical processes
associated with tornadic debris, such as lofting, centrifuging and loading, and
their relationship to tornado and supercell
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project map strongly on
mission agency efforts to increase public safety, as this work will potentially
assist the operational meteorological community through improved tornado
detection and ability to better estimate severity of ensuing damage in real-
time. Development of an anechoic chamber will facilitate future research
focusing on antenna design and performance, both by investigators at the grantee
university and co-located organizations who are part of the National Weather
Center. Graduate and undergraduate students will be directly included in the
research activities and the interdisciplinary engineering and meteorology
curriculum.