* 1303506
* CAREER:  Robust Computational and Experimental Simulation of Mechanical Systems under Extreme Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Mettupalayam Sivaselvan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 171,247.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
project is to develop a novel theoretical framework and a computational
methodology to simulate failure processes in structural systems under extreme
events. Computer simulation of failure processes in structures is invaluable in
many applications ? (1) performance-based design of structures for extreme
events, (2) forensic examination of structural failures, (3) assessment of
reserve capacities in post-disaster decision support etc. But due to the
inherent complexity and sensitivity of failure processes, current computational
tools are unable to simulate them reliably for engineers to use with confidence.
This research project will adopt a fundamentally different approach to
simulation of failure processes, integrating ideas from dynamical systems and
control theory, statistical mechanics and thermodynamics, and constitutive
modeling theory. The key to this integration will be a new mixed Lagrangian
formalism. This approach will capture the essential physics of failure
processes, leading to better mathematical models, and more efficient numerical
algorithms for robust simulation. Computer simulations will be validated using a
novel program of physical experiments, where specially developed optimal
controls will be utilized to obtain robust data.

Successful completion of the project will provide practical tools that engineers
can use routinely for assessing the performance of structural systems under
extreme events. The project will involve collaboration with four industry
partners to facilitate rapid and seamless transfer of these tools to practice.
In line with the interdisciplinary nature of the research component, in the
educational component of this project, a new course will be developed at the
junior undergraduate level, whose purpose will be to tie different subjects in
the undergraduate curriculum together within a unifying framework. Furthermore,
numerical simulations of structural failures will be used to arouse engineering
curiosity in K-12 students, through a network-based computer game, and through
units developed for the TeachEngineering digital library, which is part of the
NSF?s Digital Libraries collection.