* 1303736
* 2013 Soft Condensed Matter Physics GRC/GRS
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Robijn Bruinsma, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award contributes support for a combined
Gordon Research Conference on Soft Condensed Matter Physics: Bio-Soft Matter:
Dynamical and Structural Complexity and Gordon Research Seminar to take place
August 18 - 23, 2013, at Colby-Sawyer College, New London, New Hampshire.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of new materials has always been an important
part of the physics of soft matter but currently it is taking center stage. A
wide a range of length scales is a defining characteristic of soft matter. The
resulting structural flexibility makes soft matter physics a prime discipline
for the study of newly synthesized materials characterized by structural
complexity. Soft matter systems also have a wide range of characteristic time
scales making them a fertile ground for new materials with novel and interesting
dynamical complexity. The importance of thermal fluctuations is a theme that
unifies these two directions. Fundamental principles developed in soft matter
physics, such as the statistical mechanics of self-assembly, are increasingly
applied to biological systems. Conversely, bio-inspired approaches can be
applied to construct and understand novel soft matter materials with various
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Gordon Research Conference will bring
together a wide range of practitioners and experts from condensed matter physics
and other disciplines to assess the state-of-the-art and advance it through
fruitful synergies. Recent developments in terms of new experimental data that
has become available in the area of biologically inspired new materials as well
as new theoretical advances make this a timely conference. A special session has
been planned to highlight the connections between soft matter physics and other
research communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2013 Soft Condensed Matter
Gordon Research Conference will bring together an outstanding and diverse group
of scientists at the forefront of research, and will make a special effort to
include younger scientists and students. Specifically designed for junior
participants, students and postdocs, a two-day Gordon Research Seminar will be
held just before the main conference. This seminar will provide introductory
lectures, and an opportunity for short talks in a peer-only environment, as well
as a mentorship component. The organizers have made a strong effort to involve
members of underrepresented groups among speakers and participants alike.