* 1303086
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Overcoming Scale Disparities Through Sub-Pixel Remote Sensing Classifications and Spatial Pattern Metrics
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Amy Frazier, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,847.00

This DDRI project investigates a new data aggregation technique that uses a
combination of sub-pixel remote sensing data and landscape metrics to retain a
greater amount of spatial information compared to traditional aggregation
techniques. Geography has a long tradition of grouping spatial data into areal
units (e.g., census tracts, pixels, etc.) that form the basis for observation
and measurement. Data aggregation is necessary to map real-world phenomena and
perform spatial analysis, but the process introduces statistical biases that
adversely affect results and create obstacles for integrating datasets from
different sources and across disciplines. These biases are familiar to
geographers as the modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP) and are known to
ecologists as the root of ecological fallacies. The data aggregation technique
developed in this research will capture the increased land cover information
present in sub-pixel remote sensing classifications and retain this information
as smaller spatial units are combined into larger units, thereby reducing
statistical biases. The study will then test the results of the data aggregation
technique by predicting land cover patterns at very fine spatial resolutions.
The accuracy of these predictions will depend on how much statistical bias was
removed through the data aggregation technique. Lastly, the research will
demonstrate a practical ecological application for these findings by using them
to perform super-resolution mapping. Super-resolution mapping is a subfield of
remote sensing concerned with mapping data at a finer resolution than the
original sensor collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research include advancing fundamental spatial science by redefining data
aggregation while also providing a theoretical understanding of the causation of
MAUP and ecological fallacies when using traditional remote sensing
classifications. The research will demonstrate how advanced remote sensing
techniques can help mitigate those biases. The project will promote
interdisciplinary collaborations by ultimately allowing studies to integrate
global spatial data sources from remote sensing with ground-based ecological
spatial data more accurately. Eventually these advances can be used to study
individual behaviors and impacts to the land using remote sensing and ground-
based survey data. The long-term impacts reach beyond the theoretical aspects of
geographical and spatial sciences and will impact applied scientific research
including agent-based modeling for human impact analysis, spatial epidemiology,
and population dynamics. Community outreach will include developing a lesson
plan for a special education Earth Science class to teach students applications
of geospatial technologies and highlight opportunities for future career paths.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish an independent research
career.