* 1303099
* Collaborative Research: Kinetics of Autonomous Catalytic Nanomotors in Confined and Crowded Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Rui Qiao, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 12/31/2014
* USD 167,078.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the transport of autonomous
nanomotors driven by chemical reactions in confined and crowded environments by
integrating experiment and numerical simulations. Intellectual Merits: The work
is built on the PIs? recent success in design and fabrication of catalytic
nanomotors with translational and rotational motion. By elucidating new issues
unique to the transport of autonomous nanomotors in confined spaces and in
presence of other particles and motors with different thermal, mechanical, and
chemical interactions, the proposed research will break new ground for
fundamental studies of particulate transport phenomena and enrich the theories
of particulate transport. The proposed work will benefit from the synergistic
collaboration between two PIs with complementary expertise in nanomotor
fabrication/characterization and multi-physics simulations, and is supported by
state-of-the-art computing and experimental facilities. Broader Impacts: The
proposed work addresses some of the most pressing issues in understanding the
transport of nanomotors in practical applications, and the insights gained here
will form the theoretical foundation for engineering smart nanomotor systems for
targeted drug delivery and disease treatment, which can potentially transform
these fields. The project will include strong and sustained education programs
involving both undergraduate students with diverse ethnical backgrounds and
regional K-12 students. Undergraduate research experience helps students, many
of them minorities, develop a genuine interest in science and engineering
through hands-on research activities in STEM disciplines. Outreach efforts will
include providing high school students with immersive research experiences and
showcasing research in university-level K-12 outreach programs. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project, with a unique combination of
experiments and simulations, will provide the students involved with a unique
exposure to cutting-edge science and engineering.