* 1303662
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Protest Policing: American Cities and Police Responses to Social Movements
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Kim Voss, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1303662

Kim Voss

Nicholas Adams

University of California-Berkeley

Protest movements pose a significant challenge to city governments and police
departments, who respond in a variety of ways. This research asks why, how, and
when city and police responses to social movements vary. Past research on
protest policing identified three main factors that determine how police manage
protest: the governing context under which police operate, police departments'
cultures and their capacities, and the characteristics and activities of the
protest movements. But to date, no consensus has emerged as to which of these
different factors matters most in determining protest policing, nor under what
circumstances. It has been very difficult to compare the policing of one protest
movement to the policing of another because they usually feature different aims,
strategies, and tactics. That difficulty is compounded if the contexts in which
protest policing occurs differ considerably. With so much variability, the
conclusions of comparative studies often contradict one another, and findings
cannot be generalized across movements and locations.

This dissertation project will use the multiple instances of the Occupy movement
to complete a comparative study of protest policing. The researchers will
analyze police interactions with the Occupy movement in over 200 cities.
Specifically, data describing protest policing tactics will be analyzed to study
whether police departments use a wide array of approaches over the course of a
protest campaign or just one or two signature sets of tactics. The researchers
will also study the effects of the governing context, police characteristics,
and movement's characteristics on police handling of protests over the course of
protest campaigns -- questions untestable with existing data, which lack
detailed information on the timing of events.

Broader Impact

In the last two years, a wave of protest has swept the world: The Arab Spring,
the Occupy movement, anti-austerity rioting in England, police and protester
clashes in Spain and Greece, and labor unrest in China. There is good reason to
believe that the outcomes of such protest movements depend, in part, on the ways
in which they are policed. But researchers, to date, are unable to
satisfactorily explain why police respond to protest movements as they do. This
research aims to explain the dynamics of protester/police interactions to inform
strategies that people and their governments may take to avoid unnecessary
escalations, distrust, and negative policing and protest movement outcomes.
_______________________________________________________________________