* 1303646
* GEM:   Understanding the Global Aspects of Plasma Heating in Earth's Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Pontus Brandt, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 09/30/2017
* USD 311,882.00

This project will investigate how various modes of transport (steady convection
and bursty bulk flows/dipolarization fronts) influence the inner magnetosphere
and ring current. Observations in the plasma sheet from THEMIS and in the night
side radiation belts from the Van Allen Probes will be used to determine how
various transport modes affect local properties of the ring current. The
evolution of energy spectra, pitch angle distributions and pressure will be
examined for the different forms of interaction. One goal will be to determine
the relative importance of adiabatic and non-adiabatic acceleration. This study
will involve multiple events. In separate but related studies IMAGE HENA
observations will be used to determine globally evolving ring current and plasma
sheet pressures. This will be done by comparing the spectral and spatial
evolution of H and O ions during convection and substorms. Finally a 3D particle
trajectory tracing code will be used in the time evolving fields from the Rice
Convection Model to evaluate non-adiabatic acceleration mechanisms. HENA
observations will be used to determine plasma pressures at synchronous orbit and
these will be used as input to the RCM. The resulting pressures from RCM will be
compared with the global pressures in the ring current region.

This research will support a post-doctoral researcher and provide early career
development for a female scientist.