* 1303603
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Public School Selection Processes, Educational Inequality, and the Meaning of Rejection.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Annette Lareau, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2015
* USD 11,840.00

SES-1303603&lt;br/&gt;PI: Annette Lareau &lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Shani Adia
Evans&lt;br/&gt;University of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year,
thousands of students apply to selective urban public high schools. Applicants
can be selected or rejected by selective schools. The outcome of the selection
process determines students' location within a stratified system of urban public
schools. Students who are not admitted to a selective school attend typically
under-resourced neighborhood high schools. This study investigates the
significance of rejection for students who view school as a means to achieve
upward mobility. The research questions motivating the study are: (1) How do
students interpret the significance of the selection/rejection process for their
own future? and (2) How, if at all, does the outcome of the selection process
influence students' subsequent academic outlook. The study uses qualitative
methods, including observation and interviewing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
rejection experience has been largely absent from research on educational
inequality. However, preliminary research suggests that rejected students
interpret the negative outcome of the selection/rejection process as a marker of
their diminished educational opportunity. Moreover, tentative evidence indicates
that students who fail to access their preferred school become pessimistic about
their educational future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Increasingly, American public school students have the option
to apply to schools other than their assigned neighborhood school. However, it
is not simply that families choose schools. Schools also choose students. Thus,
with increased options comes the possibility of rejection. This study offers the
rejection experience as an important variable of interest in sociological
studies of education. The significance of rejection for young students also has
policy implications. This research could help focus attention on how and when
selection should occur in U.S. public schools. By drawing attention to the
effects of selection and school choice for those who do not attend their
preferred schools, this study invites policy makers to take a closer look at the
design and implementation of selection and school choice policies.