* 1303864
* High Resolution, Active Remote Sensing of Cloud Microphysics at Summit, Greenland with Polarized Raman Lidar
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Ryan Neely, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2019
* USD 993,566.00

A better understanding of Arctic cloud and aerosol properties, structure and
formation is essential to understand the specific response of the Arctic in the
context of global climate change. A lack of coherent high vertical and temporal
resolution observations of cloud particles, aerosols moisture advection (i.e.
water vapor) and thermodynamics, creates large uncertainties in current model
estimates of cloud properties and inhibits our understanding of cloud radiative
and precipitation impacts on the surface. As a result, current weather and
climate models poorly parameterize clouds over the Arctic and more specifically
over the Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS). A reduction in this uncertainty is
particularly important above the GIS, where clouds act as sinks and sources to
the ice mass balance by modulating the surface radiation budget and available
precipitable water. To gain the understanding necessary to reduce this
uncertainty, a new autonomous multi-wavelength, polarized Raman lidar is
proposed for development and deployment at the NSF&amp;#700;s observatory in
Summit, Greenland. The new lidar observations will employ multiple wavelengths
and polarizations to observe elastic and inelastic scattering from the Arctic
atmosphere enabling regular retrieval of temperature, water vapor and extinction
profiles. This combination of observational capability will create a coherent
dataset of high-resolution thermodynamic, cloud and aerosol observations through
the Arctic troposphere and lower stratosphere above Summit. Broadly, this
addition to the NSF Observatory at Summit, Greenland as part of the larger
Arctic Observing Network fits well within the Study of Environmental Arctic
Change (SEARCH) implementation plan. Thus, this instrument will significantly
enhance Arctic observing infrastructure and advance observations and
understanding of change in the Arctic. The proposed instrumentation and
observations are the first of their kind on the GIS and will expand the
existing, although modest, network of such measurements across the Arctic. This
project will also provide a unique experience and educational opportunity
through the combination of fieldwork and subsequent data processing for graduate
students at the University of Colorado.