* 1303991
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   "The sea is our garden": Inupiaq subsistence, indigenous knowledge, and the 'politics of nature' in the context of Arctic offshore development
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Hilda Kurtz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2014
* USD 40,227.00

Recent trends suggest that a new era of industrialization is dawning in the
Alaskan Arctic. These processes will likely require the Iñupiat of the North
Slope to increasingly balance their concerns for their traditional practices and
subsistence lifestyles against both the promises as well as the challenges of
economic growth and development. Yet the decision-making structures surrounding
projects like the Arctic offshore drilling program are now largely dominated by
the western values and perspectives held by outside authorities and business
interests. This research will explore how the Indigenous Knowledge (IK) of the
Iñupiat can and should be used to ensure that regional management outcomes are
culturally sensitive to the realities of Alaskan Native existence today.

Contemporary Native scholars insist that the IK of any tribal peoples cannot be
correctly understood without an equal willingness by westerners to explore the
unique worldviews and lifeways that inform Native knowledge systems. Geographic
interest in the notion of nature as a social construct also suggests that
culturally constituted notions of nature may provide the necessary
interpretative framework that allows for a much more comprehensive understanding
of indigenous knowledge. The theoretical impetus for these efforts is found in
the environmental justice concept of cultural misrecognition, which proposes
that a refusal to explore the complexities of indigenous knowledge systems is a
profound act of dismissal that often perpetuates a cycle of social and
environmental inequity.

This research will use a variety of qualitative research methods to investigate
how coastal Iñupiat communities in the Alaskan Arctic think about and relate to
nature, in order to better understand how these views have shaped their
traditional knowledge and beliefs. This research also seeks to identify what
aspects of their worldviews and IK that Iñupiat community members themselves
consider to be important for non-Natives to know about and understand. In
addition, this project engages with the subsistence concerns and IK of the
Iñupiat within the context of the complex political, economic, and cultural
issues that many Native communities throughout Alaska now face.

The findings of this research will ideally inform the debate currently shaping
the trajectory of development in the Arctic by highlighting both the practical
challenges as well as the epistemic promise that an exploration of Native
understandings of nature offers to contemporary resource management practices.
This research further examines how such knowledge held by the Iñupiat could
greatly enhance the offshore drilling decision-making process, which is at
present driven mainly by technological considerations. The ultimate goal is to
establish a template for development in the Far North that can promote both
regional economic growth as well as the subsistence lifestyles of Alaskan
Natives. In this way, it may become possible to manage a changing Arctic in a
socially equitable and environmentally just manner.