* 1303965
* Impacts of distant pollution sources on microphysical transitions in Arctic clouds
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Timothy Garrett, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 459,658.00

A growing body of research indicates that biomass and industrial aerosols from
mid-latitudes have a broad range of effects on arctic climatological systems.
Pollutant aerosols directly and indirectly perturb solar reflection and thermal
radiative emission in the atmosphere, and soot accelerates melting when it
accumulates on snow. Nonetheless, much remains unknown about how pollution
plumes are modifying arctic cloud properties and precipitation. Consequently,
the impact of pollution on the arctic climate system is not well
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research into aerosol-cloud-precipitation
interactions in the Arctic has generally focused on small time and spatial
scales, using a combination of aircraft and numerical modeling work. Less
research has investigated these processes over climatological time scales and
pan-Arctic spatial scales, the scales that are particularly relevant to guide
and evaluate precipitation formation in larger scale climate models. Using a
range of observational techniques for studying aerosol-cloud-precipitation-
climate interactions, including ground-based and space-based approaches, the
researchers will assess the following question: When particulate pollution
reaches the Arctic, is it associated with a modification of cloud properties and
an inhibition of ice crystal precipitation from super-cooled, low-level Arctic
liquid clouds? The knowledge generated from this study will contribute to a
better understanding of the impact of biomass burning and industrial aerosols on
the arctic climate system.