* 1303164
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Demographic Projections and Narratives of Latino Growth
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2014
* USD 11,853.00

SES-1303164 José Itzigsohn Michael Rodríguez-Muñiz Brown University

Over the past several decades, demographic change has become a major topic of
debate in the United States. The widespread consumption of demographic
projections has contributed to the belief that the country is undergoing a
seemingly unprecedented, irreversible, and altogether inevitable ethnoracial and
cultural transformation. Seizing the imagination of policymakers, social
movements, and the general public, this narrative has fueled growing anxieties
and anticipations over the future of the country. With a focus on the growing
U.S. Latino population, this dissertation expands scholarly knowledge on the
ways in which social actors and policymakers perceive, experience, and actively
engaged "demographic change." Through a yearlong qualitative and ethnographic
study involving in-depth interviews with key stakeholders and experts,
participant observation of public events and organizational activities, archival
research, and an analysis of media coverage and popular discourse, this study
examines efforts undertaken by national Latino civil rights and advocacy
organizations to translate Latino population growth into greater policy
influence. Two major research questions guide the research: 1) How do national
Latino leaders and organizations understand, frame, and use demographic
statistics and narratives about Latino population growth? 2) How is this
activity shaping Latino panethnic identity, civil rights agendas, and relations
between Latino advocates and other actors? Ultimately, this project aims to shed
light on the public and cultural life of statistics and theorize on the impact
of demographic knowledge on contemporary democratic life more broadly.

Broader Impacts

This project strives to stimulate a more inclusive discussion about Latino
population growth and demographic change. Relevant to policymakers, advocates,
and academics alike, it challenges the tendency to simply take demography as an
objective fact. Instead, this project offers a timely study of the meanings of
demographic change and the production, circulation, and use of statistics in
policymaking and advocacy. Research findings will be disseminated at scholarly
conferences, in academic publications, and to staff and leadership of the
national Latino civil rights and advocacy organizations under study. Results
will also be shared with the general public through op-eds and commentaries in
English and Spanish media outlets, blog posts, and a website the researcher will
develop dedicated to informed discussion and debate about demographic change.