* 1303400
* 2013 NSF CISE CAREER Proposal Writing Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Sajal Das, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2013
* USD 49,999.00

The NSF CAREER awards program serves a critical role in innovative research and
education in the United States by identifying, fostering, nurturing and
supporting the nation's most promising and creative junior faculty. Beyond the
CAREER program solicitation, the majority of junior faculty members usually have
little exposure to NSF, let alone interactions with program directors. Many
young professors also have no experience in writing successful grant proposals.
The goal of this one-day CAREER Proposal Writing Workshop to be held at the
University of Texas at Arlington is aimed to fill this gap. This workshop not
only introduces young faculty to the CAREER program but also gives them unique
opportunities to network with CISE program directors, former program directors
and recent awardees. Major activities of the workshop include presentations on
proposal writing, experience sharing, mock panels, and proposal writing clinic.
The workshop is open to participants from U.S. national universities including
HBCU/MEI. Indeed, significant effort is made to involve HBCU/MEI junior faculty
into CAREER proposal writing practice, and helps them to become more successful
in cutting-edge research and education, thus enhancing their overall research
capability to a competitive level. Overall, the workshop is expected to be an
invaluable experience for junior faculty as they become successful in their
academic careers. By giving priority to participants from under-represented
groups, the workshop is expected to make tangible impact to the society. Key
presentations and workshop materials are planed to be archived and to be
available for download, extending the broader impact of the workshop beyond the
one-day event.