* 1303177
* Nonequilibrium Quantum Mechanics of Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Aditi Mitra, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to study of
nonequilibrium phenomena in strongly correlated quantum systems. The research
has three thrusts:

1). Quench dynamics in closed quantum systems with applications to cold-atomic
gases and to ultra-fast pump-probe spectroscopy of solid-state systems. The PI
will build on her recent work where a novel renormalization group approach to
study the dynamics of strongly correlated systems near critical points was
developed. The PI aims to generalize this approach to study: one-dimensional
systems where both disorder and interactions are present, quantum quenches in
higher spatial dimensions, and a new kind of dynamical phase transition where a
closed quantum system in the thermodynamic limit shows non-analytic behavior
during its time-evolution.

2). Light-matter coupled systems where the interaction between two-level systems
and photons can effectively lead to strongly correlated states of photons. The
PI will include both strong driving and dissipation, which appear in
experimental realizations of these systems, in the study of these systems. The
PI will explore how different kinds of dissipative environments which are non-
Markovian in nature affect the physics of the correlated states.

3). Transport in nanoscale systems. Nonperturbative methods such as 1/N
expansion techniques will be used to study the underscreened Kondo model in
which a spin much greater 1 is coupled to current carrying leads. This part of
the project has relevance to transport through spin clusters.

This award supports active participation of graduate and undergraduate student,
and the PI's efforts in K-12 outreach activities that are part of a continuing
partnership between the NYU physics department and local schools.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The award supports theoretical research and education to explore the properties
of quantum mechanical systems, such as small assemblies of atoms, that are far
from the steady balance of equilibrium. This nonequilbrium state often results
when the quantum mechanical system has been subjected to strong forces that act
for a short period of time causing the system to change rapidly with time.
Important questions arise as to how the system changes in time and how long the
system takes to eventually establish a balance with its surroundings. Another
way for a quantum system to go out of balance is by subjecting it to a
continuous application of an external force. Large and complex systems, despite
the steady application of a force, can reach a steady state that is independent
of time. This time-independent state can have unusual properties not encountered
in systems that are in balance with their surroundings. The PI plans to explore
quantum systems in these two kinds of out of balance situations. Out-of-balance
systems are challenging topics to study; the PI will develop new theoretical
techniques to advance understanding of these ubiquitous systems. Understanding
out of balance systems at a fundamental level is important for technological
advancement such as for the development of future devices that will be nanometer
sized, like a molecule, and will be manipulated by the flow of electric current
and by light. On this scale the distinction between material and device becomes
blurred.

The proposal has a strong educational component as it will involve active
participation of graduate and undergraduate students. The results of the
projects will be presented at schools, workshops and conferences by the students
as well as the PI. In addition, the PI will participate in outreach activities
that are part of a continuing partnership between the NYU physics department and
local schools.