* 1303543
* Partial differential equations in conformal geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Jie Qing, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2017
* USD 200,184.00

Dr. Jie Qing proposes to study various problems in the field of partial
differential equations in conformal geometry. At its core is the study of the
interplays between geometric structures of manifolds (submanifolds) and analysis
of conformally invariant partial differential equations, with a general
principle that is originated from the so-called AdS/CFT correspondence in string
theory in mathematical physics. Currently there are two approaches that reflect
such principle. One is the Yamabe problems of different orders generalizing the
Yamabe problem via scattering operators, and the other is the fully nonlinear
Yamabe problems arising from the study of hypersurfaces via support functions in
hyperbolic space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is to study the
holography principles that relate quantum gravitation theory and some conformal
field theory. It has become a part the field where mathematicians and physicists
can interact. One broader impact of this proposal is that advancements in this
field of research will help establish mathematical framework for the proposed
theory in theoretic physics. The second broader impact of this proposal is to
the education. The proposed research will enable Dr. Jie Qing to actively
participate and contribute to the undergraduate and graduate program at UC Santa
Cruz.