* 1303460
* International Summer School on Biocomplexity from Gene to System
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Metin Akay, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 30,000.00

PI: Metin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 1303460&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biological
sciences have become a more quantitative and information-driven sciences since
emerging computational and mathematical tools facilitate the collection and
analysis of vast amounts of biological data. Complex analysis of biological
systems provides biological knowledge for the organization, management and
mining of biological data by using advanced computational tools. The biological
data are inherently complex, non-uniform and collected at multiple temporal and
spatial scales. The investigations of complex biological systems and processes
require an extensive collaboration between biologists, mathematicians, computer
scientists and engineers to improve our understanding of the various complex
biological processes from gene to system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits: The main objective of the summer school is to expose undergraduate and
graduate biological science and bioengineering students to the relatively new
approaches of Nano-Bio-Info-Cogno (NBIC) Technologies and translational
research. This summer school will be helpful, also, to students in computer
science and mathematics who are interested in pursuing research in biology, bio-
molecular engineering and bioengineering, since the summer school provides
exceptional insights into the fundamental challenges in biological sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The summer school uses lectures, oriented
toward biological science students, by expert faculty and will focus on the
Nano-Bio-Info-Cogno (NBIC) Technologies and Translational Research:
Opportunities and Challenges. In addition to these lectures, the summer school
will employ 2 two-hour panel discussion, with active participation by the summer
school participants, focused on Engineering Better Medicines and Advances in
Biomedical Engineering Research and Education in the World. The summer school
will stimulate further interdisciplinary research and collaborations among
engineers, mathematicians, computer scientists, and medical researchers, and
will help in identifying new, challenging directions in complex biological
science and bioengineering research.