* 1303382
* Collaborative Project: Building An Innovative Smartphone Virtual Laboratory Environment for Cyber-security Education and Training
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Kaiqi Xiong, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 101,306.00

This project is a collaborative effort involving Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis, Rochester Institute of Technology, and Tennessee State
University. The investigators are taking a comprehensive approach to advance
smartphone security research and education. The approach includes collaborative
virtual lab design and implementation, curriculum development, faculty
professional development, and partnership development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators are developing and building a Smartphone Virtual Computing
Laboratory (SVCL), which caters to Computer Science, Information Technology, and
Computer Engineering undergraduate and graduate students' intellectual curiosity
and complements their anecdotal knowledge of mobile and cloud security. The SVCL
provides an interactive and collaborative learning experience to students by
allowing them to work on interesting and challenging projects derived from
current research. With SVCL, students can work together, anytime, anywhere,
which, in turn, helps them foster a constant learning habit that will benefit
their careers. Using smartphone security as the unifying theme, the
investigators are developing hands-on laboratory modules from latest research on
smartphone application (app) security, smartphone operating system (OS)
security, smartphone cloud security, and smartphone network security. They will
also host workshops to disseminate the curriculum materials to faculty at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through these efforts, the project aims to
expose students to latest research on smartphone and cloud computing security.
The project also aims at delivering a repository of teaching/learning materials
on smartphone security that allows students to learn, work, and explore together
through ubiquitous access to the virtual learning and experimentation
environment, SVCL. The background of the institutional collaboration (public,
private, and HBCU) brings greater diversity to the pool of student
participants.&lt;br/&gt;