* 1303599
* NMR Studies of Extreme Quantum Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Neil Sullivan, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** &lt;br/&gt;Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
techniques will be used to explore the dynamics of quantum solids and fluids in
systems where striking new phenomena have been observed at low temperatures.
These systems include solid 4He in the range of 0.1 to 0.5 K for which a large
unexpected quantum plasticity has been reported, and clusters of atoms (3He, HD,
H2) confined to the interior of nanostructures for which enhanced quantum
effects occur in the restricted geometries. The latter are predicted to exhibit
new thermodynamic features because the confining dimension is less that the De
Broglie wavelengths and the energy states will be fully quantized. In both cases
new high sensitivity solid state NMR techniques will developed to study the
microscopic dynamics of these systems non-invasively. The studies will determine
the effect of quantum plasticity on the tunneling of 3He impurities in solid
4He, and the nature of the quantization of nanoclusters of atoms trapped in
nanoporous materials that hold promise for improved capabilities of hydrogen
storage. The project will support the training of a PhD student in the design
and application of NMR techniques for observing signals from very low densities
of atoms and molecules in extreme conditions. These techniques will be important
for a number of applications in industry such as geological exploration and for
investigating defects in structural materials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;****Non-
Technical Abstract**** &lt;br/&gt;The fundamental microscopic motion of atoms
and molecules is governed by the laws of quantum mechanics, and while the
general principles of quantum mechanics has been verified in many laboratory
experiments, the behavior of simple atoms in extreme conditions of density and
temperature has not been fully explored for the simplest materials, such as the
weakly interacting quantum fluids and solids comprised of light atoms and
molecules such as helium and hydrogen. The dynamics of the constituent atoms is
determined by the wave functions describing the atoms and in its most simple
terms the wave functions of the atoms overlap and as a result the atoms can
exchange places. As a result of this unique quantum mechanical aspect atoms can
tunnel through a lattice structure independent of temperature. This tunneling
motion will be exploited to probe the microscopic dynamics of solid helium for
which large anomalies have been observed in the elastic properties of very pure
crystals at low temperatures. The project will use magnetic resonance techniques
to carry out non-invasive measurements of the atomic motions in these quantum
solids using approaches similar to but not identical to those used in magnetic
resonance imaging in medical applications. Students and collaborators working on
the project will design new magnetic resonance techniques needed for the
experiments and the applications of the new technologies will be of interest to
applications in industry such as geological exploration and investigation of
structural materials.