* 1303108
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Influence of Grazing Differences on Stream Geomorphology in Tallgrass Prairie Headwater Streams
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Melinda Daniels, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 09/30/2015
* USD 15,534.00

This dissertation project is about determining how various cattle and bison
grazing practices influence sediment pollution and transport in grassland
streams. Although grazing is a common land use practice, little is known about
how different grazing practices affect sediment dynamics in the streams that
drain these lands. Different species of grazing animals may produce
significantly different sediment inputs to streams due to species-specific
physiological and behavioral differences (e.g. wallowing, water demand, heat
tolerance, vegetation preference). The researchers expect to find that grazed
watersheds will have significantly higher sediment loads and higher frequencies
and magnitudes of stream-bed sediment transport events because of increased
hillslope erosion and stream-bed disturbance from trampling. Cattle grazed
watersheds are predicted to have higher sediment loads than bison grazed
watersheds because the behavioral habits of cattle are likely to produce more
direct impacts and disturbances to channels. This project will advance the
understanding of how species-specific impacts are driven by physiological and
behavioral differences and contribute to a growing body of literature on
biological engineering of landforms, or bio-geomorphology.

Sediment is one of the major pollutants impacting streams in the United States.
High sediment loads have led to reservoir filling throughout North America and
the world and are implicated as a major source of oxygen depletion in coastal
systems. In the Great Plains region of North America, increased runoff and
hillslope erosion rates have led to decreased water quality and decreased the
social and economic value of freshwaters. Results of this project will help to
inform conservation, restoration, and management practices of grassland streams.
In particular, the results could serve as the basis for revised grazing best
management practices to address water quality issues within the region. The
results will be presented at national and local science and policy-oriented
academic conferences, presented to state and regional agencies charged with
grazing land management, and published in peer-reviewed scientific and
management oriented journals. As a doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this project will provide support to enable a promising scholar. It will
also provide training for a number of other students including several from
underrepresented groups including minorities, women, and military veterans.