* 1303274
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Local Histories and the Production of Centralized Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Leah VanWey, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 7,182.00

SES-1303274 Leah Van Wey Trina Vithayathil Brown University

While an enormous body of social science research utilizes census data,
empirical studies of the process by which census data are produced remain rare.
Population censuses are part of the representational practices of contemporary
nation-states. Censuses help to determine the boundaries of elected seats and
are also administrative tools used to distribute material benefits. Census data
influence how taxes will be apportioned across regions and help to establish the
eligibility criteria for state welfare programs. Over the last two decades, a
range of actors--including courts, social scientists, government agencies, and
sections of the public--have made increasing demands for "objective" data on
caste. Responding to these pressures, the Government of India decided in 2010 to
conduct a caste census. For the first time since 1931, caste data will be
collected from every household in the country. Building upon a scholarly
tradition that makes censuses an object of research, this dissertation is a
qualitative study of how official data on caste are produced during this
contemporary caste count in India. The co-PI will study the role that state
actors, civil society, the private sector, and general public play in the making
of social data. While remaining attuned to the individuals, objects, and
institutions involved in this nationwide exercise, the empirical study of the
caste census is grounded in the Indian State of Karnataka, in order to
understand the role of local histories in producing centralized knowledge.

Broader Impact

This project will build multidisciplinary collaborations with anthropologists,
historians and economists. Research findings will be presented at
interdisciplinary conferences, workshops and research partnerships and to
academic audiences in the US and India. The project will also create a rich set
of qualitative and archival data that will be available for use by other social
scientists. Finally, the findings of this dissertation will provide those who
plan to use the collected caste data with a detailed empirical account of how
the official data are produced.