* 1303279
* Iowa State University Information Assurance Scholarship of Service Program - Renewal
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2020
* Clifford Bergman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,377,279.00

This project seeks to continue the Iowa State University's (ISU) participation
in the CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-
qualified Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government workforce.
Faculty from the Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Computer
Science, Political Science, Mathematics, and the School of Education lead the
interdisciplinary CyberCorps® SFS program, designated by the National Security
Agency as a charter Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance
Education. The graduate students work closely with the faculty to receive
Cybersecurity training, conduct research, and develop as leaders and team
members. All students participate two full years in the unique and critical
component of the ISU CyberCorps® SFS program: leadership, teamwork and
professionalism development. The NSF's CyberCorps® SFS program funds projects
that address cybersecurity education and workforce development. The Scholarship
Track provides funding to award scholarships to students in cybersecurity. In
return for their scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a
Federal, State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a position related
to cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the scholarship. The
Capacity Track seeks innovative proposals leading to an increase in the ability
of the United States higher education enterprise to produce cybersecurity
professionals.

To date, the project has produced and placed with the federal government close
to 60 CyberCorps® SFS students. ISU is known for a wide dissemination of hands-
on, lab-oriented courses and educational materials that emphasize problem
solving in a variety of contexts; engagement with state agencies and local
industry, and multiple opportunities to practice professionalism within service
learning projects. Students contribute to Cybersecurity knowledge base by
participating in ISU research programs that address important issues including
intrusion detection systems, network security, data privacy and security,
dependable systems and networks, and security policy and commerce. The program
has an outstanding record of supporting students to complete their programs
within the required two years. ISU CyberCorps® SFS program allows students to
have a broader impact on society before they leave the university. For the
culmination of the leadership program, students give back to the community
through an extensive service learning project designed to require the direct
application of all the skills they have been developing throughout the program:
technical, research, interpersonal, team, and leadership. In addition, the
project will provide interactions with high schools and community colleges to
increase Cybersecurity awareness and the number of students interested in
Cybersecurity.