* 1303362
* Cybersecurity Scholarship-for-Service at The Unive
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2020
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2020
* USD 5,312,942.00

This project intends to create a new CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service
(SFS) program at the department of Management Information Systems (MIS) of the
University of Arizona (UA) especially aimed at recruiting from across the state,
with particular emphasis on minority recruitment and retention. The proposed
program encompasses several important areas of activity such as student
mentoring and development; independent research study integrated into the
program; assessment of student progress; internship and post-graduation
placement assistance; and program assessment and evaluation. Cybersecurity and
Information Assurance are critical to ensuring the integrity and availability
demands of a modern, globally-networked infrastructure. The biggest challenge
facing employers is finding employees with the right security skills, including
operations security, information security risk management, and security
management practices thus proving the SFS program timely, relevant, and
beneficial. The MIS department at UA is renowned for its consistent ranking in
the top five MIS programs in the country (U.S. News and World Report) for over
20 years. The approach to managing the program is deliberately cross-
disciplinary and intended to support the broadest definition of cybersecurity,
including information assurance, network security, trustworthy computing, risk
management for IT, etc. The program is intended to address the great need for
security training in the U.S. The curriculum includes dedicated coursework and
significant research with world-class faculty in security and risk management,
operations security, information security risk management, and security
management practices. The ultimate goal of this program is to help broaden
representation in science and technology and increase interest in and
technological competence for government service. The program addresses a
burgeoning need for knowledgeable security specialists by providing a pool of
carefully cultivated and highly trained personnel. The project contributes to
meaningful curriculum development that can serve as a model to other programs.