* 1303328
* InfoSec Scholars:  Scholarship for Service
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2021
* Bruce Porter, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,273,293.00

This project, centered in the Department of Computer Science at the University
of Texas at Austin (UTCS), is creating the InfoSec Scholars for Service program.
Participating students join a community of scholars built around the research of
the Center for Information Assurance and Security (CIAS), the rigorous
coursework of the InfoSec Certificate program, and an extensive public service
career development program. The InfoSec Scholars program graduates a cadre of
well-trained cybersecurity professionals with preparation for success in
cybersecurity jobs at public agencies; and provides UTCS with stronger ties to
government entities and added educational and research options for all students.
The program's goals are to 1) prepare students with the academic knowledge to be
successful cybersecurity professionals, 2) provide students with the career
development skills to be successful public servants, 3) increase student
involvement in cybersecurity research, and 4) place 100% of program participants
in summer internships and full-time jobs in cybersecurity at government
agencies. The intellectual merit of the InfoSec Scholars program is the
project's ability to generate further development of a community of
cybersecurity scholars at a top-ten research institution and to improve
cybersecurity skill sets within government agencies. The strength of the Center
for Information Assurance research unit, robust undergraduate and graduate
research programs, strong infrastructure in support of students' career
development, and a culture of faculty and staff involvement in students'
intellectual and professional growth position it to successfully implement a
model SFS program. The broader impacts of the program are the development of a
hub of cybersecurity education at a leading institution in an important high
tech region and the creation of a model program that engages students in
cybersecurity research and education. The program brings a diverse group of
bright, young professionals into cybersecurity jobs in government service
benefiting the Nation by strengthening the country's information security
infrastructure.