* 1303409
* CyberCorps: SFS: Hampton University Graduate Education and Training Scholarship in Information Assurance (HU GETS-IA) Program
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2020
* Yen-Hung Hu, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2020
* USD 2,315,510.00

As part of a new CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service program, the Information
Assurance Center at Hampton University through the Hampton University Graduate
Education and Training Scholarships in Information Assurance (HU GETS-IA)
program is supporting at least 19 students to earn Masters of Science degree in
Information Assurance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project enhances
underrepresented minority and women students' understanding of Information
Assurance to prepare them for the nation's workforce at a more competitive
level; and significantly expands the department Information Assurance research
capacity and teaching experience by offering a rigorous cybersecurity course
curriculum coupled with mentorship and required professional development
activities to the student population.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A unique feature of
this program is that students are serving as program ambassadors at high school
recruiting events and are mentoring K-12 students in the Virginia Junior Academy
of Science. Additionally, students are participating in the Hampton University
annual Information Assurance Symposium and the annual Association of
Computer/Information Sciences and Engineering Departments at Minority
Institutions (ADMI) Symposium. HU works with its partners, Spelman College,
Winston Salem State University, Elizabeth State University and other HBCU
institutions, to recruit highly-qualified computing students with interest in
cybersecurity into HU GETS-IA program.