* 1303269
* Modular steps towards broadening expertise in Critical Infrastructure Protection
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Rajendra Raj, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2017
* USD 244,295.00

1303269 Project Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Modular steps towards broadening expertise
in Critical Infrastructure Protection&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-partner
project addresses an identified shortcoming in Critical Infrastructure
Protection (CIP) education by developing curricular materials and expertise at
the high school and undergraduate levels. Partnering on this project are three
institutions: (1) Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), a Center of Academic
Excellence in Information Assurance Education (CAE-IAE) since 2003, with a
multidisciplinary team of faculty representing expertise in critical
infrastructure, computing, engineering, technology, and security; (2) Corning
Community College (CCC); and (3) Greater Southern Tier Board of Cooperative
Educational Services (GST BOCES), a program for high school students serving 21
schools in New York's Southern Tier counties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has four major goals. First, the project develops and embeds a set of flexible
CIP course modules, such as labs or teaching components, in existing high school
and courses without requiring major course or program modifications. Second,
faculty expertise in CIP is developed through cross-disciplinary collaborations
within and between the partnering institutions. Third, the developed curricular
materials are disseminated through presentations, tutorials, panels and
workshops. Finally, project effectiveness is comprehensively assessed using both
external and internal evaluators.