* 1303742
* Spin Injection and Relaxation in Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Yongli Gao, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 07/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

Technical Description: Research on organic spintronics has gained momentum in
the past few years. An important advantage of organic materials is the
intrinsically long spin-lifetime because of the small atomic numbers, resulting
in less spin-orbit interaction. Strong organic magnetoresistance response as
high as 300% has recently been reported. The roles of spin injection and carrier
recombination in organic light emitting diodes have also been extensively
observed. While the potential is high, there remain challenging fundamental
issues, including the mechanisms governing spin injection and spin flip. It is
well recognized that interfaces are critical in organic spintronics. The
knowledge gap in understanding of the fundamental processes in organic
spintronics must be bridged to realize its potential.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to investigate spin injection and relaxation dynamics to understand
the underlying fundamental mechanisms important for the development of organic
spintronics. The spin injection efficiency is investigated for the interface
between various inorganic substrates and organic materials, and the spin
relaxation dynamics are studied in organic semiconductor thin films. The primary
tool for the investigation is spin-resolved photoemission spectroscopy,
supported by other surface analytical techniques including ultraviolet and x-ray
photoemission spectroscopy, inverse photoemission spectroscopy, scanning
tunneling microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and magnetic force microscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: The project is on fundamental
materials research of spin injection and relaxation in organic semiconductors.
Success of the project can enhance the understanding of the nature of spin-
related phenomena in molecular system, with potential impact on organic
spintronics for future information technologies. The impact also comes from
training of the next generation of scientists in a fast advancing field with
international experience and leadership. A major focus of the project is
educating and training scientists in an interdisciplinary field including
organic electronic materials, surface and interface analysis, ultrafast
dynamics, and spintronics. A strong emphasis of the program is on increasing
participation of women through programs including University of Rochester Women
in Science and Engineering and Pre-College Experience in Physics for high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Electronic and
Photonic Materials Program (EPM) and the Condensed Matter Physics Program (CMP).