* 1303828
* P2C2: High-resolution Reconstruction of the South American Monsoon History from Isotopic Proxies and Forward Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mathias Vuille, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 571,281.00

The South American summer monsoon (SASM) is of great socio-economic relevance to
(sub)tropical South America, delivering water for ecosystem integrity and human
activities including agriculture, sanitation, hydropower production and many
other socioeconomic purposes. Year-to-year variations in monsoon strength, onset
and demise dates have been linked to drought and floods and can cause widespread
economic damage. Yet little is known about how the SASM has varied in the past
and how it responds to changes in natural (volcanic or solar) and man-made
(aerosols and greenhouse gases) perturbations. In this project, a scientist from
the State University of New York at Albany and his collaborators will
reconstruct the SASM history for the past 1000 years using ice core data from
the Quelccaya ice cap in the Peruvian Andes to learn more about the envelope of
natural monsoon variability. The Quelccaya site was chosen because almost all
snowfall is associated with the SASM (~85%), it contains a long, high-resolution
and precisely-dated ice-core record, and has been the focus of long-term on-site
climatologic and glaciologic monitoring and calibration programs. Using these
on-site data sets, combined with isotope-enabled model simulations for the past
millennium, the scientists will develop a so-called forward model that allows
reconstructing monsoon variations upstream over the Amazon basin since the year
850 AD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the growing concerns over future changes in
monsoon characteristics due to enhanced greenhouse gas concentrations, a better
understanding of natural monsoon variability and its sensitivity to external
forcing is absolutely essential. The project's progress will be documented on
the Quelccaya blog website. The project also includes additional educational
aspects such as training of a graduate student and a Postdoctoral Research
Associate, and integrating methods and results developed in this project into
undergraduate and graduate classrooms.