* 1303720
* Terrestrial carbon in aquatic ecosystems:  experimental tests of the subsidy-stability hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Jay Lennon, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2013
* USD 272,278.00

Ecosystems are spatially linked by the flux of materials and energy. Over the
past decade there has been growing appreciation that the movement of resources
across the landscape can act to subsidize populations in local habitats. In
addition, theory suggests that resource subsidies may act to stabilize food webs
and ecosystems, but these predictions remain largely untested. This study will
examine the effects of terrestrial-derived dissolved organic carbon (DOC) on the
stability of aquatic ecosystem metabolism. Traditionally been viewed as a low
quality resource, it is now recognized that terrestrial DOC inputs are a
resource subsidy for bacteria that can determine whether recipient aquatic
ecosystems function as sources or sinks of atmospheric carbon dioxide. The first
goal of this project is to describe the shape, magnitude, and direction of
subsidy-stability relationships using a set of whole-pond experiments that
manipulate the supply rate of terrestrial DOC. The second goal of this project
is to identify the mechanisms by which terrestrial DOC influences aquatic
ecosystem stability. Specifically, the project will assess whether DOC affects
ecosystem stability by modifying nutrient cycling, altering temperature
dynamics, or by altering interaction strengths among different groups of
microorganisms. The objectives of this project will be assessed using a
combination of autonomous sensor technology to quantify ecosystem metabolism and
temperature variability, radioisotope assays to measure nutrient cycling, and
molecular techniques to evaluate changes in the metabolic activity of microbial
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a global scale, the export of terrestrial
DOC to aquatic ecosystems is increasing due to a combination of factors,
including atmospheric deposition, climate variability, and shifting land use.
The tools and approaches developed in this proposal will address this phenomenon
and help scientists and managers predict how changes in DOC loading affect
ecosystem functioning and water quality under existing and future climate
scenarios. This project has a significant education and outreach component that
will foster interactions among the Kellogg Biological Station (KBS), Michigan
State University (MSU), and rural Michigan K-12 school districts. Specifically,
the project will continue an ongoing collaboration that will introduce concepts
of ecological stability, microbial diversity, and biogeochemical cycling into
the high-school classroom. The project will also provide interdisciplinary
research training in the fields of ecosystem science, quantitative ecology, and
molecular biology for undergraduate students, a graduate student, a high school
teacher, and postdoctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;