* 1303297
* Virginia Tech CyberScholars Program
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2021
* Joseph Tront, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2021
* USD 4,569,946.00

Virginia Tech proposes to create the CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service
(SFS) program targeting undergraduate students entering their third year of
study and majoring in Computer Engineering and Computer Science. The program
provides three years of funding to complete both a B.S. and M.S. through the
existing Accelerated Undergraduate/Graduate program, as well as a graduate
certificate in Cybersecurity. Scholarships are open to current students at
Virginia Tech and students transferring from two-year programs within the
Virginia Community College System (VCCS), with whom Virginia Tech has
articulation agreements. The program requires a completion of the 18-credit
completion graduate certificate in Cybersecurity including network/systems
fundamentals, security, cyber law, and electives in cryptography and business
aspects of cyber. The project is managed by the Hume Center for National
Security and Technology using an apparatus already in place for awarding endowed
national security scholarships and fellowships, including a dedicated support
for monitoring and mentoring students, and a robust national security career
placement program with personal connections to most cyber-related agencies,
national labs, and FFRDCs. To fulfill the thesis requirement of the M.S. degree,
students conduct research in cybersecurity in one of the six cyber-related labs
at the university, including the IT Security Lab designed as a 'teaching
hospital' for network security where student research projects can use the
production campus network as a testbed for security research. The program
provides a major advancement in cyber security education at Virginia Tech by
incentivizing study in cybersecurity and by creating a pathway to federal
employment. The Hume Center will work with the Center for Enhancement of
Engineering Diversity to recruit and retain students from underrepresented
populations. Students' graduate research is captured and disseminated through
the University Library's VTechWorks. Curriculum and learning environments are
available to K-12 and universities accessing the RAVE network nationwide.