* 1303063
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Environmental Governance in the Carbon Economy: Regulating Greenhouse Gas Emissions in California's Cap-and-Trade Market
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Susan Roberts, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 03/31/2015
* USD 15,439.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines the geographical principles,
practices, and relationships used to create a new financial market that aims to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The study's focus is on the creation of
California's carbon market, the largest carbon market in the United States, and
second largest in the world. The research is informed by existing research in
neo-classical economics, the political ecology of environmental markets, and
work in the social studies of finance. The project specifically seeks to
determine how a market for credits in greenhouse gas emissions is designed,
implemented, and regulated. The project asks three research questions addressing
how social relationships between regulators, regulated industries, and
financiers impact the design and function of a carbon market, the physical
spaces where those relationships are enacted, and the types of ideologies that
are communicated in those physical spaces between market actors. In order to
answer these questions, the student will take a mixed-methods approach,
including interviews with key regulatory and market personnel, participant
observation of regulatory hearings, and archival work to uncover how rule making
has changed over the six year regulatory process that has led to the opening of
California's carbon market.

The success or failure of California's carbon market will significantly
contribute to future debates about the role of government in reducing emissions.
The California market may be linked to similar emissions trading programs in
Canada, Australia, and the European Union. The data generated by this project,
as well as publications that result from the work, will be of use to policy
makers, non-governmental organizations, and greenhouse gas emitting industries.
The impacted organizations will benefit from data generated by the project
regarding what types of relationships, places, and arguments are most important
or effective in designing markets in environmental goods and their regulation
once these markets commence. This research is an opportunity to observe the
principles and practices of the creation and implementation in a new type of
financial market in real-time, and these observations will help researchers and
policy makers who are dealing with an ever-shifting financial and environmental
landscape. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project
will provide support to enable a promising student to pursue an active career in
socially relevant research.