* 1303019
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impacts of Tenure Formalization on Security and Living Conditions in Informal Settlements
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Shohei Nakamura, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,996.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will assess the scope of the
formalization of informal settlements, or slums, for the improvement of the
quality of life of the socially marginalized populations who live there. To do
so, the co-PI will investigate the process and outcomes of slum-notification
policy in Pune, the ninth-largest city in India. In rapidly urbanizing
developing countries, a large number of slum dwellers suffer from poor living
conditions and face the risk of forcible eviction without due compensation
because of their illegal status. One of the critical challenges is how to
achieve inclusive urbanization by improving the tenure security and living
conditions. Therefore, integrating informal tenure status with formal systems,
commonly referred to as tenure formalization, has become common practice. While
academics often tout formalization as an important step, it remains unclear how
and to what extent formalization improves the quality of life of those in slums.
The project will fill the gap by offering systematically investigated empirical
evidence about the process and outcomes of slum-notification policy, a type of
tenure formalization. To assess the impacts of the policy, the project
investigates (1) how a slum-notification policy has been implemented, and (2)
what factors contribute to the level of tenure security and living conditions
(e.g., housing, infrastructure, and services) in slums and to what extent their
notification status matters. The project will employ a sequential mixed-methods
approach, addressing the first research question through various qualitative
methods, such as interviews, site observations, and document analysis. Building
on the qualitative findings, the project will then seek answers to the second
research question using statistical analysis of survey data that the co-PI will
collect. In so doing, the research will advance knowledge on theories of self-
help housing, property rights, and informality in the fields of urban planning,
development economics, and human geography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will benefit society by raising awareness and understanding of socially
marginalized populations in developing countries. By offering empirical evidence
of how the slum-notification policy has benefited slum households in Pune, the
project will help policy makers to modify formalization policies. This will be
critical under the current situation in which the central government of India is
preparing to provide property rights to slum dwellers across the country.
Without proper understanding of informal characteristics, such simple
formalization could exacerbate the life of the urban poor. More than 1,000 slum
households will participate in the interview and survey. The co-PI will actively
disseminate project findings by publishing in academic journals and presenting
at conferences, discussing with policy makers and local residents in workshops,
and teaching classes in the future. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish an independent research career.