* 1303595
* RAPID: Deep Shear Wave Velocity Profiling for Seismic Characterization of Christchurch, NZ - Reliably Merging Large Active-Source and Passive-Wavefield Surface Wave Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2014
* Brady Cox, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 10/31/2014
* USD 197,683.00

In 2010-2011, the city of Christchurch, New Zealand was devastated by a series
of powerful earthquakes, the most destructive being the 22 February 2011 Mw6.2
Christchurch Earthquake. During this event, the seismic demands imposed on the
built environment at many locations in the city were higher than engineering
design levels, causing severe structural damage and collapse, especially within
the central business district (CBD). Ultimately, the Christchurch Earthquake
resulted in 181 casualties, thousands of injuries, and widespread soil
liquefaction that caused billions of dollars in damage to buildings, homes and
infrastructure. The entire CBD was cordoned-off following this event and remains
closed to the public today (October 2012), while an estimated 1000 structures
are being demolished. A network of 19 seismic recording stations in the greater
Christchurch area captured an extensive and unique set of ground motions (GM)
during the 2010-2011 earthquakes. Potentially, these GM can be used for back-
analyses aimed at understanding the spatial variability of the ground shaking
(particularly site and basin effects), followed by accurate forward-estimates
aimed at quantifying the amplitude and frequency content of future design GM.
However, detailed GM analyses cannot presently be conducted because no
information exists on the shear wave velocity (Vs) structure of the greater-
than-400-m deep interlayered sand and gravel deposits that underlie
Christchurch. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thrust of this Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) grant is to conduct deep (&gt;400 m) Vs profiling at 12-15 key sites in
Christchurch, New Zealand to aid in important seismic GM response analyses. This
information is needed rapidly, as plans for reconstruction of the CBD are
proceeding quickly and the proposed testing will be significantly complicated
(if not prohibited) once reconstruction begins in earnest in early-to-mid 2013.
The only way to economically and rapidly obtain Vs estimates to these great
depths is through non-intrusive surface wave testing. However, there is
currently a great deal of uncertainty involved in the passive-wavefield
techniques most commonly utilized for deep Vs profiling. Therefore, a unique
study will be conducted to compare and merge data from large active-source and
passive-wavefield surface wave methods over an extended frequency/wavelength
range, which will allow robust determination of data uncertainty and relative
bias. The active-source surface wave measurements will be conducted using one of
the large and unique NEES@UTexas mobile, servo-hydraulic shakers and up to 48,
1-Hz geophones, while passive-wavefield data will be collected using
intermediate- and large-diameter circular sensor arrays composed of 10 broadband
seismometers. This research will triple the available comparisons between large
active-source and passive-wavefield surface wave methods utilized for deep Vs
profiling. These comparisons are needed before confidence in utilizing passive-
wavefield methods independently can be achieved. Therefore, the intellectual
merits of this work include: (a) the collection and interpretation of a one-of-
a-kind dataset that can be used for evaluating the reliability involved with
merging large active-source and passive-wavefield surface wave methods for deep
Vs profiling, and (b) the advancement in accurate ground motion prediction for
deep sedimentary basins made possible by these deep Vs profiles through analysis
of a unique set of damaging GM records from multiple seismic events. Progress
made on both of these issues will directly impact earthquake engineering studies
in the US, New Zealand, and throughout the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this work are many, as these research efforts will impact
Christchurch society at large through development of robust seismic design GM
that will help to mitigate such extreme losses in future earthquakes.
Furthermore, the additional understanding of site response in deep sediments
garnered from analyzing the strong GM recorded in the Canterbury Earthquake
Sequence will benefit seismically active areas of the U.S. underlain by deep
sedimentary basins, such as Los Angeles and Seattle. This work will also serve
to strengthen international research collaborations between the U.S. and New
Zealand, and will provide U.S. graduate students with rewarding international
travel experiences that will serve to balance their technical education and
expose them to the globally-connected problems that still exist in earthquake
engineering.