* 1303682
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Digital Adaptation and the Stratification of Cultural Practices
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2013,10/31/2014
* Jeremy Freese, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2014
* USD 11,964.00

Jeremy Freese &lt;br/&gt;Cassidy Puckett&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Youth born in an era of embedded digital
technologies are commonly assumed to be "digital natives" who uniformly and
effortlessly master technology through simple immersion. Research indicates
there are wide gaps in depth of technological competence that can influence
areas as diverse as income, health, and political participation. Meanwhile
little is known about how to describe the development of technological
competence and how to explain its uneven distribution. While technological
access continues to be a barrier for many, access alone does not explain why
some learn new technologies more readily than others, even among younger
cohorts. Meanwhile, the changing nature of technology has hindered
conceptualization, measurement, and explanation of differences in technological
competence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses this gap by focusing on
one aspect of competence: digital adaptability. Conceptualization and
measurement of adaptability has been addressed in earlier work, but this study
will focus on the social determinants of digital adaptability. More
specifically, in addition to considering demographic factors, the study's
research questions are: 1) What ideas and practices within each sphere of
adolescents' social worlds affect digital adaptability (i.e., at home, in
school, among peers, and in other elective spheres)? 2) Looking across the
entire "learning ecology," how does heterogeneity of ideas and practices affect
digital adaptability? To investigate these questions, the study employs mixed
methods with two data collection phases: 1) an exploratory case study and survey
refinement phase to provide rich, qualitative understanding of the dynamics
within and across learning spheres of a small sample of Chicago Public School
(CPS) students as well as to inform development of a survey and 2) a survey data
collection phase among ~2800 8th grade students in 32 CPS grammar schools to
study correlates of digital adaptability across a larger population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will:
1) provide practical tools for the assessment of adolescents? propensity to
learn new technologies, 2) contribute to sociological research about how the
nature of learning ecologies can shape social learning processes, and 3) reach
broad research and educator audiences through conferences and publications. In
addition, the research itself will contribute to the education of low-income
students from high school through PhD levels through involvement of low-income
undergraduate and high school research assistants in the research, analysis, and
dissemination processes