* 1303521
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Responses to and Consequences of Misconduct in the Educational Context
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Katja Guenther, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 07/31/2014
* USD 8,152.00

SES-1303521&lt;br/&gt;PI: Katja Guenther&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Kerry
Mulligan&lt;br/&gt;University of California -
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research will utilize content
analysis of the media and court room depictions of a national sample of criminal
cases involving misconduct between teachers and their students to analyze how
the gender and race of the perpetrators shape the responses of individuals in
the media and criminal justice system. Drawing on sociological insights about
social construction, this research focuses on how the race and gender of the
perpetrator relate to the way in which events are presented, perhaps
differently, in media coverage and criminal justice responses to these cases.
The research employs a mixed-methods approach, including both quantitative and
qualitative techniques, to analyze data from newspaper articles and court
transcripts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will improve
understanding of the apparent resilience of ideologies by articulating how ideas
about gender are integrated into social institutions through the actions and
beliefs of individuals. Specifically, the research will establish the extent to
which these cases serve as opportunities for individuals to expand and transform
dominant ideas about gender or adhere to normal expectations. Second, by
focusing on incidents in which constructions of the case vary, this research
will demonstrate how dominant ideas about gender are strategically employed by
varying actors to serve their interests. By examining legal and media settings,
the research will reveal how strategies for constructing the events vary by
institutional setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This
research has the potential to contribute to broader society in a number of ways.
Recent research on the frequency of responses to and consequences of teacher
misconduct suggest broad interest and concern over these types of incidents.
This project will contribute new information about a large sample of these types
of cases and will add to this scholarly dialogue in a way that can assist policy
makers and educational administrators in developing more targeted prevention,
disclosure, and response procedures in U.S. schools. The research will also
provide an empirically based critique of the tendency to ignore or minimize the
victim status of male victims of female teacher misconduct. This has the
potential to draw greater attention and support to this under-served population.