* 1303941
* SECURE-IT Cybersecurity Project
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Jo Schuster, Southeast Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2017
* USD 493,382.00

There is a growing demand for cybersecurity knowledge and skills in
organizations of all types. To meet this need, this project is adapting and
implementing cybersecurity curricula, strengthening the recruitment and
retention of students in information technology (IT), and providing professional
development in cybersecurity for educators and industry professionals.

By adapting curricula developed through CyberWatch, an ATE National Center of
Excellence, the project is developing an associate degree that meets the
requirements for transfer to four-year institutions. To ensure transferability
and relevance, the curriculum incorporates standards required for the Center of
Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education-Two Year (CAE2Y)
designation.

Incumbent IT workers often lack adequate training in cybersecurity. To fill this
skills gap in the current workforce, the project team is collaborating with
local employers to package credit-bearing curricula into a model online/blended
training track culminating in a Certificate of Completion.

To produce more graduates for the high-demand, high-pay career pathways that IT
and cybersecurity offer, the project is working to increase graduation rates in
the college's Computer Information Technology program and is working to increase
the number of women students, in particular, who enroll in the program. The
project team is reviewing and modifying curricula to include active learning
strategies, such as the "flipped" classroom, as a means to engage students,
heighten learning, and improve retention. The project is also providing faculty
with training on gender-inclusive practices to help overcome stereotypes that
discourage women from pursuing careers in computing.

The project is collaborating with the Midwest Center for Information Technology
(MCIT), an NSF ATE Regional Center of Excellence based in Omaha, NE, to provide
professional development in cybersecurity to community college faculty, high
school teachers, and industry representatives in a four-state region during
MCIT's annual "Working Connections" conference.

Collaboration with MCIT and CyberWatch provides a means of nationally
disseminating the project's new curricula and other models.