* 1303560
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Knowledge-Making: the Relationship between Science, Democracy, and Development
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Patrick Heller, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 07/31/2014
* USD 9,198.00

SES-1303560 PI: Patrick Heller Co-PI: Diana Graizbord Brown University

In recent years, civil society organizations, Mexican and international experts,
state bureaucrats and elected officials have made demands for, and joined in the
project of state and social policy reform. This challenging task is undergirded
by a powerful and mobilizing idea about the potential for "knowledge- and
evidence-based" policy to democratize and modernize the bureaucracy responsible
for the design and administration of social policy, and thus, to deliver more
effectively, efficiently and transparently that which the citizens of this
nascent democracy have been promised. The transformation toward democratic forms
of social policy in Mexico remains an ongoing project through which new forms of
expertise are being crafted, new relationships forged, and through which the
meaning of democracy and future of development in Mexico are being negotiated.

This dissertation seeks to explain how state, expert and civil society actors
involved in social policy modernization and democratization imagine and
understand this political project; how the forms of expertise that occupy the
epicenter of this project are produced and used in contemporary Mexican social
policymaking; and what the effects of this ongoing process are on the country's
welfare and development future. This qualitative case study includes
ethnographic observation of the production and circulation of social policy
knowledge and policy evidence; in-depth interviews with experts, civil society
leaders and state officials; and analysis of key documents and media. By
providing an ethnographic account of the micro-foundations that shape social
policy in Mexico this research hopes to contribute to an interdisciplinary
literature on emergent welfare states in the Global South; theories of state
power and statecraft; and to the growing understanding of the relationship
between expertise and democracy.

BROADER IMPACTS First, as social development policy moves in the direction of
"evidence-based" interventions, and as science is increasingly mobilized as a
tool of democracy the findings of this dissertation will prove a valuable
resource for scholars and policy practitioners in the US, Mexico and throughout
the Global South. Second, given the international fieldwork component this
research will enhance collaboration and contribute to a cross-disciplinary,
international dialogue.