* 1303178
* Patterning of Large Array Organic Semiconductor Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Zhenan Bao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 441,453.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Solution processing is highly desirable for large
area production of organic electronic devices. Film deposition from solution is
usually performed at the kinetic crystallization regime in high throughput
industrial fabrication processes. Attaining single crystals directly through
solution printing remains challenging due to kinetic solvent evaporation,
stochastic nucleation, and fluid flow instabilities during the printing process.
Most solution processing techniques for fabricating single crystals operate at
slow quasi-equilibrium conditions, rendering these methods undesirable for
industrial applications. These challenges call for a better fundamental
understanding of solution crystallization processes of organic semiconductors
(OSCs) to allow the development of better solution processing methods for high-
throughput fabrication of high performance electronic devices. In this project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, ways to control
crystal nucleation and molecular packing will be obtained using a solution
shearing (SS) platform as a model system. The parameters for controlled crystal
growth from single nucleation sites and methods to obtain patterned single-
crystalline domains will be investigated. Finally, a comprehensive understanding
and approach will be developed for achieving patterned single-crystalline
domains with desired molecular packing. Charge transport properties of the
resulting films will be measured to characterize effects of morphology and
molecular packing on charge transport. This work will develop fundamental
understanding on tuning molecular packing and morphology in OSCs. This is
essential for unprecedented performance and future large-scale production of
organic electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Solution processing is highly desirable for large-area
manufacturing of organic electronic devices. The proposed work will result in a
systematic understanding of nucleation and growth in solution processing of
organic semiconductors (OSCs). This is crucial for advancing the field of
organic electronics, as well as, providing insights for future manufacturing of
these devices (e.g. organic light emitting diodes, organic solar cells,
transistors and sensors). The PI and student involved will work closely with the
Stanford Office of Science Outreach Office to reach out to a broad population
ranging from K-12, community college, undergraduate, and graduate students as
well as prepare the teachers of tomorrow for new areas of science and
technology. This research will expose both graduate students and undergraduates
to a broad range of disciplines as well as a wide range of organic electronics
technologies. Students will receive training on effective communication, a
multidisciplinary approach to problem solving, thus, obtaining an impressive
combination of technical engineering, basic scientific understanding, and
communication skills. This research is also expected to support the development
of interdisciplinary research in the United States and to promote public
understanding of the impact of organic electronics on industrial and economic
development.