* 1303459
* Huntsville in Nashville: The Seventh Huntsville Gamma-Ray Burst Symposium, Spring 2013, in Nashville, TN
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Veronique Pelassa, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 01/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide participant support for early career scientists and
graduate students to participate in the "7th Huntsville Gamma-ray Burst
Symposium" hosted by the University of Alabama in Huntsville and the NASA
Marshall Space Flight Center. It will be located at the Hotel Hutton in
Nashville, TN, from April 14-18, 2013. The Swift and Fermi teams will organize
this international conference on Gamma-Ray Bursts studies, covering topics
relevant to the field, including, but not limited to, the results provided by
these two missions. Gamma-Ray Bursts are among the brightest known sources in
the gamma-ray sky, visible at larger distances than the furthest galaxies
observed, and thought to be the most powerful natural particle accelerators. A
prompt, variable phase bright in the keV to GeV energy ranges is followed by an
afterglow phase, more typically observed from radio up to X-rays.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;For Broader Impacts, it has a particular focus on early career
researchers. Contributions in the form of posters are strongly encouraged. The
workshop will feature a public lecture on a topic related to this field of
research. This event will be organized in collaboration with the Barnard-Seyfert
Astronomical Society, that hosts a free public lecture in each of their monthly
meetings.