* 1303548
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Poverty, Middle School Dropout, and High School Completion
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Lori Peek, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,989.00

SES-1303548 Lori Peek Meghan Mordy Colorado State University

Completing high school opens up new pathways to success for poor youth. Degree
completion can provide access to better jobs, healthcare benefits, safer homes,
and more secure communities. Yet, many poor youth, in the US and elsewhere, fail
to earn this critical degree. This dissertation research examines the case of El
Salvador, where only 40% of youth graduate high school and 41% of 16-18 year-
olds have dropped out before completing middle school. Nearly one-quarter of the
population is between the ages of 10 and 19 and these young people are growing
up in the midst of a crisis in youth violence and childhood poverty. This
project is a multi-year qualitative study that examines why the majority of poor
Salvadoran adolescents are pushed out of school, while some are able to complete
their high school degrees. It employs ethnographic fieldwork in one rural and
two urban schools, including participant observation in middle school classrooms
and focus group interviews. The dissertation will examine how youth disengage
academically and identify the factors that put them at-risk for dropout. In its
entirety, this project aims to describe the mechanisms that translate poor
children's family- and community-based disadvantages into school-based ones. It
brings together analysis of what schools demand from students in terms of
academic performance and classroom behavior with an examination of how families
and communities enable (or fail to enable) youth to meet these conditions and
successfully complete high school.

Broader Impacts: This dissertation has implications for educational and other
social policy reform. It is highly relevant to ongoing school reform projects,
particularly in El Salvador. Findings will be shared with policy makers, and
with educators, school administrators, and other practitioners at meetings and
through conference presentations. More broadly, the dissertation has
implications for multilateral development aid initiatives. By providing evidence
on the connections between poor youth?s home and community environments and
their educational outcomes, the dissertation can be used to inform both
educational and broader social policy that supports the goals of improving the
achievement and retention of poor youth in the Global South. In addition, the
dissertation will provide insights and data that can be applied in other
research areas, such as studies of Central American migration patterns or youth
violence in the region.