* 1303351
* Collaborative Proposal: Capacity Building in Cybersecurity: Broadening Participation of Women In Cybersecurity through Women in Cybersecurity Conference & Professional Developm
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Judith Simon, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2015
* USD 34,200.00

As a capacity building effort to increase the pipeline of women security
professionals, this project is working to build momentum toward a movement of
proactive efforts to diversify the cybersecurity workforce. For the first time,
Women in CyberSecurity (WiCyS) conferences are being organized. It is a unique
effort to bring together women from different levels in academia, industry and
government to promote recruitment, retention and progression of women in
cybersecurity. Tennessee Tech University is leading this collaborative
partnership with the National Centers for Academic Excellence in Information
Assurance Education at the University of Memphis and at Jackson State Community
College.

Apart from orchestrating the WiCyS conference, project activities include:
development and deployment of "Discovering Cybersecurity" workshop for raising
students, awareness of and interest in cybersecurity careers; development and
deployment of "Facilitating Active Learning in Cybersecurity" workshop for
faculty professional development, post-conference research apprenticeship in
security for students; networking and mentoring platform through WiCyS online
community. The project is assessing how its various activities contribute to
increase: undergraduate women's awareness of and interest in pursuing further
study in cyberseccurity, faculty expertise using active learning strategies to
teach cybersecurity, female students' participation in security internships and
security research experiences and female students' recruitment into the
CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service Program.

The intellectual merit of this project is to provide substance and practice that
has the potential to be continually used to increase awareness as well as
capabilities of a greater cybersecurity workforce, with special emphasis on
women who are underrepresented in computing fields and especially in
cybersecurity. Full participation of a diverse workforce is crucial to integrate
more creativity and multi-perspective problem solving to shape technology in
cybersecurity. As a part of the expected broader impact, this project
contributes to increase in the ability of the United States higher education
enterprise to produce diverse group of cybersecurity professionals.