* 1303909
* Collaborative Research: Digitization TCN: The Macroalgal Herbarium Consortium: Accessing 150 Years of Specimen Data to Understand Changes in the Marine/Aquatic Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Brent Mishler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2017
* USD 315,518.00

This award will support investigators from a consortium of 50 herbaria at
universities, botanical gardens, and natural history museums across the U.S. to
digitize their collections of macroalgae. When they have finished, high
resolution images and information about when and where each specimen was
collected will be openly accessible for more than a million specimens through
the consortium's web portal and the iDigBio web resource. Macroalgae are the
foundation of marine, estuarine and freshwater benthic ecosystems providing
food, substrata and protection for a myriad of other aquatic organisms. Many
macroalgal species are sensitive to environmental change. The data provided
through the portal will allow researchers and the public at large determine how
macroalgal biodiversity and our aquatic ecosystems have changed over the past
150 years as a result of climate change, bioinvasions, and a wide range of human
activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of macroalgal species, including kelp,
nori, and others are grown extensively via aquaculture or harvested from the
wild for human food and for extraction of colloids used in cosmetics, food
products, and pharmaceuticals. The consortium's web portal will provide
opportunities for the public to learn about the economic and ecological
importance of macroalgae. Tools will be provided for citizen scientists to
contribute to the project by helping transcribe some of the ancillary details
from specimen labels into the database. Interactive exhibits and educational
modules will be developed by the education departments of the museums in the
consortium where hundreds of thousands of visitors will experience them each
year. The project will also provide integrative training in collections and
informatics research for undergraduate and graduate students through
participation in the digitization effort and through internships at one of the
museums. This award is made as part of the National Resource for Digitization of
Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of Biological
Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be available
through the national resource (iDigBio.org).