* 1303114
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multi-Proxy Paleoecological Records from the Shark River Estuary: Wetland Evolution in the Light of Paleohurricane Activity and Sea-Level Changes
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2015
* USD 15,688.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the long-term response
of coastal wetland communities to past sea-level fluctuations and recurrent
hurricane strikes to reveal the Holocene history of mangrove forests in the
Everglades of southwestern Florida. No palynological record older than 5,000
years before the present currently exists for this region. The doctoral student
will help fill this gap by integrating various paleoecological methods including
palynological, x-ray fluorescence, and loss-on-ignition analyses to produce the
first pollen record and paleo-hurricane proxy record over the past 7,500 years
and reveal the oldest depositional history of the coastal Everglades.
Radioactive isotope analyses of 14-carbon, 137-cesium, and 210-lead will be used
to date sediment samples collected from locations along and near the Shark River
Slough. Analyses of a sediment core previously collected at the mouth of the
Shark River Slough had identified a distinctive stratigraphic signature for
Hurricane Wilma, an intense hurricane that directly struck the study area in
2005. This storm deposit will be used as a modern analog for identifying other
hurricane events in other cores. Analyses of these cores and the resulting
vegetation chronologies that will be produced should help reveal the response of
mangrove forests to past sea-level rise and hurricane
disturbance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal mangrove forests in the Everglades are
an important natural resource. By coupling palynology with paleotempestology,
the results of this study will shed light on the response of the mangrove
ecosystem to multiple extreme events over timescales of centuries to millennia.
Such a database addresses two key issues in the management and restoration of
the Everglades coastal ecosystems: rapid sea-level rise and extreme hurricane
disturbances. The palynological results will provide guidelines and background
knowledge for management planning for coastal protection and restoration. This
project also should help identify the frequency of catastrophic hurricanes in
South Florida, which is information vital for risk assessment and disaster
management in the region. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this project will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.