* 1303898
* Weaving Islands of Cloth: Gender, Textiles, and Trade Across the North Atlantic from the Viking Age to the Early Modern Period.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Michele Smith, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/28/2018
* USD 840,689.00

Textiles were fundamental elements of material culture in the Norse colonies of
the North Atlantic, gaining such importance in Iceland that cloth was used as
currency throughout the medieval period. Textiles were woven according to strict
legal standards and guidelines that regulated the length of legal cloth as well
as thread counts. Understanding the changes in textile production through time
can help shed light on how people adapted their material culture to a changing
cultural dynamic as well as changing climates. In addition, because cloth was
produce by women and decisions about textiles resided in the household with
women, this research helps us to understand not only how Norse society adapted
its technology during a cooling climatic period by weaving thicker, warmer
cloth, but also how such environmental change might impact basic social
structures such as household decision making processes. This research can be a
window into how social, cultural and economic systems will adapt to contemporary
climate shifts and assist in preparing us for potential changes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon the PI?s former research taking advantage of
the exceptionally well-preserved archaeological textile material to provide
insights into the social contexts of textiles from the North Atlantic islands
over a course 1000 years (ca. 800s-1800s AD). The overall aim is to gain a
better understanding of the lives of women- frequently invisible in the
archaeological record- and their role in developing trade and shaping the
economies of the Norse societies. The designation of weaving as women's trade is
rooted in the gendered cosmologies that prohibited men to enter weaving huts and
engage in textile work in pre-Christian era Iceland. Ca. 1200 AD textiles emerge
as currency commodity, showing consistent trend toward standardization, which
continues through the 16th century, suggesting at least three centuries of co-
existence between standardized fish (Cod, a key component of the Norse and world
economy, including the first commodities market) and standardized cloth. Aware
of the differences in the legacies of the approaches to weaving in Iceland and
Greenland, the PI aspires to explore the variation between those, Faroes, and
Norse Scottish Isles and asks what can be learned about expression of regional
identities, Little Ice Age adaptations, and roles of women.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will conduct on-site analyses of museum
collections of materials from 6 Icelandic sites, 22 Greenlandic Norse sites,
1medieval Faroese site, and 21 Norse sites of Scotland; analysis includes
extensive typologies, AMS dates, and dye identification. Part of the effort
includes isotopic analysis that will attempt to trace movements of textiles and
wool and possible trade networks across the region. This component is pitched as
a pilot project that will assess the feasibility of using strontium and carbon
isotopes on wool - a developing methodology that may help define the locale of
the grasses consumed by sheep. Isotope analysis aims to connect the
archeological record to the historical sources, which suggests that in early
1100s Icelandic textiles served as clothing material for the poor in England,
Norway, and Germany.