* 1303677
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Housing Instability, Foreclosures and Family Health
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Carol Heimer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2015
* USD 8,568.00

Mary Pattillo&lt;br/&gt;Carol Heimer&lt;br/&gt;Elyse
Kovalsky&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Home
foreclosure, once a rare occurrence, became widespread in some parts of the U.S.
during the recent economic downturn. Previous research suggests that people have
increased health problems during times of housing instability, but the reasons
for this negative association are not clear. The primary objective of this
dissertation is to better understand the mechanisms that explain the
relationship between foreclosure and health. The researchers will study
families' experiences of housing instability in Stockton, California, a city
hard hit by the foreclosure crisis. The project draws on interviews with and
long-term observations of families at different stages of homeownership,
including families who have already experienced foreclosure, families at risk of
foreclosure, and families not presently at risk of foreclosure. The foreclosure
process can bring changes in families' financial situations, in where they live
and in their social ties. These changes create the possibilities for a wide
range of health-related effects. The salience of potential mechanisms identified
will also be tested through quantitative analysis of aggregated data on
foreclosure and health from California cities. This study focuses on families
whose hold on a middle class lifestyle and identity is tethered closely to the
idea of homeownership. The investigation will build new theoretical tools for
the study of inequality and disadvantage across domains of social life. By
identifying mediating processes linking economic and housing instability to
health, the study can serve as a framework for thinking about similar
connections to other domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research have implications
beyond the near-term impacts of a family losing their home, and beyond the
recent economic crisis. After foreclosure, families may continue to struggle
with ruined credit and disrupted lives. Similarly, the experience of foreclosure
has parallels to other life events associated with financial distress and
economic precariousness, such as eviction, job loss and divorce. Insights from
this study can be tested in these other cases of families? experience of social
or economic shocks. The mechanisms identified by this study may guide policy in
the areas of housing and health. To this end, a major goal of the study is
translating research findings to a broader audience of local, state, and federal
policymakers designing interventions for families struggling with foreclosure,
eviction or homelessness.