* 1303881
* EAGER: Geologic Evidence of Tsunamis originating from the Japan Trench's Southern Segment
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2013
* Benjamin Horton, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2013
* USD 31,970.00

In the wake of the 2011 Tohoku-oki tsunami, studies modelling rupture scenarios
for the Japan Trench have identified areas of uncertainty, particularly along
the southern segment. The accuracy of these seismic models and the understanding
of fault movement along the southern Japan Trench can be greatly improved by
locating and mapping prehistoric tsunamis deposits. Records of tsunamis
developed from the sedimentary deposits they leave behind, improve our
understanding by expanding the age range of events available for study. This
EAGER research project, carried out by scientists from the University of
Pennsylvania and the Geological Survey of Japan, aims to locate geologic
evidence of past tsunamis originating from the southern segment of the Japan
Trench, which to date remains undocumented. The study will investigate the beach
ridges and coastal ponds of Chiba region of Japan using the state-of-the-art
litho-, bio-, and chronostratigraphical techniques. The research is highly
exploratory in nature since, as of yet, geologic evidence of paleo-tsunamis in
this region has been found.

The importance of understanding the timing and magnitude of tsunamis originating
from the Japan Trench was highlighted by the unexpected Mw 9.0 Tohoku-oki event
in 2011. Despite generating the largest instrumental record of an earthquake,
very little is known about the Japan Trench, particularly its southern segment
near Tokyo. The establishment of a recurrence interval for tsunami generating
earthquakes improve assessments of natural hazards to the Greater Tokyo Area,
the largest metropolitan area in the world. This research will provide important
new information concerning the uncertainty surrounding long-term earthquake
patterns, not only for the Japan Trench, but also for other locations such as
the Pacific coast of North America, Chile and Indonesia.