* 1303998
* Understanding and controlling TiO2 reactivity with anisotropic surface chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Melissa Hines, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Melissa A. Hines of Cornell University
and her students will use solution-based chemical reactions and surface science
techniques to create, understand, and control the performance of high-reactivity
titanium dioxide surfaces in technologically relevant environments, including
air and solution. This project will develop solution-based chemical techniques
for producing well-controlled anatase surfaces in a laboratory environment, for
removing growth-directing agents from the surfaces, and for preparing clean,
reproducible anatase surfaces suitable for surface-science-based studies of
chemical and photochemical reactivity. By correlating the atomic-scale structure
of the grown surfaces with the amount of shape-controlling chemicals in the
growth solution or the amount of surface-removing chemicals in the etching
solution, researchers will obtain quantitative understanding of the surface-
site-specific chemical reactions that control the growth and chemical structure
of anatase surfaces. The knowledge and techniques garnered from this study will
provide new understanding of anatase surfaces under technologically relevant
conditions, will lead to the development of new chemical reactions for the
production of high-reactivity anatase surfaces and nanocrystals, and will
produce a platform for further surface-science studies of anatase reactivity.

This study will enable the rational improvement of nanoscale surfaces necessary
for emerging sustainable technologies. The project will develop the substrates,
the expertise, and the processing protocols necessary for understanding and
controlling the performance of high-reactivity surfaces under technologically
relevant conditions, including air and solution. By integrating research and
education, this project will train postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
students in areas of national need. The project is expected to increase student
interest and achievement in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM fields) through a variety of activities targeting K-12 students and their
teachers. Particular attention will be placed on increasing the involvement of
historically underrepresented groups, such as women and racial and ethnic
minorities.