* 1303683
* Collaborative Research:  Observing turbulent fluxes in the upper Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Matthew Alford, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,210,285.00

Funds are provided to obtain direct microstructure measurements to accurately
constrain the turbulent heat and salt fluxes in the upper Arctic Ocean and to
deploy a combination of moored and towed-body measurement devices to develop a
dynamical understanding that relates those fluxes to local internal wave and
mesoscale features. The proposed cruise will be bracketed at both ends by ¡­ 400
kilometer horizontal sections across the Beaufort Gyre (BG) with the towed body
instrument, SWIMS. This will provide an unprecedented 0.5 km horizontal
resolution snapshot of temperature, salinity, velocity, and scalar
microstructure across the ice free Arctic. Time series at select locations with
a tethered microstructure profiler will provide detailed and high frequency
estimates of the turbulent mixing rate in relation to unfolding wave breaking
events. Finally, a mooring placed in the center of the BG will provide temporal
context to interpret other measurements. Analysis will focus on 1) quantifying
mixing rates, 2) understanding how near-inertial internal wave propagation and
breaking respond to variable forcing rates and refraction by mesoscale
vorticity, and 3) evaluating several candidate dynamical relationships between
the two with an eye towards parameterization.

Broader impacts of the project include support for the training of a graduate
student and for an early career scientist. Furthermore, the proposed development
of a public lecture through the Birch Aquarium¡¯s Perspectives on Ocean Science
series, with subsequent web-based delivery of the video has the potential to
reach a large lay audience.

The Arctic Ocean is logistically difficult and expensive to observe. Thus, much
of our detailed understanding of the Arctic Ocean and its variability is likely
to be provided by models for the foreseeable future. Our faith in the output of
such models increases in proportion to our ability to include unresolved
processes through parameterizations. Mixing is one of the most important of
these processes. This project, if successful, will contribute to the accurate
parameterization of mixing in these models, with consequent improvement of
predictions of weather and climate, stratification in the ocean, the heat flux
to the ocean surface, and primary production that drives the oceanic food chain.