* 1303228
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Redefining Roles of Fatherhood in Low-Income Urban Communities.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Aasha Abdill, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 07/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1303228 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Mitchell Duneier&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Aasha
Abdill&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
research investigates whether men of low-income urban communities are uncovering
the potential benefit of loosening translations of fatherhood. Recent academic
attention to fatherhood emphasizes the concept of "new fathering," a
modification in the fathering identity which includes a focus on emotional
attachment to the child. This trajectory of inquiry leads to a set of motivating
research questions which will reveal fathering looks like and feels like to
black men and their families while ideologies of manhood, masculinity and
fatherhood are rapidly changing. Is embracing fatherhood becoming a more viable
option due to the removal of the breadwinner mandate from its definition? If so,
what now does being a father entail? How are new ideas of fathering roles
communicated and understood within low-income urban communities? How are
fathering beliefs and behaviors being impacted? Employing primarily an
ethnographic research strategy, with some quantitative components, this research
captures the change of fathering beliefs and behaviors in the urban neighborhood
of Bedford Stuyvesant, Brooklyn NY. Additionally, research will be conducted at
the local Head Start, which has been embedded in the community for 40 years, in
order to provide some information on fathering behavior over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;In addition to the social
and structural disadvantages that often operate in low-income urban communities,
such as high rates of unemployment and incarceration, local interactions within
urban communities may also be influencing the involvement of low-income fathers
with their children. This study will investigate how values, beliefs and norms
of fatherhood are transmitted within an urban community context. If changes in
public ideas of fathering are influencing the beliefs and behaviors of fathers
in low-income communities, then a greater understanding of how and in what ways
can have significant impacts on practical understanding as well as policy
implications. Organizations, including Head Start and schools, may be able to
support and take advantage of burgeoning changes in role definitions.