* 1303430
* Collaborative Project - SFS CB: Establishing the New Mexico Digital Forensics Academy
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2013,11/30/2013
* Kai Chang, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 11/30/2013
* USD 135,528.00

This project is establishing a permanent digital forensics program at Western
New Mexico University (WNMU) in collaboration with Auburn University. It is
providing a statewide digital forensics resource that currently does not exist
in New Mexico. WNMU?s unique combined mission of regional community college as
well as regional university provides unique opportunities to explore program
integration with New Mexico 2-year law enforcement programs. Deliverables from
this project include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Establish an 18-hour minor in
digital forensics as part of the WNMU undergraduate and graduate Criminal
Justice programs. &lt;br/&gt;2. Establish an 18-hour graduate certificate
program in digital forensics as part of the WNMU Criminal Justice program.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Establish an advanced digital forensics training program for New
Mexico law enforcement. &lt;br/&gt;4. Conduct Regional workshops for diverse
audiences drawn from New Mexico state and local law enforcement agencies as well
as students from other campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
challenge for this project is to determine how a small university in a remote
corner of a large state can develop, deliver and sustain a technically
challenging digital forensics program across a large state. The project is
assessing courses learning outcomes as well as elements such as the practicality
of course contents, the way the contents is delivered, the lab environment and
setup, the effectiveness of projects and assignments, lab assistance quality and
inclusion/exclusion suggestions for course contents and
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This first of its kind program in New Mexico
enjoys broad support from the state government. This ensures a broad impact
across the state. This program could serve as a model for other underserved
states, particularly large, rural states.