* 1303724
* Numerical Modeling of Large Mass-Ratio Black Hole Binaries Using Time-Domain Perturbation Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Gaurav Khanna, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 77,570.00

This research project will advance the science behind the emerging discipline of
gravitational wave astronomy -- an area which the US is deeply invested in
through the NSF LIGO project. One of the strongest sources of gravitational
radiation is the merger of two black holes and therefore it is critical to
develop a full understanding of the dynamics of such a binary system. Our work
will make important contributions to this effort in the context of large mass-
ratio black hole binary systems i.e. when one member of the binary is a
supermassive black hole and the other is a solar-mass sized object. More
specifically, we will significantly advance the development of our Kerr space-
time perturbation theory based approach (the Teukolsky formalism) in the time-
domain to tackle a variety of challenging problems such as: high-accuracy
gravitational waveform generation and the development of effective-one-body
models, that will ultimately positively impact the data analysis of current and
future observatories; understanding the "anti-kick" which is an intriguing
aspect of the phenomenon of gravitational recoil observed in such binary
systems; validating full numerical relativity simulations; testing the Cosmic
Censorship Conjecture in the context of the capture of a small test particle by
a near extremal Kerr black hole, and more. Thus, our research activities will
contribute to a number of challenging and important problems in the area of
gravitational wave physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research work will involve
undergraduate and graduate students throughout, therefore directly contributing
to the education and training mission of the university. In addition, the
proposed research will establish new collaborations, between individuals and
institutions. We will also frequently participate in outreach activities thus
promoting science awareness and public knowledge on current scientific research.
Such outreach will be done through media interviews and stories and also through
a dedicated publicly accessible website. We will also establish a "waveform
server" that would freely allow any user to generate the gravitational waves for
any large mass-ratio black hole binary system using a simple web based
interface. In this manner, any individual would be in a position to make use
such data for a project or a study of their own interest. Lastly, because our
research activities will contribute to the development of broad mathematical,
computational and web-related tools, and also to the education and training of
students, this project's impact will likely extend beyond its research area and
thus potentially benefit other scientific and engineering disciplines. The
mathematical and computational skills developed by the supported students will
open them up to possible employment to a wide variety of technical positions,
including those associated with great current national need.