* 1303585
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Post-public Housing Spatial Concentration
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Mary Waters, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2014
* USD 11,695.00

SES-1303585 Mary Waters Eva Rosen Harvard University

In the past fifteen years there has been an important transformation in housing
policy. The dissolution of large-scale public housing in many cities has
resulted in social turmoil and the displacement of poor and vulnerable
populations. The vertical ghetto -- the high-rise public housing development --
has remade itself into the horizontal ghetto -- the concentration of housing
voucher holders in moderately poor neighborhoods. If the transformation of
public housing has placed more of the nation's needy households in neighborhoods
that are characterized not by the stable, concentrated poverty that urban
sociologists long studied, but by moderate poverty, and high rates of
residential churning and social disorder, it might mean that the mechanisms by
which neighborhoods transmit various advantages and disadvantages have been
fundamentally transformed. How does this context shape and constrain residents'
expectations and orientations toward their neighborhood? Why and how do
residents end up in these new post-public housing neighborhoods? These questions
are addressed through a case study neighborhood in Baltimore. The dissertation
relies on a combination of ethnographic observations and 120 in-depth interviews
with residents and community members, including voucher holders, homeowners,
unassisted renters, community members, and landlords.

Broader Impacts

With the dismantling of the public housing high-rises, and the important
increase in the number of housing vouchers, many have moved to new areas,
concentrating disproportionately in moderately poor neighborhoods with high
residential instability. This dramatic change provides an impetus for
researchers and policymakers to learn more about what kinds of social
organization these neighborhoods facilitate and how new social relations shape
cultural schema pertaining to mobility, which play a crucial role in the social
reproduction of poverty. This research contributes to knowledge about these
patterns that can be used to promote, rather than compromise the wellbeing and
future prospects of the recipients of housing assistance. This research suggests
that although housing vouchers may be a valuable and effective tool for solving
housing affordability problems, a market-based solution is inherently limited
for solving America?s ghetto poverty problem.