* 1303147
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Claiming Ground:   Indigenous Politics, Religion, and Human-Environment Relations in a Sacred Landscape.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Emily Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,989.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates the ways in which
notions of sacred landscapes are used to claim territory, and the effects of
those processes on human-environment relationships. Struggles between indigenous
communities and states over territory, environmental access, land use, and
resource management take a number of forms, and are often situated within the
growing global indigenous rights movement. Out of these struggles over human-
environment relations, notions of sacred landscapes are increasingly mobilized
as embodiments of ethnic identity and territoriality, yet the effects of such
claims on human-environment relations within communities whose landscapes are
reified as sacred remain unexplored. This dissertation project hypothesizes that
mobilizations of sacred landscapes, in the context of highly politicized
indigenous rights movements, reshape and redefine human-environment relations in
important ways. Situated within a conceptual framework that draws on a theory of
articulation, the concept of the production of space, and a political ecology
approach, this dissertation research seeks to answer the following questions:
(1) How are territorial claims articulated with global indigenous politics
through notions of sacred landscapes?; (2) In what way does the production and
reproduction of sacred landscapes structure indigenous identity and
territoriality?; and (3) In what ways does this process (re)shape environmental
access, land use, and resource management within a community? This project uses
a suite of qualitative research methods, including focus groups and semi-
structured in-depth interviews, participant observation, and textual analysis in
a case study in Nepal. The research contributes to multidisciplinary literatures
on indigenous politics, identity and territory, and religion. Further, this
dissertation research works to bring critical approaches to religious studies
into more traditional framing of the geography of religion in order to advance
understandings of the role of that religion plays in human-environment relations
and landscapes.

Beyond the intellectual and theoretical contributions of the research the
findings of this project can influence national and international policy
regarding sacred landscapes and indigenous communities. The project contributes
to the training of students in Nepal who will be engaged in the project as
research assistants. Results of the research will be disseminated locally in
Nepal and at national and international academic conferences and via
publications in scholarly journals. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
doctoral student to establish an independent research career.