* 1303625
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Conflict, Collaboration, and Shared Community Interests
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Jan Doering, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2014
* USD 10,616.00

SES-1303625&lt;br/&gt;John Levi Martin&lt;br/&gt;Jan
Doering&lt;br/&gt;University of Chicago &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safety is a
desirable public good that gives residents of different backgrounds an incentive
to collaborate. Yet, issues of crime and safety can also be divisive, as
residents of color (particularly African Americans) may feel exposed to an
unjust share of the community's scrutiny and suspicion. This study investigates
the causes, processes, and consequences of conflict and collaboration in
grassroots public safety organizations in two interracial Chicago neighborhoods.
Since public safety work may rally diverse residents around a common cause, as
well as alienate them from one another, the case of public safety organizations
allows for an investigation of community in the context of local safety
initiatives, from peace circles to neighborhood watch patrols. Through a
comparative design, this study isolates the causes, processes, and outcomes of
conflict and collaboration across a range of grassroots public safety
organizations. Three complementary strategies of data collection are employed:
participant observation, in-depth interviewing, and the gathering of secondary
data, such as organizational minutes and Census data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study contributes
to the public discourse on perceptions of crime, race relations, and everyday
life in diverse urban environments. Results will be shared with the wider
public. In particular, strategies will be proposed for maximizing the
inclusivity of public safety work while minimizing its divisiveness. These
recommendations will be presented to civic leaders, community organizers, and
policy makers.