* 1303051
* CyberCorp Cadre
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2021
* Lorie Liebrock, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,906,169.00

This project seeks to continue the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
(NMT) participation in the CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to
prepare highly-qualified Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the
government workforce. NMT is a Hispanic Serving Institution, designated as a
Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education and Research by
the National Security Agency, and meeting the criteria for multiple training
standards (CNSS 4011, 4012, 4013E and 4016E.) To date, the program has graduated
47 CyberCorps® SFS students including four Native Americans, three Hispanics,
one Asian American, and nine women. This project will provide a multi-
disciplinary, integrated education, research, and training to additional 13
CyberCorps® SFS scholars. The project's objective is to prepare CyberCorps® SFS
scholars to become leaders in civil service, not merely practitioners, in the
field of Cybersecurity. The NSF's CyberCorps® SFS program funds projects that
address Cybersecurity education and workforce development. The Scholarship Track
provides funding to award scholarships to students in Cybersecurity. In return
for their scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a Federal,
State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a position related to
Cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the scholarship. The Capacity
Track seeks innovative proposals leading to an increase in the ability of the
United States higher education enterprise to produce Cybersecurity
professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum includes practical, hands-on
applications of Cybersecurity coordinated between the Computer Science and
Engineering (CSE) Department, the Information Technology (IT) Program, the
Institute for Complex Additive Systems Analysis (ICASA), and other academic
departments. By integrating research projects in advanced courses, the project
enhances problem solving and develops CyberCorps® SFS scholars who are subject
matter experts in the area of their selected focus. The underlying curriculum
principle is to integrate Cybersecurity content in every core CSE and IT course
from algorithms and architecture to software engineering. For example, in the
software engineering course, students learn best practices on software design
and verification for security; in the compiler writing course, students learn
the security implications of design decisions in compilers; and during their
compiler implementation project, they implement a security optimization such as
buffer overflow protection. This integration of Cybersecurity concepts impacts
all of the students who take the CSE or IT courses.