* 1303113
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Energy-Saving Regulations on the Location of Manufacturing
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Matthias Ruth, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2015
* USD 15,113.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the effect of
regulatory differences in regional energy savings on the location and growth of
manufacturing industries in China. The concern for industrial redistribution
induced by different environmental regulations across jurisdictions, namely the
pollution-haven hypothesis, has long interested geographers and economists. A
stricter environmental regulation may increase polluting firms' abatement costs,
reduce their competitiveness, and shift them to areas with laxer regulations.
This process makes areas with laxer regulations suffer from more pollution, and
areas with stricter regulations lose jobs. Using industry-level and firm-level
panel data from 2002 to 2010 in China, the doctoral student will investigate
whether inter-provincial regulatory differences in energy saving affected the
location of manufacturing industries. The analysis will focus on three aspects:
two-digit industry-level and firm-level employment, firm-level location choice,
and firm-level growth. The econometric analyses will be applied to all provinces
for aggregate policy effects and restrictively to counties along provincial
borders. The latter analyses should help identify whether there are more abrupt
changes in manufacturing activities in border areas and identify differences in
the geographical scope of the changes that result from a regulation change
across borders. Generalized difference-in-differences models, conditional logit
models, and multi-level models will be used for estimation.

This research project will advance basic knowledge about the pollution-haven
hypothesis and the cost of environmental regulations. It will identify common
biases in measuring industry relocation by employing both industry-aggregate and
firm-level data with the same sample frame using multiple estimation methods. It
will compare the effect of a command-and-control policy with that of a market-
based one by incorporating both in the estimation. With comprehensive datasets
and estimation methods, the project will measure policy-induced industrial
relocation and the relative strength of alternative policy approaches. Project
findings will shed light on future energy saving, energy consumption, and
natural resource consumption in different areas in China. The findings should
help improve the current policy frameworks that governments in many nations can
use to meet energy-efficiency targets with fewer adverse impacts. The policy
implications of the decentralized regulation in nations like China are highly
relevant to the impacts of international climate change policies, especially the
issues of carbon leakage and loss of competitiveness for countries that joined
international commitments of greenhouse gas reduction. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research career.