* 1303516
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Racial Boundaries and the Dynamics of Transformation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Jose Itzigsohn, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2015
* USD 10,836.00

José Itzigsohn Marcelo A. Bohrt Brown University

Struggles over racial boundaries are a perennial feature of racialized societies
-- where social, political, and economic resources are differentially
distributed along racial lines. Yet, most studies of the transformation of
racialized societies adopt a macro-level political and institutional
perspective, overlooking how transformation is experienced, perceived, and
participated in by concrete actors, on the ground. The project promises to make
the following contributions to the study of race and racial boundaries: (1) to
examine how racial discourses inform the transformation of state institutional
logics, and the ways in which the racial/cultural identities of bureaucrats
shape and are shaped by everyday organizational interactions; (2) to reveal how
race works by examining how racial boundaries are maintained, challenged, and
changed in everyday life; and (3) to better specify the link between everyday
discourses and practices in the transformation of racial boundaries.

Through 12 months of ethnographic research and interviews this project studies
the micro-dynamics of state decolonization, and the articulation of a new state
structure in Bolivia. The research focuses on one facet of the larger project,
the decolonization of public administration, which has, in part, resulted in the
opening up of positions within the civil service to indigenous men and women.
Following the process of decolonization of one state agency and using the
sociological concepts of symbolic and social boundaries as analytical tools,
this research seeks to understand how, in the context of macro-political change,
bureaucrats on the ground interpret, negotiate, and rearticulate racial
boundaries and institutional change, and to what effect.

Broader Impacts

The study will have practical implications of relevance to policy practitioners.
It will shed light on the generally obscured area between official racial
policies and their implementation on the ground. The lessons learned could
possibly inform institutional change beyond the public sector and in other
contexts. These lessons are important in light of the resilience of racial
inequalities despite policies that seek to address them. In addition, this
project will build and promote lasting research collaboration networks between
researchers in Bolivia and the United States.