* 1303633
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Resources, Micro-level Actions, and Health Disparities
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Peter Conrad, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 11,820.00

SES-1303633 &lt;br/&gt;Peter Conrad&lt;br/&gt;Amanda Gengler&lt;br/&gt;Brandeis
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few crises strike deeper at the heart of family
life than a child's serious illness. How families and healthcare providers
respond to this crisis has profound implications for a child's future health and
wellbeing, and their families' quality of life. As life-saving technologies have
advanced rapidly in recent years, limited access to these specialized
technologies may be more consequential than ever. This dissertation research
examines the work families of seriously ill children must do to mobilize needed
resources, activate social networks, and advocate on behalf of their child to
move up the rungs of the U.S. healthcare system and obtain the best possible
care for their child.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use a combination
of ongoing intensive interviews and ethnographic observations with families of
seriously ill children being treated at an elite university research hospital to
study how families across diverse racial and socioeconomic backgrounds
confronting a variety of serious childhood illnesses negotiate with doctors and
nurses, locate and mobilize needed resources, and advocate on behalf of their
children. While social scientists have long documented--and made important
strides towards explaining--significant health disparities across racial and
socioeconomic divides, much of this work has focused on structural inequalities
at the macro level or on isolated individual health behaviors at the micro-
level. Much less is known about how micro-level actions and interactions between
critical social actors involved in the illness process contribute to the
creation and maintenance of inequalities in the type, amount, and quality of
care obtained. This research examines the actions families must take to get
their children access to the best medical care available to them, and predicts
that differences in families' access to a variety of social, material, and
symbolic resources along with differences in families advocacy strategies may
contribute to disparities in health outcomes and broader social inequalities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this
research will advance our understanding of the subtle mechanisms through which
significant inequalities are created and sustained throughout the illness
process and thus offer important insights that could improve health policy and
delivery of healthcare and support services to families of seriously ill
children. Such improvements may offer the potential to begin to equalize
families' access to needed care and resources. Results are therefore likely to
be of interest to doctors, nurses, social workers, patient educators and
healthcare policy-makers, and will be shared widely in follow-up presentations
with healthcare providers, and in future classroom teaching.