* 1303359
* Capacity Building: Collaborative Research: Integrated Learning Environment for Cyber Security of Smart Grid
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Yi Pan, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 153,028.00

Ensuring the cyber-security of the smart grid raises significant interest
amongst both general public and researchers. However, the corresponding
education programs fall behind in many aspects. Very limited curriculum or
hands-on learning resources are available for security education about the smart
grid, especially for the mutual impacts between cyber and physical systems. To
bridge this gap, this project is developing an integrated simulation environment
dedicated to smart grid education programs, and is designing a suite of course
modules and hands-on projects focusing on security of modern power systems.
Through federating the control network simulator with the Power Grid Simulator
Program, this project covers both cyber and physical systems underpinning smart
grid operations. The research team is carrying out well-planned evaluation and
dissemination activities to assess the effectiveness of the innovative
instructional materials and promote their wide adoption. Rigorous evaluation
procedures are being used by experienced independent evaluators. The research
team is implementing the new instructional materials in six courses at three
participating institutions, and the project is promoting the wide adoption of
the approaches through two faculty development
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project is designing a
first-of-its-kind smart grid simulation environment dedicated to security
education programs that covers both cyber and physical systems. This environment
and the educational materials provide transformative learning experiences for
students on future electric energy systems and promote research and education in
this interdisciplinary field. Through the dissemination efforts such as faculty
development workshops and outreach activities, the project establishes a student
education and training pipeline that attracts high school students to CS and EE
majors, equips college students with much needed cyber and physical knowledge
and skills for secure power systems, and prepares them for the challenges of
working in the future power industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project provides a new method to train qualified workforce to fill tens of
thousands of open positions in the fast evolving smart grid industry and improve
the sustainability and security of future power systems. The project provides
interdisciplinary research experiences in cyber-physical systems involving power
grid, networks, and security to both graduate and undergraduate students.
Minority and under-represented students also benefit from the project.