* 1303301
* Integrating categorical and geometric methods in non-semisimple representation theories
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Vera Serganova, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2016
* USD 166,996.00

The aim of this project is to solve several open problems in representation
theory of Lie algebras and superalgebras via categorical and geometric methods.
In particular, we propose to study the category T of tensor representation of
sl-infinity. In this proposal this category plays two different roles. In
application to infinite-dimensional Lie algebras it is the target category for
categorification of boson-fermion correspondence, the Fock space equipped with
action of free bosons and fermions is identified with the complexified
Grothendieck group of the category T. In application to Lie superalgebras we use
the approach originally suggested by Brundan. Namely, we identify the
complexified Grothendieck group of the category of representation of a classical
supergroup G and certain "tensor" representation M of sl-infinity, and
categorify the action of the Chevalley generators of sl-infinity in M by the
translation functors. Recent papers of Brundan and Stroppel, Cheng, Lam and
Wang, Gruson and the author demonstrate the power of this approach by making
essential progress in long standing open problems (such as character formulae,
Kazhdan-Lusztig theory for the general linear superalgebras and explicit
description of extension groups). We suggest to combine this approach with our
results on the structure of individual sl-infinity modules in T to obtain new
information about modules over Lie superalgebras: description of tensor
products, calculation of superdimension, Kazhdan-Lusztig theory for the
orthosymplectic superalgebras. Another goal is to generalize T to the case of
fields of positive characteristic, and explore connection with Deligne's tensor
categories. We also combine the above approach with geometric methods in
representation theory of Lie superalgebras. In particular, we introduce several
conjectures relating thick ideals of the tensor category G-mod for a classical
supergroup G, equivariant sheaves on the self-commuting cone of G and the socle
filtration of the corresponding sl-infinity modules. The last part of proposal
addresses the problem of generalizing Borel-Weil-Bott theorem for supergroups.
Although partial results in this area were obtained almost 30 years ago, a
complete answer is still unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supersymmetry is an
important tool in modern theoretical physics. The methods of supersymmetry
factor the questions interesting for physicists through the theory of
representations of supergroups and superalgebras. There are still a lot of gaps
in mathematical foundations in this subject: the methods familiar from
representation theory of reductive groups get stuck early since the algebraic
structure of representations is significantly more complicated. As new phenomena
were discovered, it turned out that they have analogues in other non-semisimple
branches of representation theory: modular representations and representations
of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras. The latter representations have a wide
range of applications: from integrable systems to string theory. We suggest a
new approach to a key tool of this theory, vertex operators, by categorification
of boson-fermion correspondence. We also plan to study further the duality
between representation of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras and classical
supergroups.