* 1303612
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Occupational Licensing on Wages, Inequality, and Diversity
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* David Grusky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 11,893.00

SES - 1303612&lt;br/&gt;PI: David Grusky&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Beth Red
Bird&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
ways in which licensing in an occupation impacts wages and wage inequality among
workers, and how this relationship might vary based on the demographic features
of workers and occupations. There is notable contemporary research concerned
with new forms of stratification associated with income inequality, particularly
types resulting from changes in the structure of the labor market. Much of this
literature, however, has focused on the shifting reward structure between
groups, ignoring the equally important possibility that new structures produce
different reward opportunities within groups. This project fills a gap in past
research by focusing on a dramatic change in labor market structure: the rise in
occupational licensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research
explores: (1) how wage benefits derive from licensure, (2) whether licensure
impacts wage inequality within occupations, and (3) whether licensure
restructures the workforce in terms of gender and race. The study uses
nationally representative data collected over the last thirty years to
understand how one of the most substantial labor force trends of our time is
altering the structure of wages, inequality, and diversity within occupations.
While neoclassical economic theory provides a useful starting point from which
to understand these changes, this project also explores ways in which licensure
itself may create mechanisms through which wages and prestige are re-structured,
a process that is enhanced by the institutionalization that accompanies
licensure.&lt;br/&gt;Licensure is expected to produce a modest wage premium for
licensed workers, it also creates a state-endorsed semi-meritocratic structure
which may further stratify reward structures. Thus, it is hypothesized that
licensure increases inequality while simultaneously increasing rewards to
traditionally disadvantaged groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Licensure is becoming a method of regulating occupations, usually in
the name of enhancing quality of workers and reducing risks to the consuming
public. However, the effects of licensure on the composition of intra-
occupational labor markets and on the wage inequality experienced by workers are
relatively unknown. This project offers the opportunity to bring empirical
evidence to bear on questions about state policies that can enable efforts
relative to their impact on efficiencies in the workplace, on satisfaction of
workers, and on wages and wage inequality within varying communities.