* 1303169
* Automorphic Forms Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Scott Ahlgren, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 12/31/2013
* USD 18,000.00

This award will support the 27th annual Workshop on Automorphic Forms and
Related Topics, to be held March 11--14, 2013, at University College Dublin in
Dublin, Ireland. Funds will be used to defray travel costs of US-based attendees
at the conference. The co-organizers are Scott Ahlgren (University of Illinois),
Jeremy Lovejoy (CNRS, Paris 7), and Robert Osburn (University College Dublin).
Additional information can be found on the workshop website:
automorphicformsworkshop.org

Automorphic forms have played diverse and important roles in mathematics for
centuries. Over the years, it has been found that automorphic forms are deeply
entwined in number theory, representation theory, combinatorics, mathematical
physics, Lie theory, geometry, and other areas. Some of the most spectacular
scientific breakthroughs in the 20th and 21st century, such as Borcherds' proof
of the moonshine conjecture, the resolution of Fermat's Last Theorem by Wiles,
and the proof of the Fundamental Lemma by Chau, are automorphic in nature. So
are many other celebrated conjectures, such as those of Langlands and Bloch-
Kato, which remain open, and those of Serre and Sato-Tate, whose proofs have
recently been published or announced. Important new types of automorphic forms
are still being discovered, such as the harmonic Maass forms which lie behind
Ramanujan's mock theta functions.

The AFW serves an important role in the community through its tradition of
welcoming and mentoring junior researchers in the area. Many senior researchers
have come through the workshop at some point in their career, and many gave one
of their first conference talks at an AFW. The AFW has always had a welcoming
reputation towards women and members of other underrepresented groups.
Historically, a substantial percentage of participants have been women. The AFW
attracts participants from around the world, from different career stages, and
from different types of universities, and the workshop has led to many research
collaborations and research papers. This will mark the first time that the AFW
has been held outside of North America, which will provide junior US-based
participants an excellent opportunity for exposure to the European and British
research communities in automorphic forms.