* 1303763
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Measuring the effects of surfactants on cloud microphysics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ronald Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2017
* USD 502,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program supports Professor Ronald C. Cohen
of the University of California, Berkeley, in collaboration with the research
group of Barbara Noziere of the University of Lyon, France to advance
understanding of cloud droplets by studying whether surfactants affect droplet
growth rates. In the Earth's atmosphere, cloud droplets are formed exclusively
by the condensation of water vapor onto micron-size aerosol particles. The
research will develop new ideas and approaches to understanding cloud droplet
growth especially with respect to the key question of how mixtures of organic
chemicals in aerosol and on water droplets affect droplet growth rates. In Lyon,
the focus of the research will be on the characterization of surfactants found
in ambient aerosol. At Berkeley the focus will be on determining parameters that
affect droplet growth and evaporation and understanding how model surfactants as
well as the surfactants extracted from ambient aerosol by the Lyon group affect
the evaporation and growth. To accomplish these goals, novel analytical and
spectroscopic methods will be developed, including optical traps, fluorescence
anisotropy decay, Raman thermometry and cavity enhanced Raman scattering, to
investigate the effect of atmospheric surfactants on cloud droplet formation and
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and apply the next
generation of laboratory experiments to study the fundamental chemistry of cloud
droplet growth. In the Earth's atmosphere, cloud droplets are formed exclusively
by the condensation of water vapor onto micron-size aerosol particles. The Cohen
group at Berkeley and the Noziere group at Lyon have separately pioneered new
approaches to studying droplet growth over the last few years. Fusion of the
experimental skills and knowledge of the two teams, a goal of this project, is
expected to lead to unique advances in our understanding of the chemical link
between aerosol and clouds, especially at the crucial step of cloud droplet
growth. This project is expected to result in significant advances in our
understanding of the scientific basis for policy decisions regarding air quality
and climate. The results will be communicated both in the scientific literature,
to a more general audience through various media and directly to regulators and
policy makers in California with whom the PI meets informally at meetings aimed
at planning for climate change in the local region