* 1303384
* Capacity Building for Information Assurance and Cyber Security
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 322,410.00

This capacity building project seeks to foster high quality education and
research in Cybersecurity. The University of South Alabama (USA) has been
designated as a Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance (IA)
Education by the National Security Agency and is an active participants in the
CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program. USA currently offers a full
range of Cybersecurity courses at the graduate and undergraduate level. This
project aims to increase the number of students interested in pursuing
cybersecurity education, to provide key resource to further ongoing
Cybersecurity research, and to increase the expertise of faculty and students.
The project is providing broader impact and dissemination through local
colloquia and research groups on campus and through two regional workshops that
brings faculty from up to ten local community and junior colleges, fostering
development of Cybersecurity focus throughout the region. The NSF's CyberCorps®
SFS program funds projects that address cybersecurity education and workforce
development. The Scholarship Track provides funding to award scholarships to
students in cybersecurity. In return for their scholarships, recipients will
work after graduation for a Federal, State, Local, or Tribal Government
organization in a position related to cybersecurity for a period equal to the
length of the scholarship. The Capacity Track seeks innovative proposals leading
to an increase in the ability of the United States higher education enterprise
to produce cybersecurity professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
expand the current cybersecurity program by three key activities: 1) developing
a virtual lab facility that supports hands-on Cybersecurity curriculum
development for ten cybersecurity courses and will provide computational
resources for ten faculty conducting Cybersecurity research; 2) implementing a
professional development program for faculty to remain current in Cybersecurity
research advancements; and 3) sponsoring K-12 STEM field trips and summer camps
that brings high school junior and seniors from local partner schools to the USA
campus for cybersecurity focused field trips.