* 1303577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Origins of Trust and Trustworthiness
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,10/31/2016
* Edgar Kiser, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 10/31/2016
* USD 11,998.00

SES-1303577 PI: Edgar Kiser Co-PI: Blaine Robbins University of Washington

Trust is central to the development and growth of social and economic exchange.
The goals of this dissertation project are to identify factors that promote
trust, to understand the situational features that enable trust formation, and
to pinpoint the dispositional sources of trust. Given the widespread interest in
trust across the social sciences, this project will test theoretical
propositions found in sociology, political science, economics, social
psychology, and philosophy. To accomplish this, the investigators will
administer a web-based survey consisting of two hypothetical scenarios - a "car
repair" scenario and "group project" scenario - to a large subject pool of
online participants. This will be used to measure characteristics of trust and
trustworthiness experienced by the participants. With this integrative approach,
the investigators hope to construct a more comprehensive framework for the study
of trust that resolves interdisciplinary debates about its conceptualization and
operationalization.

Broader Impacts: With globalization and cosmopolitanism continuing to increase,
understanding the sources of trust is an enduring issue for social scientists.
If successful, results might inform policymakers of the socio-demographic
factors that promote not only trust, but also social relationships, economic
transactions, and civil society among diverse populations. Furthermore,
examining how trust forms under market and non-market conditions has applied
implications for both economic growth and business administration. This research
also has a significant education component, leading to the training of a
graduate student who will eventually mentor and teach future students
multifactorial vignette designs. Finally, the research involves modifications to
a widely used open-source software program for web-based surveys, modifications
that will be made freely available to interested researchers.