* 1303175
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climate and Topographic Controls on Little Ice Age Glacial Advances
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Yingkui Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 11/30/2015
* USD 15,995.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates the climate and topographic
controls on glacial advances during a period known as the Little Ice Age (LIA,
approximately AD 1300 to 1850). Glaciers provide a critical freshwater supply in
arid and semi-arid areas around the world, so understanding the dynamics of
glaciers is of societal importance. Glacial advances and retreats are strongly
affected by climate change, but are also influenced by local topographic and
glaciological factors. These factors then can either reinforce or dampen the
effects of changes in temperature and moisture. This project will constrain the
formation ages of the landforms left behind by the LIA glacial advances to test
whether the LIA glacial advances are asynchronous across a mountain region.
Then, detailed mapping of the LIA and modern glacier extents from Google Earth
imagery will be used to evaluate the relationship between the magnitude of the
LIA glacial advances and local topographic and glaciological factors.
Understanding the spatial and temporal pattern of the LIA glacial advances will
provide significant insights into the shifting dominance of different
atmospheric systems and their interplay with local topographic and glaciological
factors. This knowledge is of critical importance for climate models to predict
future climate scenarios. In particular, the detailed study from the sites
selected in the Central Asian highlands will provide an understanding of
relationships between the westerlies and the Siberian High, and possibly the
Asian monsoon, in driving glacial advances and retreats over complex mountainous
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fill a gap in knowledge of
the timing and extent of the LIA glacial advances and provide well-constrained,
paleo-climate information to help better understand future climate and
environmental changes. The glacial maps delineated based on high-resolution
Google Earth imagery will provide an updated glacier inventory to document the
status of glacier changes. In addition to the support for this doctoral
dissertation research, this project will provide training for an undergraduate
student in geologic dating and paleo-climate reconstruction. Research results of
this project will be disseminated to a variety of audiences through conference
presentations, journal publications, and scientific outreach by integrating the
research content into foreign language (Chinese) classes in local K-12 schools
and the Confucius Institute at the University of Tennessee. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research career.