* 1303520
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Business Unity and Anti-Corporate Social Movement Protests in the U.S., 2000-2010
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2015
* Michael Schwartz, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

Michael Schwartz&lt;br/&gt;Tarun Banerjee&lt;br/&gt;SUNY at Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;What determines how large corporations in the U.S.
respond to social protest against them? Firms show a lot of variation in their
strategies, sometimes accommodating demands, and at other times, taking strong
stands against concessions or even retaliating against protesters. Why do these
firms respond so differently? This research studies the influence of social
relations of the corporate elite. Do firms undertake differing strategies based
on individual firm-level factors or do they also develop these strategies
socially? If they do so socially, do the corporate elite show unity in their
strategies? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research incorporates organizational
sociology and economic theory to identify relevant firm-level characteristics
that impact responses to protests. Social movement theory is incorporated to
assess the influence protests may have on firms. Finally, unity theory is used
to explain the impact of networks formed between companies. The researchers will
used these networks to test whether unified behavior is not just the convergence
of individual interest but is socially constructed and results from collective
action. Logistic multi-level random effects models will be run, with a protest
against a firm in the sample as the unit of analysis. The research also builds a
database of protests in the U.S. from 2000 to 2010. This study has two main
scholarly contributions. First, this is the most in-depth study on the
strategies of the business elite around protests. Previous research has been
limited by protest type or impact. Second, this is the first study to quantify
the role of corporate networks in their strategies against protests. While it is
understood that corporations are not asocial independent actors, no quantitative
studies of protests have yet measured the influence of their social relations on
their responses to protest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently there is an incomplete understanding of
the political actions of firms, and activists operate without full knowledge of
the degree to which the social relations of firms impede or aid their efforts.
Given the prominence of anti-corporate protests (under the Occupy Wall Street
banner as well as others), this is a consequential time for many movements and
policy actors. The time period under study covers significant political and
economic occurrences -- including the 2007 financial collapse and housing
crisis, the shrinking of the public sector, and the increasing consolidation of
political and economic power by large corporations -- further confirming the
need for research to better understand the phenomena of large corporations and
those that oppose them.