* 1303803
* International Collaboration in Chemistry:  Bioinspired Heterogeneous Photocatalyst Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Krishnan Rajeshwar, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 372,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports the research of Professors Krishnan
Rajeshwar and Frank W. Foss Jr. of the University of Texas at Arlington to
collaborate with Professor Yaron Paz of Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology in Israel to design and develop more efficient photocatalytic
assemblies via the assembly of multiple components with complementary functions
in a composite architecture. This International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC)
project employs components that enhance electron transport in assemblies built
from stable metal oxide semiconductors, efficient electron mediators, and robust
and tunable flavin organocatalysts. The team synthetically tailors and assembles
individual organic and inorganic chemical components to arrive at more efficient
hybrid photocatalyst assemblies. These photocatalytic systems utilize molecular
assemblies designed from earth abundant, inexpensive, and benign chemicals to
create new processes for photochemical catalysis. This project includes
international and cooperative research and education enabling a concerted focus
on basic research questions related to photocatalytic assemblies that can
convert sunlight into usable energy. The US investigators enable students at the
Center for African American Studies and the AACCESS program, a program that
provides need-based scholarships for tuition at UT Arlington to lower-income
students at local Tarrant County Community Colleges. This project provides
opportunities for high school, undergraduate and graduate students for hands-on
experiences, exposing them to the collaborative nature of international
research.