* 1303276
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Hierarchies within Internal Medicine Graduate Education
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Tania Jenkins, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 07/31/2014
* USD 9,479.00

SES-1303276 PI: Margot Jackson Co-PI: Tania Jenkins Brown University

In 2012, 55 percent of all residency positions in internal medicine were filled
by graduates from American medical schools (USMGs). The remaining 45 percent
went to foreign medical graduates, US-born foreign medical graduates and
osteopaths (DOs). This dissertation examines the experiences of this 45 percent
by questioning the widely-held assumption that physicians are a monolithic
"community of equals." As growing numbers non-US medical graduates fill less
desirable positions within the medical profession, there is the potential for an
unequal opportunity structure to form, putting these residents at a disadvantage
relative to US-trained MDs. By pursuing the medical sociological tradition of
hospital ethnography, this project will compare the experiences of residents in
two types of residency programs - one that caters to USMGs and another to non-
USMGs - in order to answer the following research questions: 1) How is medical
education organized hierarchically and how does this organization lend itself to
stratification among internal medicine residents of different training
backgrounds? and 2) How does the occupational structure of graduate medical
education affect the professional mobility of internal medicine residents? This
dissertation will contribute to sociological understandings of occupational
stratification by focusing not on gender or race, as other scholars have done,
but on educational pedigree (degree type and location of medical school) as the
driving force behind inequalities in professional status.

Broader impacts: The results may help us make sense of the implications
associated with a wide range of health care policies and the experiences of both
patients and physicians. For example, internal medicine is a pivotal residency,
as it offers graduates the option of either practicing primary care or going on
to subspecialize. With health insurance extending to millions of new patients,
there is a need for primary care practitioners. By understanding the experiences
of internal medicine residents - including the opportunity structure that
constrains their decisions to remain generalists or subspecialize - there can be
better preparation for facing the growing need for these services.