* 1303060
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric methods in the representation theory of affine Hecke algebras, finite reductive groups  and character sheaves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* George Lusztig, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

Representation theory of groups of Lie type is a central part of mathematics. It
is concerned with understanding systems with symmetry by representing them in
matrix form. One of the tools which has proved to be highly effective for the
study of representations is the theory of character sheaves which the PI
initiated in the early 1980's. This theory provides a geometrization of the
theory of irreducible characters of finite simple groups of Lie type. It is
proposed to continue the project of studying character sheaves on reductive
algebraic groups, including disconnected ones. In particular it is proposed to
continue the study of affine Hecke algebras with unequal parameters and in
particular to establish a geometric interpretation for their canonical basis.
This should give new information on the representation theory of groups over
p-adic fields. It is also proposed to continue the study of characters of
semisimple p-adic groups continuing the author's earlier work with J.L. Kim.
Progress in these topics is expected to have applications to various parts of
mathematics and theoretical physics.

The theory of group representations attempts to study the idea of symmetry by
means of matrices which are more amenable to computation. One of the oldest
application of representation theory is the theory of Fourier series, widely
used in engineering and applied science. More recently, ideas from
representation theory have been used in chemistry (study of crystals) and
physics (theory of elementary particles). G. Lusztig's research is concerned
with applications of methods of algebraic topology (study of shapes by means of
algebra) and algebraic geometry (geometric study of equations) to obtain new
results on group representations which could not be obtained by other methods.