* 1303211
* Collaborative: Development and Testing of a Secure Programming Clinic
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2014,03/31/2020
* Matt Bishop, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 03/31/2020
* USD 524,306.00

This capacity building project will create Secure Programming Clinic to enhance
student learning and expertise in writing robust, secure software, analogous to
a writing clinic in an English department or law school. It provides continual
reinforcement of the mechanisms, methods, technologies, and need for programming
with security and robustness considerations throughout a student's undergraduate
coursework. The clinic would augment courses, not replace them or their content.
The clinic can be tailored to meet the needs of specific groups, such as
beginning students or students in a particular class. The students will likely
retain and use some of these skills after they graduated, thereby improving the
quality of software overall. In addition, the development of the assessment
instruments to evaluate the impact of initial learning, abstraction, feedback,
and meta-cognition on transfer will be a valuable contribution to computer
science education researchers. The NSF's CyberCorps® SFS program funds projects
that address cybersecurity education and workforce development. The Scholarship
Track provides funding to award scholarships to students in cybersecurity. In
return for their scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a
Federal, State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a position related
to cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the scholarship. The
Capacity Track seeks innovative proposals leading to an increase in the ability
of the United States higher education enterprise to produce cybersecurity
professionals.

The project will test the clinic's effectiveness by developing and validating
measures that reflect the ability of learners to write robust, secure software.
The clinic will be tried in several different ways to gather data, and use that
data to evaluate each particular clinic. The clinic procedures, instructional
modules and measures will be disseminated to the educational community. This
project brings to bear research in learning in conjunction with methods used in
other disciplines, particularly the humanities, which have proved successful in
augmenting existing courses to provide reinforcement of basic skills. From this
grounding, the Secure Programming Clinic seeks to build and assess expertise in
an area that spans many aspects of programming. The project further studies how
to deliver this information and practice; how to frame the information so
students at different levels of programming experience and skill can benefit
from them; and how to use the results of the evaluation to tune the clinic and
materials.