* 1303135
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sociopolitical Interaction and Health Outcomes in Refugee-Hosting Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2014
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2014
* USD 15,842.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award examines the health
implications in a region of long-term refugee settlement. The process of
creating and maintaining refugee settlements has a significant impact on local
landscapes, both physical and social, and therefore has implications not only
for refugees, but for also for the people who live in the areas where refugees
have been forced to settle. This project will specifically consider the health
outcomes of refugee communities and their neighbors, as well as illuminate the
relationship between the political acts needed to create refugee camps and the
outcome of those acts as related to health and mortality. This project will
consider the case of Congolese refugee communities in western Uganda to
investigate this issue. The investigators will conduct an analysis of
epidemiologic surveillance data for 1992-2012 from clinics in the study area to
identify morbidity rates and trends for key populations. The investigators will
also conduct a household survey, focus groups and semi-structured interviews
with refugees, their local neighbors, and representatives from the authorities
that run the camps in order to understand the local political process of refugee
camp settlements.

This project will contribute epidemiologic information that will be of use to
groups involved in providing humanitarian aid in refugee areas. It will produce
findings that have the potential to inform governments and humanitarian aid
organizations including those from the United States, the United Nations, and
relevant non-governmental organizations. Furthermore, the project will
contribute to the ongoing debate about the status and treatment of refugees
regionally and globally. Worldwide, violent conflicts continue to displace
millions of people, many of whom subsist precariously in poor places near
conflict zones. Both the health and wellbeing of the displaced and those they
come to live among are impacted by this process and this investigation will shed
lights on ways to improve the outcomes of these communities. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement (DDRI) award this project will provide
critical career support to a promising student researcher.