* 1303573
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: School-Based Education as an Agent of Socialization
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Mary Nell Trautner, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 8,770.00

SES-1303573 Mary Nell Trautner Sarah Smith SUNY at Buffalo

What roles do organizations and institutions play in the socialization of
youths? By exploring students' accounts of their experiences with school staff,
the researcher will conduct an organizational analysis to better understand the
role that schools have in the socialization of youth. In particular, the
researcher will complete an analysis of school-based health education, which
represents a formalized, institutional attempt to foster a particular set of
dispositions to health. The research will examine school based sex education
(SBSE) where the training is based on assumptions about its preventative
potential for sexually transmitted infections and pregnancy. Prior research,
however, does not address how young people make sense of SBSE so that it may
have these intended effects. Similarly, analyses of SBSE policy, rhetoric, and
curricula tend to focus on the ways in which adults perceive SBSE, with scant
focus on students' perceptions. In contrast, studies of social learning focus on
young people?s exposure to messages about sex and sexuality from other sources
such as media, religion, family, and school contexts beyond the SBSE classroom.
This research bridges literature on SBSE with research on how youth interpret
messages about sex and sexuality. In interviews with 60 boys and girls from one
low-achieving and one-high achieving school in Western New York, the analyses
will address how young people describe SBSE, in what ways young people describe
SBSE as having influences on their attitudes about sex, and differences in the
stories youth tell across race, class, and gender, and other characteristics.

Broader Impact

This project will introduce new scholars from underrepresented groups to the
field of social science through the use of a diverse group of undergraduate
assistants. Undergraduate assistants will gain valuable knowledge and experience
in social science research methods. Through their participation as research
assistants, undergraduate students will have access to data for their student
theses. Further, the researcher will solicit feedback from the academic
community (i.e., via conference presentations and correspondence with experts in
the field), as well as local practitioners in the field (i.e., sex education
teachers, school nurses, etc.) and in-turn, provide post-analysis presentations
to both academic and public audiences.