* 1303071
* Electron Impact Ionization and Excitation of the Rare Gases and Excitation of Molecular Hydrogen and Molecular Nitrogen.
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Murtadha Khakoo, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 209,997.00

This project will concern the investigation of controlled reactions of directed
incident electron beams with fundamental gaseous atoms and diatomic molecules.
The laboratory at Cal State Fullerton will investigate details of the scattering
process involving excitation of strong transitions in these targets specifically
to look at how spin and orbital angular momentum is imparted by the incident
directed electrons onto the target atoms/molecules. The targets chosen are the
rare gases (neon, argon, krypton and xenon) and the molecules are hydrogen and
nitrogen which have different electron-nuclear couplings. The research also aims
to look at the ionization of the atomic targets. The thrust of this is to
investigate the basic collision quantum physics that describes such processes.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work is its involvement in
state of the art research of many US undergraduate students at Cal State
Fullerton in the laboratory. They then have a significantly increased chance to
go onto PhD programs (mostly nationally, but in one case internationally). The
research training also provided skills needed for working in industry or in
other laboratories. These students get to do frontline research and benefit from
collaborating with each other and faculty. It also provides collaborative
research between Cal State Fullerton and several other theoretical and
experimental collision physics programs, both nationally and internationally.
The success of this group with data that tests collision models such as (most
recently) the R-matrix B-spline was especially highlighted in the keynote talk
at the last American Physical Society- Gaseous Electronics Conference at Salt
Lake City. Such type of data is useful for industrial, plasma and astrophysical
applications.