* 1303526
* Dissertation Research: Generalized Reciprocity: Understanding the Social Contagion of Altruistic Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Michael Macy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2015
* USD 11,998.00

Michael Macy Milena Tsvetkova Cornell University

Anonymous acts of generosity are widespread in daily life: people donate blood,
stop to help a stranded motorist, write anonymous online reviews, or contribute
code to open-source software, often without any direct reward or recognition. An
important key to this puzzle may be the possibility that helping behavior can be
contagious -- helping in response to receiving or observing help has the
potential to trigger a chain of generosity that reaches far beyond the original
act. . Bridging two large but largely disconnected existing literatures -- on
altruistic behavior and social contagion -- this dissertation project identifies
two mechanisms that alter the probability to help a stranger: generalized
reciprocity (a recipient of help is likely to pay it forward) and third party
imitation (an observer of help giving is likely to emulate it). These mechanisms
are hypothesized to affect behavior differently: while receiving help from
strangers multiple times will increase the probability to help a stranger,
observing help between strangers will initially increase and then decrease that
probability; this latter decrease, however, will be smaller for those who have
received help. As a result, when third-party imitation interacts with
generalized reciprocity, cascades of generosity are expected to be more frequent
but reach fewer people. To test the validity and robustness of the macro-
implications and the empirical relevance of the hypothesized mechanisms, two
studies are proposed: a simulation experiment with an agent-based model and an
online experiment with human subjects.

Broader Impacts

The project will advance theoretical knowledge about helping behavior and its
diffusion and methodologies for online behavioral experiments. In addition, the
potential ripple effect of generosity means that when we help others, we may
also be indirectly helping many more people downstream. Better understanding of
the mechanisms that can trigger these cascades has the potential to inform
efforts to mobilize voluntary contributions and pro-social behavior by more
effectively targeting those who have benefited in the past. In particular,
generalized reciprocity and third-party imitation can be harnessed to enhance
creative participation and community formation in large-scale online
collaborative projects and user-generated-content communities.