* 1303534
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Conditions and Courses of Genocide
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Elizabeth Boyle, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 07/31/2014
* USD 11,825.00

SES-1303534&lt;br/&gt;Elizabeth Boyle &lt;br/&gt;Hollie Nyseth Brehm
&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota-Twin Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genocide is
not a random event but a process that unfolds systematically. Preliminary work
and existing literature have suggested that genocide can be predicted and
perhaps even one day ameliorated using a combination of sociological and
criminological explanations. Yet, many questions remain, and this dissertation
seeks to answer two of them: 1) What are the causes of genocide at societal,
state, and international levels? 2) What accounts for temporal and regional
variation during genocide? To assess what leads to genocide, the dissertation
begins with a quantitative analysis of the preconditions of genocide in all
countries over the last 50 years. Then, to analyze how genocides unfold, it
turns to case studies of the genocides in Rwanda, Bosnia, and Sudan. Each case
study includes quantitative analysis of genocidal violence over time and by
region. To better understand reasons behind variation in violence, it also draws
upon historical analysis and 20 interviews per case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
works have suggested that sociology and criminology hold much promise for the
study of genocide, though sociologists and criminologists have largely neglected
the study of this crime of crimes. This dissertation draws upon these
literatures to better understand two aspects of genocide?its causes and how it
unfolds. Political scientists and historians have begun to address the causes of
genocide over the last several decades, though the majority of research focuses
on the intricacies of particular cases and the importance of political leaders
in planning and implementing genocide. Such in-depth analyses are important,
though few scholars have actually assessed the general factors that contribute
to the occurrence of genocide. These may include factors beyond the roles played
by individual leaders, including societal factors (such as societal diversity),
state factors (such as the type of government), and international factors (such
as engagement in the international system through trade or organizational
membership), which have not been thoroughly studied in regard to genocide
despite the growing interdependency of the international system. While these
factors are considered in relation to the initial occurrence of genocide, this
study also disaggregates the events of genocides and conceptualizes genocide as
a process. Extant literature on the causes of genocide focuses on what leads to
genocide; however, viewing genocide as an undifferentiated event misses the
opportunity to truly understand the violence. Few studies have explored regional
and temporal variation in genocide, and no studies have done this
comparatively&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation will produce both quantitative and qualitative data that will be
used to better understand genocide. Such research has the potential to inform
policy makers, think tanks, and research centers around the world as they strive
to create early warning systems for genocide. Understanding the process of
genocide could also inform interventions in genocide by international actors as
well as local organizations. Accordingly, the findings will be disseminated
through publications and conference presentations at both local and
international conferences. Notably, the co-PI has interned with the Rwandan
Government Genocide Prevention Commission and a similar organization in Bosnia,
and both organizations are interested in the results of the study. In addition,
the co-PI has been in contact with Genocide Watch and several other
nongovernmental organizations and will ensure that the findings from the
research are disseminated.