* 1303522
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Group Diversity and Knowledge Production
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Arnout van de Rijt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,781.00

Arnout van de Rijt&lt;br/&gt;Michael A Restivo&lt;br/&gt;SUNY Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women?s historical absences from scientific endeavors
and other institutions that create knowledge are also seen in the contemporary
practice of online peer production. Recent survey research of contributors to
Wikipedia, a prominent example of peer produced knowledge, has found that less
than 15 percent of its contributors are women. The causes for this high degree
of gender inequality have been linked to both self-selection and barriers to
participation: expertise in creating knowledge is considered a masculine
pursuit, and women may buy into this belief, undermining their confidence in
participating in online knowledge production. However, this gender gap has been
shown to be more than simply self-selection: research suggests that some aspects
of online participatory culture serve to limit women?s participation due to
excessive conflict or contentiousness, devaluation of certain topics or
perspectives, and in some instances, overt hostility or other forms of
misogyny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will analyze the ways in which
gender diversity affects the quality of work produced by contributors to
Wikipedia. They will use the quality of the information in Wikipedia's
encyclopedia articles as an indicator of the performance of the groups who
author those articles. Organizational research has long known that diversity --
in respect to group composition, the types of tasks being performed, and other
group dynamics -- affects a group's performance and shapes its collective
output. For example, the quality of work produced by Wikipedia contributors has
been shown to vary by the functional diversity (differences in types of work
roles performed) and cognitive diversity (differences in the knowledge bases) of
group members. However, the potential interaction with gender not been explored
in any detail, which is surprising since research on gender differences in
online communication and interaction point to the need to incorporate gender
more thoroughly into our conceptualization of the problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying the work of
Wikipedia contributors provides an invaluable opportunity to assess how gender
diversity, and the different ways of doing gender, affects group performance and
shapes the quality of peer produced knowledge. Preliminary analysis of a subset
of Wikipedia articles shows that gender diversity leads to favorable outcomes
for article quality. The findings from this research will be of interest to
gender scholars, organizational researchers, and others who study of online
collaboration. More broadly, understanding why and when diversity can be
beneficial to groups will be of practical relevance to the people who are
building and working within these types of online organizations. Particularly,
Wikipedia can take steps to shrink its gender gap by identifying and addressing
barriers to inclusive participation from a diverse range of contributors.