* 1303121
* Discrete subgroups of semisimple Lie groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Alireza Golsefidy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2017
* USD 149,000.00

The PI will continue studying discrete linear groups (specially arithmetic
groups) and their interactions with various branches of mathematics, e.g. number
theory, homogeneous dynamics and combinatorics. The focus of this project is to
expand our understanding of such groups in two different directions: going from
finite covolume to infinite covolume (and beyond); going from characteristic
zero to positive characteristic. The PI plans to see in what extent the
analytical behavior of the congruence quotients of a finitely generated group is
dictated by its Zariski-topology. The PI's second goal is to study homogeneous
dynamics over a local field of positive characteristic. The analytical
properties of the congruence quotients of linear groups have been showed to be
extremely useful in various parts of mathematics and computer science. In the
past decade they have been used in affine sieve, variation of Galois
representations, hyperbolic geometry and group theory. It is clear that
extending these results would have immediate impacts in other branches of
mathematics. As the second component of this project, the PI plans to work
toward the proof of Raghunathan's conjectures for semisimple groups over a local
field of positive characteristic. Many mathematicians worked on these
conjectures, e.g. Dani, Margulis, Shah, Tomanov, and finally in a series of
papers, Ratner completely proved these conjectures over a local field of
characteristic zero. As Ratner's results have been extremely fruitful in various
parts of mathematics, it is expected that any partial result toward their
positive characteristic analogue would have immediate
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main tools to study an object or a
structure is to understand its symmetries. That is the intrinsic reason why
group theory is in a close connection with other branches of mathematics and
physics. For instance the PI's work on linear groups can give us the precise
algebraic conditions to construct explicit families of sparse highly connected
graphs known as expanders. Expanders are extremely useful in communication,
theoretical computer science (e.g. error correcting codes) and various branches
of mathematics. The PI studies also the dynamical systems of algebraic nature
and their deep and fruitful connections with other branches of mathematics, e.g.
number theory.