* 1303785
* EAGER: Exploration of Infrared-excited Quantum Dots and Quantum Dots with  built-in Spontaneous Polarizations in Switching Transmembrane Ion Channels
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Michael Stroscio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,999.00

This project will explore the use of quantum dots with built-in spontaneous
polarizations and infrared-excited quantum dots in switching voltage-gated ion
channels. Specifically, this project will study the interaction of the dipole
fields produced by the built-in spontaneous polarization as well as by the
radiation-induced polarization of quantum dots with ion channels that are gated
with voltages. This research will include STM/AFM characterization of
semiconductor quantum dots under illumination and of semiconductor quantum dots
that have built-in spontaneous polarizations in the absence of external
radiation; results will be compared with modeled characteristics. Patch clamp
techniques will be used to measure the response of voltage-gated ion channels to
these quantum-dot fields for a variety of scenarios including: (A) the switching
of ion channels with infrared-excited quantum dots that are bound directly to
ion channels with molecular linkers, and (B) the switching of ion channels for
the case where quantum dots having large built-in spontaneous polarizations,
that produce large electric fields surrounding the quantum dots, are bound
directly to ion channels by molecular linkers. This project will conduct proof-
of-principle research underlying the excitation of quantum dots with tissue-
penetrating infrared radiation for the subsequent active control of ion channels
as well as the static gating of ion channels using quantum dots that have built-
in spontaneous polarizations in the absence of external illumination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impacts of this program are
numerous and they underlie the exploitation of novel nanosystems that will
perform functions - not now performed with current devices and systems that will
have impact on economic, medical, and scientific issues, as well as the
education of new generations of students in emerging techniques that will have
broad and continuing payoffs in a variety of scientific, medical, technological,
and economic applications. In particular, this project underlies the novel use
manmade colloidal quantum-dot nanosystems consisting of semiconductor colloidal
quantum dots to influence the functions of biological ion channels. The success
of this program would advance the application of nanotechnology to the
beneficial control and modification of ion channel functions. As specific
examples of impact, this program will explore novel approaches for using
colloidal quantum dots for switching ion channels that have potential for long-
term practical applications including: (A) the control of neural functions and
response; (B) advanced prosthetics and; (C) the design of novel manmade
nanostructures that perform channel blocking functions similar to those of many
drugs employed in the neurological and cardiac applications.