* 1303680
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Collective Bargaining and Decision-making Processes
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Amanda Pullum, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2014
* USD 11,999.00

SES-1303680&lt;br/&gt;David Meyer&lt;br/&gt;Amanda Pullum&lt;br/&gt;University
of California-Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While private sector unions have been
experiencing a precipitous decline in membership for the past 50 years, public
K-12 teachers have the highest union membership rates of any American workers.
With this prominence has come opposition. In 2011 alone, twenty state
legislatures held floor votes on bills restricting collective bargaining and
tenure protections for public schoolteachers. Faced with these similar actions,
teachers unions mounted a variety of responses, including rallies of all sizes,
lobbying, and judicial and legislative challenges. The researcher will study why
unions responded differently to similar legislative action. Examining the
strategic choices made by unions will shed new light on how both labor and non-
labor activists work to bring about social and legislative
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study brings important insights to an
important debate in the literature on social movements: what factors do
activists consider when deciding upon strategy? Previous scholarship has offered
many possible answers, such as the nature of the threat, existing laws,
organizational structure, and ideology. This research examines strategic choices
of teachers unions and the process through which particular strategies were
chosen in four states-- Wisconsin, Ohio, Tennessee, and Idaho. Two of the
states, Tennessee and Idaho are right-to-work states; and two, Wisconsin and
Ohio, are not right-to-work states. The planned analysis will identify the
causal conditions most important to teachers unions? strategic decision-making
processes; explain the mechanisms by which these conditions influenced strategic
choice and resulted in widely varying responses to similar legislation; and
compare how union members in the four states considered these causal factors
when choosing strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this study will be disseminated to both
academic and public audiences. The findings will be presented at a wide variety
of conferences, and ultimately, the dissertation will be transformed into a
book, which will be easily accessible to members of the public with an interest
in labor unions. The findings of this study will be of use to scholars of social
movement strategy, labor unions, and similar organizations such as public
interest groups. In addition, this study will contribute to public knowledge and
discourse on social movements and organized labor in education and the modern
American workforce.