* 1303287
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Biological Controls on the Ocean C:N:P ratios
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2015
* USD 711,204.00

Intellectual merit. One of the fundamental patterns of ocean biogeochemistry is
the Redfield ratio, linking the stoichiometry of surface plankton with the
chemistry of the deep ocean. There is no obvious mechanism for the globally
consistent C:N:P ratio of 106:16:1 (Redfield ratio), especially as there is
substantial elemental variation among plankton communities in different ocean
regions. Thus, knowing how biodiversity regulates the elemental composition of
the ocean is important for understanding the ocean and climate as a whole -- now
and in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conceptual hypotheses for this
study are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1. The C:N:P ratio of a cell is constrained by
its broad taxonomic group, which determines, for example, whether it has an
outer shell, its size, functional metabolism, membrane lipid
composition.&lt;br/&gt;2. Within a taxon, there is high genetic diversity. Some
of this genetic diversity is potentially laterally transferred, or can be lost
within taxa, and confers various functional abilities (organic phosphate
assimilation, nitrate assimilation, photoheterotrophy, etc.). Functional
diversity provides the cell with further flexibility, such as the ability to
respond to varying nutrient supply rates/ratios, and affects a cell's C:N:P
ratio within the range specified by the taxon.&lt;br/&gt;3. Given these
taxonomic and genetic constraints, a cell is physiologically plastic and
modifies how it allocates cellular resources in response to nutrient supply
rates/ratios in the environment.&lt;br/&gt;4. The microbial diversity
(taxonomic, genetic, and functional) of the surface ocean varies over time and
space, driven by many factors in addition to nutrients. The sum of this mixture
composes the ecosystem C:N:P, the ratio that Redfield described.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on this framework, the CoPIs will make field
observations of taxon-specific stoichiometry and growth rates, genomic analyses,
and conduct laboratory chemostat experiments to improve understanding of how
ocean taxonomic, genetic, and functional biodiversity control the stoichiometry
of the surface ocean plankton. Their analyses of these data would lead to a
mechanistic understanding of variations in the Redfield ratio, both spatially
and temporally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This study will greatly
expand knowledge of the genomic diversity among ocean microbes and how this
diversity affects biogeochemistry. The stoichiometry of the ocean's microbes is
a parameter that nearly every chemical or biological oceanographer uses, from
converting measurements made in one element to another, to estimating regional
and global nitrogen budgets. The research also has important implications for
the global carbon budget and any changes that might result from climate change.
Beyond training three postdoctoral scholars and two graduate students, a Gateway
Mentoring Program will be established to recruit undergraduates (total of 12)
transferring from community colleges in the Southern California area, training
and preparing them for careers in research-oriented science. The program will
consist of extensive mentoring, research experiences at UCI, internships at
BIOS, Princeton, or UCSD, and presentations at national conferences. This
intensive mentoring and research experience prepares students well for a career
in science, and enhances acceptance to post-graduate schools. The Program will
have a very high proportion of underrepresented groups as reflected in the
targeted colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration. To understand
mechanistically temporal and spatial variability of the plankton C:N:P ratio,
biodiversity must be studied not only at the traditional taxonomic level, but at
the genetic and functional levels which dictate organism response to their
environment. Data will be integrated into a combined ocean ecological,
evolutionary, and biogeochemical model, with flexible stoichiometry, including
cellular biochemical allocations. Seeding a coupled physical-biological model of
the oceans with multiple competing genotypes enables the exploration of
ecological and evolutionary patterns of resource acquisition and C:N:P ratios.
Developing a more mechanistic examination of the course of ecology and
evolution, in which laboratory and field data define tradeoffs between different
growth and nutrient acquisition strategies, would estabblish the framework of
adaptive dynamics for determining "evolutionarily convergence". Finally, model
outcomes will be evaluated against field data.