* 1303299
* Bridging the Cybersecurity Leadership Gap: Assessment, Competencies and Capacity Building
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Jean Pierre Auffret, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 484,857.00

This project is developing Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) Core
Competencies as a foundation for developing multidisciplinary cybersecurity
leadership education learning objectives and curricula guidelines. The project
is leveraging these guidelines towards the development of online cybersecurity
leadership education modules, certificates and a blended online cybersecurity
leadership master's degree for delivery nationwide in partnership with other
universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to address the cybersecurity
leadership gap in the U.S. as cybersecurity leadership expertise is limited to a
small number of university graduate level cybersecurity leadership programs that
bridge the technical and management skills required for cybersecurity
leadership. Formally, we are exploring the following questions: What
cybersecurity leader core competencies are critical to cybersecurity leadership
effectiveness?; and what organizational dimensions are factors in cybersecurity
leadership success? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is bringing together
private sector, government and academic cybersecurity, IT and other executives
in focus groups, workshops, forums, and online collaboration for the development
of the Core Competencies, learning objectives and curricula guidelines. The
approach builds upon the U.S. Government's success in collaborating with
academia and private sector in the development of CIO Core Competencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this project is developing a Cybersecurity
Leadership Education Forum and associated board with the goal of ongoing project
sustainability and for ongoing updating of the Core Competencies, learning
objectives and curricula guidelines. As a direct outcome of this project,
universities in partnership with government organizations and the private sector
have a set of best practices for developing cybersecurity leadership programs
and measurable outcomes to compare with.