* 1303080
* Systematic Theory-Guided Nano-Engineering of Desired Order and Viscoelasticity in Electroactive Dendrimers and Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2013,02/28/2019
* BRUCE ROBINSON, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2019
* USD 658,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Multi-scale theoretical (time-dependent
density functional theory and coarse-grained Monte Carlo-molecular dynamics)
methods are being developed and will used to guide the development of new
macromolecular (polymer and dendrimer) electroactive materials with particular
focus on electro-optic materials critical for chipscale integration of
electronics and photonics. Theory-guided design will permit control of both
molecular architecture (molecular order and lattice dimensionality) and dynamics
(viscoelasticity and phase transitions). New experimental methods are being
developed to characterize order, lattice dimensionality, and viscoelasticity.
Newly synthesized and characterized organic electro-optic materials will be
integrated with silicon photonic, plasmonic, and metamaterial devices relevant
to telecommunications, computing, and sensing technologies. Collaboration with
the Air Force Research Laboratory, industry (Boeing, Intel, and other
companies), and with international researchers (Germany, Switzerland, Belgium)
will be pursued. Workforce development and promotion of workforce diversity will
be pursued through continued interactions with minority serving institutions
including HBCUs (e.g., Norfolk State University), Hispanic and Native American
institutions. Undergraduate and high school student participation in research
will also be facilitated. The potential broader economic impacts of science will
be emphasized by working with the UW Center for Innovation and Technology
Entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Properties of electroactive (e.g., photovoltaic,
electronic, electro-optic) materials depend on the organization of component
atoms, ions, or molecules. The utilization of soft matter materials has been
inhibited by lack of theory-guided design to achieve the desired order and
performance properties. New theoretical methods will be developed that will
permit such rational design leading to new electro-optic materials and
permitting the fabrication of compact information technology devices exhibiting
ultrahigh-speed and low power-consumption data processing. Such technology is
important to chipscale integration of electronics and photonics, and in turn to
next-generation computing, telecommunications, and sensing technologies. The
anticipated outcome of this basic research program should be of potential
interest to industry. Workforce development and enhancement of workforce
diversity will be pursued through a variety of mechanisms including continued
interaction with HBCUs (e.g., Norfolk State University), Hispanic, and Native
American institutions, and through facilitation of the participation of
undergraduate and high school students in research. Broader impact will also be
achieved through the University of Washington Center for Innovation and
Technology Entrepreneurship.