* 1303566
* Aleutian Archaeology: Identifying Cultural and Environmental Relationships c. 6000 BP to 250 BP
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2017
* Brian Hoffman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2017
* USD 268,031.00

Dr. Caroline Funk and a collaborative, multidisciplinary team of six federal
agency and academic colleagues from across the United States will conduct one
year of field research and laboratory analyses centered on Kiska Island, Western
Aleutians, Alaska. They will research human impacts on resources and
environmental/ecological histories by studying the prehistoric Aleut
archaeological record and the environmental history of Kiska Island. The team
will work to develop an environmental/ecological history of the area and a
history of human use of Kiska Island, to identify potential areas of human
impact on the environment, and to contribute to global debates about long-term
human intersections with coast/island environments. These broad objectives are
accomplished by cooperative research in the anthro-, geo-, and biosciences to
answer a series of questions: how did prehistoric Rat Islands Aleut live within
and conceive of their landscape and how did the environment shape Rat Islands
Aleut culture? What physical and climatic conditions and events did Rat Islands
Aleut, the environment, and indigenous plant and animal species endure? What
role did humans have in shaping the form and characteristics of landscapes,
seascapes, and non-human species?

To understand the interactions between Aleuts and their environment, variations
in plant and animal species present in archaeological sites are compared to
known or our newly defined climate trends, seismic records, volcanic events, and
events and processes in Kiska Island Aleut prehistory. Field work includes
archaeological survey aimed toward locating new archaeological sites, testing
known and newly discovered sites, and geo-survey to map geomorphological and
geological features. On and off site coring provides pollen and plant
macrofossil data and lake coring provides high resolution tephra data. Island
intertidal survey sets baseline data for modeling the regional food web.
Laboratory analyses are performed on all materials collected during fieldwork,
creating the multidisciplinary, comparative data sets necessary to test our
hypotheses about recursive human/environment impacts. Lithic and organic
artifact analyses and faunal analyses provide data about Aleut identity and
resource use. Lithic artifact sourcing (XRF) may grant insight into Aleut
contacts outside of the Rat Islands group. Pollen and plant macrofossils provide
information about Aleut plant use and paloeclimate. Sea mammal population
characteristics as measured by isotope and trace element analyses performed on
archaeological specimens provide information about prehistoric subsistence
harvests and marine ecosystem dynamics when combined with the new food web
models. Geological tephrastratigraphy development and geomorphological studies
provide information about large-scale environmental events that may have
impacted humans and their resources.

The research contributes valuable data regarding human and large-scale
environmental event impacts to studies of the North. Entirely new environmental
and human histories of Kiska Island and Rat Islands Aleuts developed from our
synergy of anthropology/archaeology, bioscience, and geoscience link to regional
and global data sets to expand understanding of the form and function of island
ecosystems and human relationships with them. The work aids in restoration
ecology and land management decisions, while advancing socionatural and identity
theories about small-scale society impacts on their landscapes. A project
website, public talks, and scholarly articles and presentations ensure that the
work is broadly disseminated in Aleut, public, land management, and scientific
communities.