* 1303621
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Marriage and Changing Institutional Contexts
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Kristen Schilt, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 11,994.00

Kristen Schilt&lt;br/&gt;Abigail Ocobock&lt;br/&gt;University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "de-institutionalization" theory of marriage is
based on the assumption that marriage no longer provides external, informal
rules for behavior. Yet few have examined, explicitly, how marriage shapes and
constrains social action today, or how people actually experience it as an
institution. Same-sex marriage provides an interesting lens through which to
investigate the theory because it suggests both the possibility of de-
institutionalization, as adherence to traditional marital norms decline and
marital practices become more varied, and the further institutionalization of
marriage, as it expands to govern new populations. Research has not kept pace
with the rapidly changing institutional landscape of marriage. Scholars have
made important contributions to ongoing debates about same-sex marriage but the
lived experiences of same-sex couples who gain the right to marry have received
scant attention, Social scientists know little about how gay men and lesbians
actually experience marriage and its impact on their lives. Does having the
legal right to marry impact the decision to marry after the initial point of
legalization? How does having access to marriage shape relationship choices and
experiences as well as the meanings they attach to them? And beyond couple
relationships, does marriage also impact family and community
relationships?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation addresses these questions
by comparing gay men and lesbians in Massachusetts, which has offered same-sex
marriage since 2004 with their counterparts in Michigan, which adopted a
constitutional ban on same-sex relationship recognition the same year. It is a
mixed methods study that includes the collection of data both through an online
questionnaire and in-depth interviews. By comparing the experiences of gay men
and lesbians with and without the right to legally marry, and investigating
differences across married and unmarried groups, this study offers systematic,
in-depth data about how the institution of marriage shapes couple, family and
community relationships, making a significant contribution to both institutional
and family scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the level of continuing social and political
debate around same-sex marriage, this dissertation will generate detailed and
reliable data about how same-sex couples experience marriage. This is essential
for improving public understanding on the issue, and findings will be made
accessible to a broader public audience through the publication of articles in
mainstream media outlets as well as academic journals. In addition, reports of
findings will be disseminated to policy makers, to provide them with empirical
information that can be used to inform policies related to same-sex couples and
their families.