* 1303424
* LUCID: A Spectator Targeted Visualization System to Broaden Participation at Cyber Defense Competitions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2021
* Jie Yan, Bowie State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2021
* USD 899,710.00

The goal of this project is to stimulate interest in cybersecurity competitions
through the development of a visualization and broadcast system targeted to
enhancing learning and understanding among spectators. The system engages the
spectator by presenting information pertinent to understanding the real-time
details of the game in a usable and spirited manner. It accomplishes this
through the combination of various techniques, including real-time network
security visualization, live video and audio monitoring, animation, computer
graphics and commentary. As a result, the project improves the educational value
and excitement for the spectator and broaden interest in the field of
cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed tool captures computer and
network activities for all the competing teams and present them in a user-
friendly manner for the benefit of the spectator using state-of-the-art
broadcasting, animation and commentary. Although visualization has been utilized
at large-scale cyber defense competition, such as the Mid-Atlantic Collegiate
Cyber Defense Competition, it is still used only in a limited way. Further, it
does not target the spectator in a serious way and it is rarely used for small-
scale cyber defense competitions, which is the main target of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By improving the spectator experience, more students are
attracted to collegiate cyber defense competitions and ultimately to cyber
security related fields. The tool is also beneficial to competition
participants, especially to student teams who could use the tool for network
security visualization.