* 1303025
* Real Examples of Classic Storm Structures for Classroom Use Based on Data from FRONT-PORCH
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Sandra Yuter, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 02/28/2017
* USD 92,479.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;Conceptual model diagrams are frequently used in
undergraduate and graduate atmospheric science courses because they allow
students to visualize the dynamic interwoven pieces of complex storm systems.
These models are visual simplifications of the relationships that govern the
system and the use of them in the classroom has been shown to significantly
improve student learning. Despite their recognized importance, traditional
conceptual models are most often static representations of dynamic systems and
often struggle to reproduce the complex and noisy reality of authentic storms.
Studies have shown that the educational value of conceptual models is maximized
when students are able to compare and contrast the model with real data and
identify weaknesses in the simplified model.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to
develop a series of case study examples of commonly observed storm structures
using observational data collected during the FRONT-PORCH experiment. High
resolution dual-Doppler reconstructions of the three-dimensional wind field,
dual-polarization hydrometeor identification, and surface and upper-air
meteorology observations will be combined and displayed side by side to give a
complete view of a real example of storm structure that can be compared and
contrasted with commonly used conceptual models. These examples will be housed
on the web in a case study library where students across the country can choose
among different storm types and view the evolution of the storms in a movie
whose playback they can control. Additionally, a series of laboratory exercises
using the case study library will be written to accelerate bringing this data
into classrooms and thus enhance the effectiveness of meteorology courses
without significant additional effort on the part of individual
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Educational
initiatives in the atmospheric sciences have traditionally lagged several years
behind advancements in the teaching of other physical and geosciences. This
project will be one of the first in the atmospheric sciences to develop a widely
available educational resource that relies primarily on observational data
collected during a field experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;A broad grassroots reformation is underway in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education as classes shift from
a lecture based, professor centric, passive learning approach into one in which
students are actively engaged in the construction of their knowledge. The
driving force behind these changes is the litany of new studies that
consistently demonstrate that lecture based instruction is not as effective as a
style that incorporates active learning. The permanent case study library will
allow students across the country to examine real data alongside the traditional
static conceptual models that are common in meteorology textbooks. The lab
exercises involve the students in actively exploring the data and coming to
their own conclusions about the way a storm works before being given the answer.
By comparing and contrasting real data with conceptual models students will gain
a deeper and more complete understanding of complex storm structures.
Additionally, pre-packaged exercises that can be easily implemented will
facilitate use of this and other educational resources by our academic colleague