* 1303848
* Workshop:  Logistical Support for Conducting a "Nitrogen Ideas Lab"; December 2-7, 2012; Crewe, United Kingdom
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2014
* Jorge Vivanco, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* scott jackson
* 10/31/2014
* USD 186,178.00

Nitrogen is critical to plant growth. A limited number of plant species have the
capacity to fix atmospheric nitrogen through symbioses with nitrogen fixing
bacteria; the rest need to obtain their nitrogen through soluble forms of
nitrogen present in the soil. For the majority of crop plants, nitrogen
availability has been increased through the use of nitrogen based fertilizers.
However, application of artificial fertilizers is costly and is limited in
developing countries. Moreover, in intensive agricultural systems nitrogen
applied to the crops is not used efficiently and is lost as run-off into water
courses or as greenhouse gases through denitrification, resulting in deleterious
impacts on the environment. The process by which these fertilizers are produced
is energy-intensive and contributes to greenhouse gas emissions. Funds are
provided for logistical and follow-up support to conduct an interactive five day
workshop titled Nitrogen Ideas Lab
(http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2012/nsf12579/nsf12579.htm), a collaborative effort
between the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC). The ultimate aim of this workshop,
to be held at Crewe Hall, Cheshire, UK, December 3-7, 2012, is to bring together
a trans-disciplinary group of scientists that will spend time together framing
the problem, generating novel ideas, developing solutions and action plans "to
develop innovative strategies to increase the efficiency of nitrogen
utilization". The Nitrogen Ideas Lab will include 30 invited participants, five
mentors, five program directors, and facilitators. A unique feature of the
workshop is the inclusion of the company Knowinnovation to assist in the design,
development, and facilitation of the workshop using a trademark Creative Problem
Solving (CPS) methodology. The vision is that mixing researchers from diverse
scientific backgrounds will engender fresh thinking and new approaches that can
be used to increase nitrogen availability to crop plants while maintaining or
increasing yield, and hence decrease the need for the application of nitrogen
fertilizers. An expected outcome of the workshop activities will be the
formation of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary teams that will produce
transformative research proposals addressing important questions on nitrogen
acquisition and nitrogen use efficiency in crop plants. It is envisioned that
strong transatlantic synergies will be formed by bringing together highly
qualified researchers from the U.S. and the U.K.