* 1303840
* Digitization PEN:  Digitizing the University of Iowa Museum of Natural History's Historic Invertebrate Collections through the InvertNet TCN
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Trina Roberts, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 75,312.00

An award is made to the University of Iowa Museum of Natural History to connect
it to the existing InvertNet Thematic Collections Network by digitizing
approximately 28,000 insect and crayfish specimens from the museum's zoological
research collections. Capturing 2D and 3D images and digitizing irreplaceable
data will ensure long-term data preservation and make collection information
accessible online to scientists, educators, students, and the public. Museum
collections are crucial to modern biological research, and historic specimens
are especially necessary in studying the effects of environmental and land use
change. However, the fragility of these specimens and the scattered location of
collections can make using them in research difficult and inefficient.
Digitizing images and data makes specimen information more visible and
accessible, increasing the potential for new research and public
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In concert with digitization, the museum
will integrate public education with InvertNet research by creating a "traveling
trunk" for educators on the theme of invertebrates in the Midwest, updating an
existing exhibit on arthropods to include content from the InvertNet project,
and developing a traveling exhibit that can be borrowed by schools, nature
centers, museums, and other groups in the region. This award is made as part of
the National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the
Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting
from this award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).