* 1303434
* Geometry of Langlands Duality
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Ivan Mirkovic, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2016
* USD 149,282.00

The project is broadly directed towards geometry that is expected to underlie
various&lt;br/&gt;duality phenomena in mathematics (Langlands program) and
physics (Gauge Theory).&lt;br/&gt;One goal is to reconstruct Loop Grassmannians
and Mirkovic-Vilonen cycles from the&lt;br/&gt;point of view of Statistical
Mechanics, and apply this to constructing two dimensional&lt;br/&gt;loop
Grassmannians. Another project is a to establish Langlands duality for
categories&lt;br/&gt;of equivariant coherent sheaves on affine Steinberg
varieties. A more technical project&lt;br/&gt;is a geometric clarification of
the Feigin-Frenkel description of the critical center Finally,&lt;br/&gt;the
projects on Quantum Field Theory are on reformulating Costello?s
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;formulation of perturbative QFT in terms of flows and a
speculation on the relation of&lt;br/&gt;QFT to Grothendiecks function-sheaf
dictionary. The most ambitious project attempts&lt;br/&gt;to create geometric
for the arithmetic case of Number Theory through a 'stochastic
set&lt;br/&gt;theory'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims towards relating
and unifying developments in mathematics and theo-&lt;br/&gt;retical particle
physics. The mathematical origin of these developments is the so
called&lt;br/&gt;Langlands program which is the modern view on a classical
discipline of Number Theory. In time this program incorporated a number of
central disciplines of mathematics, starting with Representation Theory,
Algebraic Geometry and currently the Homotopy Theory. The relation to physics is
a part of the current melting of barriers between mathematics and physics which
arose in a period when the two subjects developed separately. The central impact
on mathematics in the last quarter century was the import of the ideas from
Quantum Field Theory (in particular String Theory), which is the part of physics
that studies elementary particles. The proposed work attempts to work in both
directions by applying ideas from physics to mathematics and mathematical
constructions to physics. It also aims towards deeper understanding of the
relation between Quantum Field Theory and Number Theory. The proposal also
contains more standard topics within Representation Theory and Langlands
Program.