* 1303740
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Growth Dynamics in the Climate Control of Tree-Ring Variability for Paleoclimatology
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Malcolm Hughes, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 12/31/2017
* USD 597,613.00

Tree rings are an important natural archive of past environments. Though these
records have great value and potential, important details about rates and
patterns of carbon storage in annual growth layers (tree rings) remain poorly
understood. These gaps in knowledge concern the basic natural history of the
tissue that forms wood. This research, led by scientists from the University of
Arizona and Rocky Mountain Tree-Ring Research, Inc., aims to improve the
scientific basis for the use of tree ring records by compiling data sets of when
key tree growth processes start each year, the rate at which each proceeds and
for how long, and how daily to seasonal variations in climate conditions relate
to the timing, rate, and magnitude of each process. This will be the first such
study in the Western US. The research team will collect data at four clusters of
sites in Wyoming, Colorado and Arizona, all centered on existing flux tower
facilities and including the major tree types used in dendroclimatology in this
large region. They will then compare the tree growth data with air, stem and
soil temperature, water availability, sapflow and other factors, as well as
phenological events such as shoot extension and needle elongation. These data
and comparisons are essential for improving forward models of tree ring growth
control. The methods, based on and informed by sound process models of the
climate control of tree ring formation, have the potential to improve
robustness, extend generality, and better assess the biological validity of
climate reconstructions based on tree rings. Such methods are also central to
emerging Bayesian techniques of paleoclimate reconstruction, and to attempts to
test reconstruction methodologies using synthetic proxy
records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include
improved understanding of past climates and improved understanding and
prediction of responses of wood growth in western forests to recent or possible
future climates. The latter is a significant practical concern, as much of the
carbon in forests is stored in wood, and the results of this research will
further inform projections of carbon allocation and storage in response to
climate change. The project will involve undergraduate researchers in field and
lab work and the publication of results. The PIs will engage in outreach both
directly through public talks and media interviews as well as through the
University of Arizona Extension Service.