* 1303732
* OP-TEC: The National Center for Optics and Photonics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Fred Seeber, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 4,287,963.00

OP-TEC's mission is to build the capacity of U.S. two-year colleges to provide
the quality and quantity of photonics technicians needed in this critical field.
To date the center has: Developed seven exemplary Partner Colleges that serve as
models, mentors, test sites and regional leaders in specialized photonics
technician areas; Launched four Regional Photonics Clusters of employers and
colleges, using Partner Colleges for leadership; Supported nine colleges in
initiating new photonics AAS degree programs; Assisted five colleges to restore
declining or closed photonics programs; Worked with 108 colleges to plan new
programs; and Developed a strategy for increasing the number of high school
students who enter the optics and photonics field. In addition the center has
conducted faculty development, developed curricular material, and has begun work
developing a program for precision optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the center, along with Partner Colleges and in cooperation with business and
industry, is encouraging and developing additional optics and photonics programs
or optics and photonics specializations within related majors (for example, in
engineering technology) at two-year colleges; developing additional ways to
attract more students into these program; developing course material in emerging
areas; providing faculty development; enlarging strategies to recruit veterans
with related experience into the programs; increasing the number of members of
groups under-represented in these programs; and developing short programs for
technicians already in the field. The center is developing materials and
encouraging colleges to develop concentrations in precision optics to meet
employer demand &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this proposal
resides in its focus on photonics, photonics-enabled technologies, precision
optics, and emerging applications of photonics that impact U.S. security and
economic development. Expanding capacity for producing photonics and precision
optics technicians also guarantees that there are rewarding jobs for US students
and that employed technicians receive additional education and training to
secure their jobs and support needed technical innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts lie in 1) growth in student completers
due to increase in programs and enrollment through OP-TEC outreach/retention
strategies, including regional clusters/centers, 2) expansion of photonics
education in photonics-enabled technologies, retraining employed technicians and
developing precision optics programs, and 3) new efforts to attract returning
veterans and underrepresented populations by educating faculty and
administrators in diversity awareness as well as recruitment and retention
strategies.