* 1303753
* Racial Identity Development and Stereotypes in Childhood and Early Adolescence: Understanding the Path of Resistance
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Leoandra Rogers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2016
* USD 207,354.00

Nearly 60 years post the landmark case Brown v. Board of Education (1954),
inequality still plagues the nation's education system. While explicit barriers
to educational equity (e.g., laws) have been put in place, implicit attitudes
and beliefs that foster educational disparities remain. For example, the
cultural belief that Black Americans are less intelligent than their White
American counterparts still persists, and has implications for children's self-
concepts, development, and academic outcomes. The existing research on
stereotyping and identity processes focuses primarily on adolescents and adults,
and chiefly on the ways that individuals adhere or accommodate to these
stereotypes. Yet, recent empirical research suggests that the influence of
cultural stereotypes may start earlier than middle-school. The dual objectives
of this postdoctoral project are to understand (a) the origins and early
development of racial identity in childhood and (b) the ways that youth
challenge or resist prevailing cultural stereotypes. These objectives are
achieved through interdisciplinary work conducted by Drs. Andrew Meltzoff
(Sponsoring Scientist) and Leoandra Onnie Rogers (Postdoctoral Fellow), and the
support of the Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences (I-LABS), a state-of-
the-art research center at the University of Washington. In these studies, in-
depth interviews and tests with elementary school-age children in racially
diverse public schools provide a measure of how racial stereotypes shape racial
identity across developmental ages and racial groups. These data, which come
from explicit verbal reports, are then used as input to refining tests of
implicit cognition to capture the ways that racial stereotypes inform children's
implicit racial identities. This research aims to add to the knowledge of how
stereotype processes operate prior to adolescence, and also to lay the
groundwork for exploring psychological factors related to educational
inequality.

Intellectual merit:

The racial identity literature is vast and diverse in theory and methods. This
research integrates theoretical perspectives and methodological approaches to
examine racial identity formation. The focus is on early childhood responds to a
gap in the literature concerning racial identity processes prior to the
adolescent years. The use of new research techniques from developmental and
social psychology adds an interdisciplinary perspective to the racial identity
literature. The research also contributes new information on the ways that youth
challenge stereotypes. By recognizing that children possess the ability to
resist negative racial stereotypes, and investigating why some children are
successful at this, it allows us to uncover how resistance processes might
counteract the pernicious effects of cultural stereotypes. Moreover, the project
provides new methodological tools for identity research by using explicit, in-
depth interview techniques to help design more quantitative measures that are
suitable for studying young children.

Broader impacts:

The findings from the study have the potential to impact educational inequality
by diminishing the effects of stereotypes on youth development, for minority
groups in particular. With better understanding of how children interpret racial
stereotypes, such as those related to intellectual ability, teachers are better
positioned to teach them to contest pernicious beliefs that otherwise may
undermine their academic performance and career pursuits, particularly in
disciplines where they are underrepresented such as STEM fields. Such
information is useful for parents, teachers and other practitioners working with
children, and the children themselves, with considerable benefits at a societal
level. I-LABS has established partnerships with federal, state, and local
agencies and public-private partnership on childhood learning and education.
Operating this research through I-LABS creates the ability to disseminate the
scientific discoveries to people who can use them.