* 1303350
* CAREER: The Dynamics of Collective Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Sanmay Das, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 01/31/2014
* USD 181,344.00

This project studies the design of information systems like wikis and
information markets. Research in social science has established that often there
is a "wisdom of the crowd" -- i.e., collectives can display more intelligence
than the individuals they are composed of. When such collective information
systems work, they serve as superb aggregators and disseminators of information.
However, fundamental computational challenges remain in understanding how to
design them optimally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is advancing along
several lines, including&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) general theories of how
information is aggregated in different social media, developed and validated
using real data gathered from existing databases and generated from user
experiments; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) algorithms for facilitation of user
interactions so that the medium in question can deliver the promised results
(for example, market-making algorithms for liquidity provision in information
markets);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) theoretical and practical characterization of
the possibilities for rogue users to manipulate collective wisdom
systems;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4) algorithms for detecting malicious users, and
mechanisms that thwart miscreants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
naturally interdisciplinary in nature, drawing from machine learning and
probabilistic reasoning, data mining and social networks, as well as finance and
economics. It contributes to our understanding of complex social phenomena like
the growth of information in wikis and blogs, as well as to the development of
intelligent reasoning algorithms for agents in complex, uncertain multi-agent
environments like markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of agents that
participate in markets and social systems improves the quality of online markets
and improves information flow in virtual spaces. Further, insights gained from
modeling market structures and social spaces can tell us how to design them
better. For example, understanding the impact of different levels of central
control on wiki articles or open source software projects yields guidelines for
how much central control is optimal in different
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a world where computation and social systems
are increasingly intertwined, the PI's research and education program exposes
students to multidisciplinary ideas through the introduction of a new class on
collective intelligence, social networks and e-commerce, and the development and
extensive use of the very objects of study -- information markets and wikis --
in classroom and lab settings. The PI is also developing an experimental project
for putting freely accessible course wikis online, similar to online course
materials at other universities, but open to editing by the community.