* 1303757
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Synthesis and Assembly of  Shape-Adjustable, Reconfigurable Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Qian Chen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 430,000.00

This International Collaboration in Chemistry between US Investigators and their
Counterparts Abroad (ICC) project focuses on developing shape-adjustable
nanocrystals for use in assembling reconfigurable superstructures. The synthesis
of nanocrystals of diarylethene and azobenzene derivatives and their assembly
into photo-responsive nanocrystals is developed in this project. One of the
goals is to generate ordered structures and to enable their photo-triggered
transitions using laser irradiation at specific locations and at specific times.
Other goals are to develop chemo-responsive nanocrystal assemblies as well as
the anisotropic reconfiguration of Janus nanocrystals. The Granick group at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry Division. The
Kimizuka group at Kyushu University is supported by the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS), the partnering international funding
agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular crystal materials
show great technological promise with the significant drawback that the crystal
structure typically is static in time. This research collaboration between US
and Japanese researchers is to enhance our fundamental understanding about how
to design and produce new structures with the value-added element that they are
reconfigurable. This in turn could lead to more effective sensors, actuators,
and release agents. The extended visits of students to the Japanese partner
laboratory for collaborative work and training provide students with valuable
international experience.