* 1303123
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Social Stigma and Associated Behaviors on Women Seeking Treatment for Tuberculosis Infection in Lusaka, Zambia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Jared Aldstadt, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2015
* USD 14,931.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the impact of
tuberculosis-related stigma on women's decisions to seek an initial diagnosis
and subsequent treatment for the disease. The global burden of tuberculosis
(TB), an opportunistic infection, is estimated to be from 30 to 50 percent
worldwide and is on the rise, particularly in countries that also have high HIV
prevalence. Women throughout the developing world have disproportionately borne
the burden of disease-related stigma, and it affects their lives at different
scales -- within their families, in their communities and as part of national
discourses. As a result, women are less likely to receive treatment for the
disease, which hastens the rate of disease transmission and has a deleterious
impact on the physical, social, and economic well-being of communities
worldwide. The doctoral student will collaborate with ZAMBART Project, a non-
governmental organization in Lusaka, Zambia, to examine the role of individual-
and community-level intervention strategies that counter TB-related stigma in
order to evaluate their effectiveness and the role of social networks in
positive health behavior change. A combination of qualitative and quantitative
approaches, including ethnographic field research, statistical analysis, and
computational models, will be used to explore the relationships among TB-related
intervention strategies and behavior change. Questions to be pursued include the
following: (1) Do people change their beliefs about TB and TB-infected persons
as a result of intervention strategies? (2) Are there "tipping points" in
positive behavior outcomes within groups? (3) Are there identifiable groups
within social networks that serve as loci for positive behavior change to ripple
outward into their communities?

Because of the indelible impact of TB in communities, it is important to examine
the role of changing family structure and social networks in informing health
decision making. In addition, identifying groups of people may be more
susceptible to TB-related stigma is the first step in countering misinformation
about the disease and infected persons. This project will provide new
information and insights regarding how the social and behavioral determinants of
disease influence its control. Enhanced understanding of social networks and
their role in the diffusion of information and behavior change will assist
researchers and policy makers in designing effective public health programs.
Results from this project will be of value for those who study the geography of
health, mechanisms of decision making, health behavior, policy design and
implementation, and social networks. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish an independent research career.