* 1303171
* Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Patrick Dowling, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 05/31/2015
* USD 177,743.00

The Summer Undergraduate Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (SUMSRI) is a
program conducted by the Department of Mathematics at Miami University. Each
year, SUMSRI prepares about 15 students, recruited from institutions across the
nation, for graduate programs in the mathematical sciences by providing them
with intensive exposure to research and graduate-level mathematics. At the core
of this experience is a seminar in which students conduct research under the
guidance of a faculty member; each year, three different seminars are offered
and students are placed in seminars according to their interests. The program is
supplemented by short courses in Real Analysis, Algebra, Mathematical Writing,
and GRE Preparation and a colloquium series featuring (primarily) female and
minority mathematical scientists. In the year following their participation in
the program, participants are asked to present their research at regional and
national meetings, with financial support from SUMSRI. African Americans and
Hispanics, who now comprise over 25% of the U.S. population, together received
less than 6% of the 500 mathematics PhDs awarded to U.S. citizens in 2009. The
percentage of PhDs earned by female U.S. Citizens was slightly over 30% of the
total. Because of the shortage of minority and female mathematicians, SUMSRI is
especially interested in, but not limited to, underrepresented minorities and
women, with the goal of exposing them to research and graduate education in the
mathematical sciences. In the past twelve years, SUMSRI has proven its
effectiveness in preparing students for the challenges of graduate education. Of
the 205 graduates of the program from 1999-2012, 44.9% are from underrepresented
minority groups; among these, 67.4% are either in a graduate program or have
completed a graduate degree, while 14.1% are still undergraduates. Women
comprise 74.1% of program graduates, of whom 69.7% are either in a graduate
program or have completed a graduate degree, while 11.2% are still
undergraduates. SUMSRI can now count 26 graduates who have received the Ph.D.
degree; of these, 21 are women and 8 are from underrepresented ethnic groups.
Twelve of these have found employment in mathematical science departments within
academia, 2 in non-mathematical science departments, and 10 in industry /
government.