* 1303554
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Exploring the interactions between small molecules and biopolymers using localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yitzhak Tor, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 320,150.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Yitzhak Tor from the University of California, San
Diego, to explore the interactions between small molecules and large biopolymers
and cell surface components, using gold island-based localized plasmon
transducers, as part of an International Collaboration in Chemistry. As a proof-
of-concept, this label-free method will be used to assess the affinity and
selectivity of aminoglycoside antibiotics and their derivatives to the ribosomal
decoding site RNA, a key recognition event that lowers the fidelity of protein
biosynthesis. This system has been selected due to its fundamental significance,
as it illustrates the fact that low molecular weight ligands are capable of
meddling with a critical function of a large biological machine. The proposed
research will shed light on the molecular features that govern the selectivity
of the ligands selectivity toward the bacterial RNA, when compared to the human
competing targets. Furthermore, advancing the proposed platform technology will
facilitate a convenient, label-free exploration of diverse macromolecular
recognition events where low molecular weight ligands influence the folding and
function of key macromolecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small molecules are
capable of interfering with the function of critical cellular components, such
as the ribosome, where all proteins are synthesized. To learn about the
molecular interactions involved, a new technology based on a specialized optical
technique will be advanced, where the biological targets do not need to be
modified or altered. In this fashion, information about the interaction of small
molecules with diverse biological targets can be accumulated rapidly. This
pursuit will allow graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to acquire
training in diverse scientific disciplines, ranging from synthetic techniques to
surface chemistry. This project will also be integrated into an outreach program
to introduce high school students at the UCSD Preuss School to basic principles
of chemistry and biology. Simple lab experiments and demonstrations will be
developed to illustrate the process of modifying surfaces by self-assembling
?designer? molecules and monitoring biorecognition events using straightforward
optical instrumentation.