* 1303604
* Collaborative Research:   Combined Influence of Snow Cover and El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) on North African/Mediterranean Temperature and Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Eli Tziperman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2016
* USD 87,496.00

This project considers the generation of North African and Mediterranean climate
anomalies by El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events and Eurasian snow cover
fluctuations. Two causal mechanisms are examined, one involving tropospheric
teleconnections produced by Rossby wave generation and propagation (a
"horizontal" mechanism), and the other involving stratosphere-troposphere
interactions (a "vertical" mechanism). The horizontal mechanism is hypothesized
to consist of 1) a canonical northeastward propagating wave train that emanates
from the eastern equatorial Pacific, and 2) an ultra-low frequency Rossby wave
that is excited over the Pacific, trapped within the North African-Asian (NAA)
jet and propagates upstream to the Mediterranean region. The vertical mechanism
begins with an expansion of Eurasian snow cover, which leads to colder surface
conditions and lowering of mid-tropospheric geopotential height. This in turn
amplifies the wave-1 stationary wave pattern, which propagates into the
stratosphere and reduces the strength of the polar vortex, resulting in a
negative anomaly of the Arctic or North Atlantic Oscillation, which shifts the
jet stream and storm track southward. The southward shift of the jet and storm
track allows colder temperatures to invade the middle latitudes, including the
Mediterranean region. These influences will be examined through statistical
analysis combined with a suite of models including a Rossby wave ray tracing
calculation, a linearized barotropic model, a state-of-the-art global
atmospheric model (CAM), and an atmospheric model with a well-resolved
stratosphere (WACCM). In addition, an empirical prediction scheme will be
developed and tested using Eurasian snow cover and ENSO as predictors for
seasonal Mediterranean precipitation and surface temperature.

The work has societal broader impacts due to the agricultural and other
consequences of climate variability in the Mediterranean region. More
specifically, the empirical prediction scheme will be provided to operational
centers including the International Research Institute at Columbia University.
In addition, a website will be developed to provide public information regarding
the role of atmospheric teleconnections in producing climate anomalies. The
project will also support and train a graduate student, thereby providing for
the future scientific workforce in this research area.