* 1303073
* ETALE TOPOLOGY IN TENSOR TRIANGULAR GEOMETRY
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Paul Balmer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 347,430.00

This project is part of the PI's long-term program of "Tensor Triangular
Geometry," which studies the geometry of tensor triangulated categories as they
occur throughout mathematics. The specific goal of the present project is to
expand etale topology from algebraic geometry into tensor triangular geometry.
The starting point is the observation that restriction of modular
representations from a finite group to a subgroup is nothing but an extension-
of-scalars, with respect to a suitable ring object. Moreover, that ring object
is commutative and separable and compact (finite dimensional), so it deserves to
be called a "tensor-triangular etale" ring object. In short, such enhanced etale
extensions not only generalize the classical etale extensions of algebraic
geometry but also cover restriction to subgroups in representation theory. In
algebraic geometry, the power of extension-of-scalars resides in the ability to
apply descent theory. Extending descent to tensor triangular geometry and
specializing to representation theory yields a machinery which allows one to
decide when modular representations of a p-group extend to an arbitrary finite
group containing our p-group as a Sylow subgroup. In modular representation
theory of finite groups, abstract tensor triangular etale topology materializes
into the so-called "sipp topology" on the category of finite G-sets and leads to
stacks of derived and stable categories. These ideas then lead to (sipp)
cohomology theory, which is one of the main avenues of the present project. Sipp
cohomology theory can be related to classical group cohomology, to classical
algebro-geometric etale cohomology and therefore to Galois cohomology. The first
concrete range of application is the description of endotrivial representations
over arbitrary finite groups, extending from the Carlson-Thevenaz classification
over p-groups. Beyond this first major achievement, the sipp topology is
actually perfectly suited for treating gluing problems from p-local to global.
This is particularly interesting for derived and stable categories, in view of a
series of long-standing conjectures, like Broue's Abelian Defect Group
Conjecture for instance.

One of the driving forces of research in Fundamental Sciences, including
Mathematics, is the constant attempt to unify specialized theories into more
fundamental principles. The first goal is the discovery of deeper scientific
beauties but the second, more collective, goal is the transposition of
techniques and methods from one specialized area to other neighboring ones, thus
creating new applications and further interaction and innovation. Tensor
Triangular Geometry covers a large class of specialized areas of Mathematics,
ranging from Algebra to Analysis: It appears in Algebraic Geometry, in Modular
Representation Theory, in Stable Homotopy Theory, in Motivic Theory, in
Noncommutative Topology, and more. Tensor Triangular Geometry provides a growing
number of new theorems and great conceptual unification between those fields.
Moreover, it displays a steadily expanding collection of applications. For
instance, via Tensor Triangular Geometry, the deep beauty of Grothendieck's
famous etale topology, with its origins in Galois theory and its full
manifestations in modern Algebraic Geometry, now surfaces again in Modular
Representation Theory. There, it provides answers to long-standing problems
about the relations between representations of finite groups of order a power of
a prime number and representations of arbitrary general finite groups.