* 1303938
* Collaborative Research:   An innovative network to improve sea ice prediction in a changing Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2013,11/30/2018
* Lawrence Hamilton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 155,414.00

Recent major changes in the extent, thickness and properties of arctic sea ice
have captured attention and posed significant challenges to a diverse group of
stakeholders, ranging from maritime safety and security, resource management and
development, politicians, coastal communities, weather and climate forecasters,
climate change researchers, and a growing segment of the general public. Sea ice
forecasting on seasonal-to-interannual timescales, especially over the summer
and into fall, is of particular interest. Though each stakeholder is driven by
different priorities, all require improved monitoring, prediction, and
communication of sea ice conditions. To date, sea ice modeling efforts have
largely focused on climate scales (i.e., response to greenhouse gas forcing) or
targeted synoptic forecasting in support of navigation. Sea ice forecasting on
seasonal scales is a challenge because of: (1) high variability in atmospheric
and oceanic influence, (2) observations for initialization and validation have
limited coverage and/or high uncertainties, (3) limitations of current model
capabilities, (4) inherent limitations in sea ice predictability, and (5) an
Arctic system changing in ways without recent historical
precedent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEARCH Sea Ice Outlook was implemented four
years ago in an ad hoc fashion, requesting voluntary contributions to estimate
September sea ice extent based on late spring (June 1) conditions. Contributions
have been made using different methods that vary from complex (partially- and
fully- coupled general circulation models and statistical relationships) to
basic (trend extrapolation, heuristic, public poll). The Outlook will be
organized and expanded into a more structured, coordinated and formal effort
that focuses on tackling key barriers to sea ice forecasting, including rigorous
evaluation of predictions, coordination and organization of relevant
observations for initialization, evaluation of methods, and finally, an
organizational network structure to manage the efforts and communicate results
in new ways. This effort builds on the experience of the past four years and
expands on structures already in place, leveraging resources and expertise at an
international scale to help address a set of challenges recognized as priorities
by a range of U.S. and international programs and
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - This project advances
NSF?s goal of providing improved predictive tools for the Arctic by creating an
innovative network of scientists and stakeholders to generate, assess and
communicate arctic seasonal sea ice forecasts. The network?s focus is to develop
new methods to evaluate forecasts, new metrics for synthesis and comparison
across forecast methods and new approaches to initialize forecast methods with
targeted observations. Finally, the network will investigate how different
forecasting methods can be combined to exceed predictive skills of narrower
approaches. The research team will explore how best to plan observations for
improved seasonal predictions and how these predictions in turn can advance
understanding of the evolving state of the arctic sea ice
cover.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - Improved seasonal forecasts of
arctic sea ice will be developed and disseminated for societal benefit. By
fostering and coordinating an international network of researchers and
leveraging a broad range of activities, the project provides information
tailored to stakeholders? needs. In addition to rigorous evaluations of
stakeholder information needs, the network will develop a common reference
framework for key sea ice variables and predictors, generating integrated
datasets and predicted fields for the scientific community and stakeholders.
Activities will also be initiated to inform and engage the growing internet
communities of citizen scientists, many of whom already show a strong interest
in arctic science, have capabilities for their own original and potentially
worthwhile analysis, and connect with wider networks of media and public
discussion. The activities will include graduate students and post-docs who are
mentored to conduct high-quality research at the intersection of fundamental and
applied research. By entraining more young researchers into the network, the
project also addresses an important need for qualified experts that can help
address urgent questions concerning resource uses and ecosystem services
impacted by rapid arctic sea ice change.