* 1303743
* RAPID: Neuroendocrine and Behavioral Responses to Witnessing a Dominance Contest: Insights from the 2012 Presidential Election
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2013
* Pranjal Mehta, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 10/31/2013
* USD 75,200.00

Status hierarchies are ubiquitous across human and animal societies, and
dominance contests are an important means for determining status in social
groups. These contests include physical confrontations - fights, sports matches,
and even wars -- as well as non-physical competitions, such as competitive
exams, job interviews, and formal presentations. Although previous research has
examined face-to-face dominance contests, little is known about the biosocial
processes involved in large-scale societal dominance contests such as democratic
elections. Given the widespread significance of presidential elections for the
actual and perceived status of nearly all society members, it is critical for
social psychology researchers to study them to build more comprehensive theories
of status hierarchies. Bringing together theories and empirical approaches in
behavioral neuroendocrinology and social-personality psychology, the aim of this
proposal is to examine voters' neuroendocrine and behavioral dynamics before,
during, and after the 2012 US presidential election.

The proposed research is focused around three broad empirical questions: (1)
what are the psychological factors that explain variation in hormone responses
(testosterone and cortisol) among eligible voters, (2) what are the behavioral
consequences of these hormone response profiles (e.g., changes in aggressive
behavior and prosocial behavior), and (3) what is the temporal trajectory of
neuroendocrine and behavioral responses to the election? To address these
questions, the proposed study will recruit healthy men and women who are
registered to vote and hold views across the political spectrum. On five
theoretically-relevant days (two days prior to the election, election day, and
two days after the election), participants will provide saliva samples to
measure diurnal testosterone and cortisol in order to assess hormone responses
to the results of the presidential election. Participants will also wear an iPod
Touch with Electronically Activated Software (EAR) to record naturally occurring
social interactions and behaviors via short audio clips. Daily diaries and
surveys will be collected throughout the study. Participants will be requested
to release social media feeds in the weeks surrounding the election. Finally,
public voting information will be accessed to confirm whether or not
participants voted in the election.

This proposal breaks new ground in examining hormone-behavior associations in a
real-world dominance contest. While previous work has shown that observer's
steroid hormone levels can fluctuate when witnessing a dominance contest, little
is known about (a) the behavioral consequences of observers hormone changes and
(b) the psychological factors that explain variability in these hormone
responses. The proposed work also addresses the onset and trajectories of
hormonal and behavioral changes before, during, and after a high-stakes societal
dominance contest.

This project has implications for theories of individual and group-based
dominance hierarchies across multiple fields, including psychology, behavioral
neuroendocrinology, neuroscience, political science, sociology, and
anthropology. Moreover, this research will serve as a training foundation in
social neuroendocrinology research for students from underrepresented groups.
Finally, the proposed work has implications for at least two public policy
issues. Specifically, the findings are expected to assist in devising new
interventions to (1) curb aggression and violence in individual and group-based
status hierarchies, and (2) decrease stress and improve health in individuals
and groups who perceive themselves as low status. The data and analytical
approach may also reveal strategies for increasing enthusiasm and positive
affect to improve voter turnout in democratic elections.