* 1303644
* AON:   Observing the Evolving Central Arctic Ocean with Ice-Tethered Profilers
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2020
* John Toole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 02/29/2020
* USD 3,780,933.00

This awards sustains sampling of the upper Arctic Ocean water properties through
all seasons using Ice-Tethered Profiler (ITP) instruments. Studies conducted
over the last decade indicate that the Arctic is both a sensitive indicator of
climate change and an active driver of climate variability. As evidenced by the
strikingly low summer sea ice extent estimates recorded since August 2007 and
large anomalies in liquid fresh water content (manifested by upper-ocean
salinity), significant changes in the Arctic appear to be underway now. It is
critical that we continue to observe the Arctic during this time of rapid
evolution to quantify the physical changes that are occurring, to better
understand their causes, and to assess their impacts on the Arctic Ocean climate
system. We will construct and deploy 6 ITP instrument systems annually
throughout the Arctic Ocean to acquire, process and make the data from these
instruments freely and immediately available to all interested parties to
support science and operational activities via our project web site, the GTS and
the Argo float program data assembly centers. Improvements to sensor design and
added variables will be tested during deployments to increase the platform
lifetime and expand the measurement suite on board the ITP. On-going
partnerships with European and Japanese investigators employing the WHOI ITP and
other similar instruments holds promise for continued broad spatial coverage of
the Arctic. We will continue to use the ITP program to support outreach
activities designed for both specialized and general audiences including giving
briefings to teachers, science journalists, policy makers and operational
groups, contributing to museum presentations, making school visits and
continuing to evolve our project web site http://www.whoi.edu/itp .