* 1303831
* Collaborative Research:   Understanding the Full Range of Amazon Drought and Impacts
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2020
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 01/31/2020
* USD 351,887.00

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;This grant will provide improved paleoclimatic
and paleo-drought perspectives needed to manage Amazonia in the face of natural
climate variability and change. The project targets three clusters of western
Amazonian lakes in Brazil, Ecuador and Peru to establish a regional network of
at least four sub-decadally resolved 1500- to 3000-year long integrated records
of paleoclimate, vegetation, and fire-history for western Amazonia. The team
will use a climate and Earth system modeling strategy to address many questions,
including:&lt;br/&gt;*To what extent are the hypothesized drought events in each
lake record really droughts, i.e., reproduced in other lake records nearby
(restricted drought) and over 1,000 km away (broader drought)?&lt;br/&gt;*What
are the best "paleo-informed" estimates of drought and abrupt change risk for
Amazonia?&lt;br/&gt;*How did Amazonian vegetation and fire dynamics respond to
the spectrum of past drought severity, and how might these biophysical feedbacks
affect future forest sustainability and the risk of a tipping
point?&lt;br/&gt;*Is there early warning behavior in the Amazonian dynamical
system approaching critical transitions?&lt;br/&gt;*How well do state-of-the-art
models simulate the observed record of drought and abrupt
change?&lt;br/&gt;*What are the dominant controls on decadal to century-scale
drought variability and abrupt hydro climatic change in
Amazonia?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;In 2005, the
Amazon basin was hit with a drought unprecedented in the period of instrumental
observation. Scientists quickly realized this drought was a new threat that put
Amazonia's biodiversity, ability to act as a carbon sink, and ecosystem services
(e.g., hydrologic and economic) at risk. In 2010, a second, more severe drought
occurred. It has been posited that Amazonia might not survive accelerating
climate change, perhaps even reaching a tipping point beyond which substantial
areas of the forest would convert irreversibly to savanna.&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Arizona and Florida Institute of Technology team has collected
data showing that single-year periods of severe drought were not uncommon in
Amazonia, and that longer multi-year (up to ~15 yr) droughts and abrupt climate
changes have also occurred. Comparisons between this 1500-year record and state-
of-the-art climate model simulations also indicated that models might
underestimate the risk of future prolonged Amazonian drought. As carbon
feedbacks are important components of modern fully-coupled climate models,
integrating estimates of forest resilience into the paleoclimatic assessment is
critically important to understanding the past and future role of drought in
this landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide information
useful in managing Amazonian ecosystem services in the face of climate
variability and change, via scientific publications as well as reports to
Amazonian policy-makers and managers in their native languages. The team is
building on inter-institutional ties within the US and also forming new
partnerships in Amazonia. The team will also create two new mechanisms for
explaining the Amazon's climate challenge and key paleo-perspectives to the
public, including students and non-English speakers: (1) a new exhibit at the
largest live rainforest exhibit in the US, and (2) a contest to produce the best
short multi-lingual video on the science and its implications. We will also
train two paleoenvironmental Ph.D. scientists in this highly relevant
interdisciplinary context, as well as several undergraduate students, including
those from the large Hispanic and Native American student communities at the
University of Arizona.