* 1303935
* SpaceTEC Renewal - National Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2020
* Michael Reynolds, Eastern Florida State College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,654,166.00

DUE-1303935&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SpaceTEC, as a National
Aerospace Resource Center, has created an infrastructure for a nationally-
recognized performance-based certification process for aerospace and aviation
technicians. With industry and government support, the knowledge and skill sets
are developed on which the certification exams are based. Professional
development is provided for examiners and college faculty. Two four-day
professional development workshops are offered each year, and articulation
agreements will be coordinated. The certifications also provide information to
college faculty about the competencies the industry requires of technicians so
that the college courses and curricula can be modified. Heretofore industry has
asked for a "supertech" that understands both electrical and mechanical aspects
of the position. At industry request, the certificate examinations are revised
to cover less content and to be stackable. The Center also expands its
repository of materials to include NASA education and training materials and
names of industry subject matter experts and increases services to veterans and
under-employed technicians. In new certificate programs, offered at ten partner
colleges, SpaceTEC addresses key workforce issues by matching educational needs
with qualified providers. Most activities will be moved to fee-based over the
period of the grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation effort focuses on
metrics to assess the impact of the Center certification program and the
effectiveness and the use of these metrics to continuously improve programs. The
evaluation tools developed in the core certification program are used to measure
the effectiveness of the adaptations to the existing SpaceTEC core curriculum
and certification programs to assist veterans and other special needs groups.
Measures of success are the rate of special needs candidates who pass the
credentialing exam, the benefits of taking the readiness courses on improving
pass rate, and especially job placement rate and success in the workplace. Pre-
and post-surveys are used to measure participant learning in the professional
development workshops. Follow-up surveys with college faculty assess
improvements made in existing college courses and labs, with particular
attention to their impact on student learning outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industry driven performance-based certifications provide
industry the information needed to make good hiring decisions. The industry-
recognized stackable certificates provide newly educated technicians, veterans
and under-employed technicians a pathway to employment. The feedback on the
success of the certificate holders is an efficient mechanism for the Center to
influence courses and curricula at community colleges nationwide. Each partner
college adapts its curricula to meet those core standards required in the
workplace. The SpaceTEC certification process and exams measure student learning
outcomes. Feedback is provided to both students and college faculty on
individual strengths and weaknesses and also on deficiencies in a particular
technology area so that a college can work to strengthen individual aerospace
courses.