* 1303259
* 3rd Mile High Conference on Nonassociative Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Petr Vojtechovsky, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2014
* USD 18,000.00

The 3rd Mile High Conference will take place at the University of Denver from
August 11-17, 2013. The Mile High Conferences on Nonassociative Mathematics
provide a unique forum for all aspects of nonassociative mathematics. This
conference will bring together researchers working in various areas of
nonassociative mathematics, including quasigroups and loops, Lie algebras and
Jordan algebras, latin squares, 3-nets and latin square designs, and
applications of octonions and nonassociative structures in physics. The
interdisciplinary spirit of the conference is reflected not only in the
selection of main speakers from various fields, but also in the composition of
the Program and Organizing Committee. About 70 researchers are expected to
participate. The main goals of the 3rd Mile High Conference are as follows: (i)
To reinforce the Mile High Conferences as a leading series of conferences in
nonassociative mathematics worldwide; (ii) To bring together scientists from all
areas of nonassociative mathematics, hence promoting cross-disciplinary
research; (iii) To make the conference accessible to graduate and post-doctoral
students while also providing a forum for these young researchers; (iv) To
encourage and support participation of researchers from underrepresented and
underprivileged groups; (v) To publish conference proceedings in order to
promote original research; (vi) To disseminate open problems in the various
fields of nonassociative mathematics. All these goals address both the
intellectual merit and the broader impact of the conference.

Nonassociative mathematics is a broad field that interacts with many traditional
areas of mathematics as well as mathematical sciences. For example, quasigroup
theory and the octonions have found applications in relativistic physics and
particle physics. Jordan algebras have proven to be useful in both physics and
statistics, and latin squares also show up routinely in the latter field.
Finally, the ubiquity of Lie algebras in mathematical sciences is well known.
The Mile High Conferences in Nonassociative Mathematics strive to be one of the
primary opportunities for people working in diverse parts of nonassociative
mathematics to come together, exchange ideas and learn about the cutting edge of
the field. For further information about this year's conference, see
http://www.math.du.edu/milehigh .