* 1303138
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changing Labor and Land-Use Regimes in Market-Based Ecosystem Services Projects
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Wendy Jepson, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 10/31/2014
* USD 15,534.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines how urban-based Payments
for Ecosystem Services (PES) programs change rural land-use practices. PES, a
market-based mechanism for conservation, compensates local communities and
households in or around targeted ecosystems to change their land-use practices
for the conservation of targeted natural resources. In addition to paying for
the natural resource, PES schemes require individuals, households, and
communities living in and around targeted resources to produce and maintain the
ecological service with their own labor. This project advances research on
market-based conservation programs by examining labor processes, and thus value
production within them. Specifically the project will focus on (1) how PES
schemes develop interventions; (2) how PES schemes enroll communities, and thus,
workers; (3) the characteristics of households engaging with PES interventions;
and (4) and how labor requirements for PES schemes influence individual and
community land-uses. The doctoral student will examine a well-established PES
water program in the Andean highlands using multiple methods, including
participant observation, key informant interviews, document collection,
household surveys, and labor and land-use mapping walking tours. Data analysis
will focus on the processes of labor mobilization and the reorganization of
labor within communities and households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines a PES program that serve as models for other watershed projects
throughout the Americas. As such, this research will benefit broader society by
informing sound policy decisions on PES conservation programs. The research will
be conducted in collaboration with a local non-governmental organization (NGO)
with which educational and dissemination activities are planned in both English
and Spanish. Research results and data will be incorporated into teaching and
learning modules for undergraduate courses in human and regional geography in
the US. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.