* 1303901
* The Diversity, Seasonality and Function of Parasitic Fungi in Arctic Sea Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Rolf Gradinger, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 550,738.00

This work explores the hypothesis that parasitic chytrids (fungi) may change the
seasonal cycle of ice algal abundances and diversity by targeting specific ice
algal taxa, mainly certain diatom species. In addressing this hypothesis, this
grant aims at providing information on the spatial and temporal patterns of
abundance, and diversity of marine fungi in arctic sea ice in comparison to
water column information and relate this information to various environmental
data which will include salinity, temperature, and as well as ice thickness and
snow cover. Field work will be conducted between 2014 and 2015 on the fast ice
in Barrow and in spring of 2015 on RV Sikulaq in the Bering sea. The combined
data set will allow for a refined interpretation of the relevance of the
parasitic fungi for the food web structure in arctic
seas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is the first to explore these ecological
processes in polar sea ice and can potentially lead to a paradigm change on
carbon processing similar to one seen recently in freshwater science. Detailed
studies on marine chytrids are rare in any ice covered marine region and these
observations might stimulate new research in both Arctic and Antarctic regions.
Biological community composition information will contribute to diversity
research on fungi in general and the understanding of global patterns in
microbial biodiversity linked. The research will have broader impacts in its
engagement in teaching activities through training of two participating UAF
students and through high school seminars as well as meeting with teachers in
Barrow, and their potential participation in expeditions. A broad public
audience including minorities will be kept informed through media coverage and
project-specific web pages documenting the field and lab work.