* 1304426
* ATETV - Bilingual Video Series
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Anthony Manupelli, Pellet Productions, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2019
* USD 1,149,759.00

This project is expanding Advanced Technological Education Television's (ATETV)
(www.atetv.org) impact by producing bilingual student recruitment and retention
videos featuring and aimed at Hispanics and Latinos. This video series is also
advancing knowledge of effective recruitment strategies and understanding of
career choice processes across many ATE disciplines. The work is being developed
and created using the input and resources of educational partners with
experience in the Hispanic and Latino communities and is being tested for
efficacy under controlled circumstances in multiple venues. The shifting
demographics of our nation make this work imperative. Embracing and engaging
students who may be the only English speakers in their homes, or for whom
Spanish is their first language is inviting Hispanics and Latinos, the largest
ethnic minority in the US, to learn about STEM education and technology careers
with the ultimate goal of improving the diversity of qualified technicians
across a broad range of science and technology. This new series of videos is
creating fresh and comprehensive content focusing on the wide range of
opportunities in STEM, and is leveraging existing content (created for ATETV) to
expand the reach of this material and generate new understanding of ATE
educational and career pathways. These bilingual videos have multiple audio
tracks (English and Spanish), multiple subtitle tracks and are highlighting
emerging technical disciplines that are helping close some content gaps in the
prior ATETV work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ATETV Bilingual Series extends across
ATE disciplines and benefits Hispanic students and families, educators and high
school guidance counselors. The videos are enhancing the recruitment efforts of
technician educators, improving diversity in the workforce, improving
educational attainment and employment for Hispanics and modeling processes for
others to follow whether they are targeting Hispanics or other underrepresented
groups.