* 1304406
* Quantifying Rates of Biological Production to Better Understand the Carbon Cycle in the Canada Basin
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Rachel Stanley, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2015
* USD 235,537.00

In order to predict the future carbon cycle in a rapidly changing Arctic Ocean,
a better understanding of the present-day carbon cycle is needed, and this
research will study this with some relatively novel methods. The gas tracers
oxygen, argon and triple oxygen isotopes can be used to quantify rates of net
community production and gross primary production, respectively. Net community
production is defined as photosynthesis minus community respiration and thus
reflects the net amount of CO2 taken up by the ?biological pump.? Gross primary
production is defined as the total photosynthetic flux. The ratio of net
community to gross primary production yields information on how tightly an
ecosystem is recycling its carbon. By concurrently measuring rates of net
community and gross primary production, this work will study the environmental
effects on photosynthesis and respiration, and this should allow a better
mechanistic understanding of the processes controlling biological
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use the ratio of O2 to Argon
and triple oxygen isotopes to quantify rates of biological production on
summertime cruises for three years in the Beaufort Gyre section of the Canada
Basin. The main objective of this work is to gain a better understanding of the
interplay among biological production, sea ice, and temperature in the Canada
Basin. The team will use data collected in 2011 and 2012, collect samples in
2013 and interpret all the data in order to address two hypotheses. The first is
that gross primary production increases when summer sea ice extent is smaller
but that net community production does not change. In this case there will be no
net change in the carbon cycle although production will seem elevated if one
uses traditional metrics of chlorophyll or biomass. The second hypothesis is
that rates of gross primary production and carbon recycling are higher in
regions of actively melting ice, that is in ?ice edge blooms.? These ice edge
blooms should have similar rates of net community production to the open water
and be responsible for no additional net carbon
uptake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - Professional media designers will
produce a short video about changing biological productivity in the Arctic
Ocean. This will be shown at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Exhibit Center and on
local ferries to Martha?s Vineyard. Additionally, this project will promote
education by including opportunities for a graduate student.