* 1304408
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2:  Contributions of northern cold-climate peatlands and lakes to abrupt changes in atmospheric methane during the last deglaciation
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Todd Sowers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2018
* USD 40,199.00

The proposed research integrates studies in a range of disciplines
(paleoecology, climate, biogeochemistry, geomorphology, geology) to understand
the timing, magnitude, and overall contribution of northern cold-climate
peatlands and lakes to rapid increases in atmospheric methane (CH4)
concentrations (AMC) during the last deglaciation. The study will use
comprehensive paleoecological records of northern peatland and lake development
to document their past spatial and temporal patterns of CH4 emission. This will
enable better prediction of future emissions from northern ecosystems,
particularly as surface permafrost thaws under scenarios of climate warming.
Specifically, the PIs propose to: (1) Synthesize new and existing peatland,
thermokarst-lake, kettle-lake and other post-glacial lake initiation data, as
well as compiling such data from regions that no longer support peatlands or
permafrost, such as on formerly exposed continental shelf and along southern
margins of ice sheets, to gain knowledge of timing of these AMC sources during
the last deglaciation; (2) analyze new and existing peat macrofossil data to
estimate past CH4 flux from northern high latitude peatland regions as they
evolved from high- CH4 emitting fens to lower- CH4 emitting bogs during the
Holocene; (3) use novel stable isotope approaches and 14C dating to constrain
the magnitude and timing of permafrost-derived hydrogen and carbon in CH4 from
northern peatlands and lakes that formed when ground ice melted; and (4) compare
their bottom-up reconstructions of past CH4 emissions and their isotope values
from peatlands and thermokarst lakes with top-down modeling of global
atmospheric CH4 sources based on recent, higher resolution data of
interhemispheric CH4 isotope (13C, D, 14C) gradients recorded in Greenland and
Antarctic ice cores.

Methane is a potent greenhouse gas. Its global warming potential is many times
that of carbon dioxide. Therefore, in order to develop scenarios of future
climate change, it is important to be able to estimate how much methane will be
released to the atmosphere due to permafrost degradation. This project will
constrain that number.