* 1304119
* Collaborative Research: A New Framework for Fine-grained Soil Characterization (Moving Beyond Atterberg Limits)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/27/2012,09/30/2016
* William Likos, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2016
* USD 239,799.00

The goal of this project is to modernize geotechnical index testing by exploring
a new approach for fine-grained soil characterization based on automated and
rapid measurements of water vapor sorption behavior. Unlike historical methods
that have relied on cumbersome manually-determined indices only indirectly
related to clay composition such as Atterberg?s limits, the new framework will
be based on fundamental clay surface properties including specific surface area
(SSA) and cation exchange capacity (CEC). Despite recognition that SSA and CEC
are linked to macroscopic clay behavior, their usage has seen limited
application in geotechnical practice because these links remain uncertain and
measurement methods remain complex. New methods will be developed to derive
these basic clay properties using sorption-based procedures that are more
systematic, economical, and readily automated than existing techniques.
Intellectual contributions will be made by exploring the concept of an intrinsic
water vapor sorption isotherm unique to all clays and by improving basic
understanding of linkages between clay surface properties and macroscopic
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of a new fine-grained soil
characterization framework will transform the way geotechnical site
investigations are performed and improve the efficiency with which geotechnical
engineering projects are executed. A fundamentally sound approach for expansive
soil characterization will alleviate the severe economic and social burden of
damages resulting from these materials. The framework will allow design
engineers to more effectively quantify site variability by allowing a larger and
more diverse suite of samples to be tested in a short amount of time and at
lower cost than existing methods. Improved basic understanding of fine-grained
soil behavior will impact the broad range of applications where these materials
have found use, including environmental applications such as waste containment,
filtration and membranes, and as industrial adsorbents. Education and outreach
initiatives will be integrated with the research to capitalize on the
collaborative nature of the project, including a graduate student exchange
program, a diversity initiative, and an educational initiative featuring
integration of sorption-based soil classification modules into undergraduate
geotechnical engineering laboratory courses.