* 1304843
* Understanding, Supporting, and Creating Curriculum Pathways for Industrial Automation Careers
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Sheng-Jen Hsieh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Heather Watson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 949,999.00

This project is supporting and creating curriculum pathways to increase the
number of qualified technicians in the areas of operation, troubleshooting,
design and integration of automated manufacturing systems (industrial
automation). The curriculum pathways include a series of courses and learning
experiences that equip students for a successful career in automated systems and
industrial automation. The project is developing career pathways that lead from
high school to the workforce, using web technologies to make industrial
automation education more accessible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Many curriculum articulation efforts have focused on
establishing dual credit programs for general academic subjects or on particular
types of technology, such as mechatronics and robotics. There has been
relatively little emphasis on automated systems education or establishing dual
credit programs in industrial automation that begin at the high school level. To
overcome this shortcoming the project is: 1) assessing industry workforce needs
and skill sets in the area of industrial automation, 2) identifying gaps and
inefficiencies that affect students' ability to smoothly transition from high
school to two or four-year college to jobs in industry, 3) developing curriculum
pathways and articulation agreements to efficiently prepare students to enter
the workforce, 4) developing tools (e.g., web-accessible automated systems and
virtual learning environments) to make hands-on learning experiences more
accessible to learners with limited instructional resources, and 5) pilot-
testing the tools within three clusters consisting of (at least) one high
school, one two-year college, and one four-year
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project is helping
provide U.S. companies with technicians and engineers who have a deeper
understanding of industrial automation concepts, and who are better prepared to
adapt to changes in production goals, automation processes and organizational
restructuring. The partnering institutions are working with a significant number
of underrepresented minority students and the propagation plans are providing
further opportunities for students from all backgrounds to learn the concepts
associated with system integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is further
contributing to rural technician education, by engaging two-year college
participants from west Texas to work in the wind and solar energy industries.
Since there has been relatively little emphasis on automated systems workforce
preparation, the project is creating model career pathways from high school to
the workforce and using web technologies to make industrial automation education
more accessible to all. The project's focus on automated manufacturing to
benefit the energy industry is helping address the global priority on the
critical shortage of highly qualified workers to positively impact the nation
and its related economy.