* 1304249
* Work-based Learning: Preparing Incumbent Workers for Advanced Manufacturing Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Dean Autry, Jobs for the Future, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 10/31/2016
* USD 900,000.00

Jobs for the Future (JFF) partners with Owensboro Community and Technical
College (OCTC) and the WGBH Educational Foundation to develop and field test a
work-based learning (WBL) approach for manufacturing technician education for
incumbent production workers lacking an Associate degree. New WBL courses,
adapted from existing OCTC courses and National Institute of Manufacturing
Standards credential standards, are piloted within the manufacturing technology
department at OCTC. In the pilots themselves, cohorts of incumbent workers earn
six to twelve academic credits towards an advanced manufacturing Associate
degree, and improve their skills and knowledge in advanced manufacturing
technology. A suite of professional development tools and multimedia resources
are developed for faculty and employers at other colleges and posted to the PBS
LearningMedia digital platform to support wider adoption of a WBL design in
manufacturing technician education. The Educational Development Center?s Center
for Children &amp; Technology conducts both the formative and summative
evaluation of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the
success of the Jobs to Career program in nursing implemented by Jobs for the
Future at 17 community colleges. WBL is aligned to competencies in OCTC courses;
faculty are supported in designing the curriculum for WBL; the capacity of
employers to integrate WBL into the workplace is strengthened; outcomes for 45
incumbent workers are improved. The project products and outcomes are
disseminated through a professionally produced multi-media toolkit. The
evaluation determines the impact of WBL on participants and compares them to
students on campus-based courses. It also determines the effectiveness of the
toolkit when used by other instructors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ATE program
has funded the development of various forms of Problem-Based Learning that bring
the workplace to the classroom. This project tests the effectiveness of bringing
the classroom to the workplace.