* 1304613
* Collaborative Research: Gender, Environment, and Change: Exploring Shifting Roles in an Inupiat Community
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Courtney Carothers, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2017
* USD 286,173.00

This environmental anthropology study will provide a detailed ethnographic
picture of the ways in which Alaska Native communities are responding to global
challenges while at the same time retaining and practicing their core indigenous
values in the face of many uncertainties. Previous research has identified
indigenous groups and women as some of the most vulnerable populations affected
by pronounced political, economic, and environmental shifts. In this study the
researchs seek to examine gendered responses to the processes of globalization
and significant social-environmental change and the shifting roles of women in
the midst of such changes. This research will provide an in-depth study of the
gendered, multigenerational responses to specific contemporary changes in
Barrow, Alaska, an IÃ±upiat subsistence-based community and economic and
administrative hub of Arctic Slope region. While it is widely recognized that
women play important roles as providers in this region, more research is needed
on the evolving nature of women?s ?work? given new vocational and educational
opportunities in the context of shifting mixed economies, increasing regulation
of the environment, cumulative oil and gas exploration and extraction, and
pronounced environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on the
theoretical frameworks of traditional ecological knowledge and political
ecology, the PIs ask several primary research questions: 1) How do recent shifts
in local livelihoods reshape discourses and practices on what it means to be a
female provider in Barrow in changing times? 2) What are the linkages between
women?s work and community well-being? 3) To what extent have recent shifts in
local livelihoods impacted the ability of women to nurture diversity and create
opportunities for self-organization and self-determination? and 4) How are women
participating in, and providing leadership to, local and regional political
networks? The research design is guided by feminist and participatory research
approaches; the researchers have built methodological flexibility into their
research design to enable the local research team and advisors to help shape the
direction of the project. The project uses mixed methods, combining participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, critical case studies, and social
network analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women?s roles have been an
underrepresented aspect of indigenous management strategies worldwide and this
project recognizes women as empowered individuals who often foster the well-
being of their communities. Thus, this research provides an important
opportunity to explore applied concerns in anthropology and resource management
by valuing women?s traditional ecological knowledge and provisional roles during
a time of intense shifts. The investigators also anticipate that this research
will be useful and meaningful for the community of Barrow and will have broader
applications to other indigenous groups facing similar challenges. They hope the
collaborative and participatory nature of their research, including local people
in the research process and providing additional opportunities to provide
trainings and foster dialogue about research and ethics, will make a significant
contribution to both the research and educational activities in Barrow and
international discussions about the appropriate relationships between
researchers, research programs, and local communities.