* 1304905
* Collaborative research:  What role do glaciers play in terrestrial sub-arctic hydrology?
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Anna Liljedahl, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 844,653.00

This project will develop a comprehensive assessment of the glacier-permafrost-
hydrology system in light of anticipated increases in glacier wastage and
permafrost degradation with climate warming. Current limited understanding of
the integrated effects of glaciers and permafrost on terrestrial hydrology
inhibits quantification of the impact of cryospheric changes on arctic water
resources. Glaciers in permafrost landscapes feed and recharge aquifers in
otherwise semi-arid lowlands, which despite relatively low precipitation rates,
contain extensive wetlands. The specific objectives of this study are to 1)
assess the hydrologic pathways of glacier wastage within a watershed underlain
by discontinuous permafrost through hydrologic and geochemical field
measurements, 2) quantify the effect of glaciers and permafrost on recent
historical (1960-present) hydrologic fluxes and storage by combining glacier
mass balance, hydrologic, and geochemical field measurements with an existing
heat- and mass transfer model that couples glacier mass balance to downstream
hydrology, and 3) project the future hydrologic regime using custom-derived
downscaled climate projections (5 km) for the Tanana River basin, Alaska. The
major products of the project will include a quantification of the controls that
govern the hydrologic processes in glacier- and permafrost affected watersheds.