* 1304540
* P2C2:   Positive Feedback between Dust, Radiation, Precipitation and Temperature as a Driver for Abrupt Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Amy Clement, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2017
* USD 441,045.00

Aerosol feedbacks represent one of the highest uncertainties in the dynamics of
the Earth system (IPCC, 2007). Paleoclimate records show significant
fluctuations in dust associated with changes in climate. However, the role of
dust as a feedback to climate change in the past and into the future remains
highly uncertain. The proposed working hypothesis is that a positive feedback
between dust, radiation, precipitation and temperature is an important driver
for abrupt climate change. Researchers from the University of Miami will focus
on two periods of abrupt climate change in the Atlantic: Heinrich Event 1 and
the termination of the African Humid Period. These are two periods of abrupt
climate change for which the source of the abruptness is still a matter of
debate. PIs will run transient paleoclimate simulations using the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community Earth System Model (CESM)
coupled to an interactive dust model, synthesize paleo-dust and drought records,
and test the sensitivity of their results to changes in dust optical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
advance our understanding and knowledge of forcing and feedbacks associated with
desert dust in past periods of abrupt climate change, and determine if climate
change is more abrupt when dust is an interactive component. Through model-data
synthesis, the PIs will analyze if the inclusion of dust climate feedback in
paleoclimate simulations bring models into better agreement with observations.
Results from the transient paleoclimate simulations will be made available
online to facilitate paleoclimate model-data intercomparisons.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish
linkages between the University of Miami, NCAR, and Cornell University through
the use of CESM and the participation in the CESM Paleoclimate Working Group.
Research activities will be presented at scientific conferences, workshops, and
community outreach events, such as the science café
(http://www.rsmas.miami.edu/info/seminar-archive/msg01683.html). Knowledge
gained from this work will be used to prepare curriculum material for
undergraduate and graduate courses taught at the University of Miami. The PIs
participate in the Earth Science Women's Network (ESWN), a group that promotes
mentoring, support, professional collaborations, and career development with
other women working in science and technology. In addition, the PIs participate
in the annual RSMAS Women in Science day. This program targets sixth and seventh
grade girls, and female scientists from the Rosenstiel School lead hands-on
activities in their scientific field to engage the young participants.