* 1304291
* Holocene reconstructions of Iceland-Scotland Overflow and the Deep Western Boundary Current
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2015
* David Thornalley, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 10/31/2015
* USD 546,923.00

Changes in the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) can seriously
impact regional climate and the global hydrologic cycle. However, variations in
this ocean circulation system during the Holocene are poorly understood. The
proposed work will address this knowledge gap by generating Holocene-length
grain size records with well-constrained chronology, using high-accumulation
cores spanning the depth range of the Deep Western Boundary Current (DWBC, or
the main pathway by which water sinking in the North Atlantic flows southward at
depth). These records will complement similar records from the Iceland-Scotland
overflow, helping to define the coupling between the two circulation pathways.
In addition, the project will collect cores from both sites to produce more
detailed grain size records focusing on the past 2,000 years, when climate
forcing is relatively well understood. Interpreted in the context of model
sensitivity studies, the records will help to explain the mechanisms and
dynamics of long-term AMOC changes during the Holocene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, led by researchers at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, will improve our understanding of and capacity to
predict ocean circulation changes that are associated with climate change. The
project will support an early-career scientist in establishing a long-term
collaboration with senior researchers, and will strengthen international ties
via collaboration with scientists from the UK and the Netherlands. A graduate or
undergraduate student will be involved in the field campaign.