* 1304875
* Collaborative Research:  Atmospheric measurements of O2/N2 ratio, CO2 concentration, and CO2 isotopes in support of the Arctic Observing Network
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2014,12/31/2017
* Cynthia Nevison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Mercer
* 12/31/2017
* USD 96,488.00

This project will support a continuation of time series measurements of
atmospheric CO2 concentration, the stable isotopes of CO2, and the O2/N2 and
Ar/N2 ratios of air samples collected at Arctic sampling stations. Measurements
of O2/N2 ratio at Arctic sites, when also combined with measurements at lower
latitudes, have the potential to help quantify the magnitude of the seasonal
air-sea exchanges of O2 with the Arctic Ocean, which could be a key indicator of
biogeochemical change in a time of rapid Arctic warming. Although the land
biosphere also contributes to seasonal variations in O2/N2 ratio, the ocean
contribution can be resolved by combining O2/N2 and CO2 data to compute the
tracer atmospheric potential oxygen (APO), which is effectively an atmospheric
tracer of ocean biology and chemistry. This work will draw on support from
international collaborators, with the potential to shape Arctic O2/N2
measurements by the international community into a critical component of the
AON. Measurements of the 13C/12C ratio and 18O/16O ratio at Arctic sites also
may provide key early warning indicators of ecological change. The project will
support the archiving of aliquots of atmospheric CO2 in background arctic air to
be used for open-ended purposes by future researchers. Finally, the project will
support graduate student involvement in the collection and foster collaborations
among scientific groups engaged in measurements of O2 and CO2 isotopes in
support of detecting Arctic change.