* 1304888
* Developing a Vision and Plan for the Northern Utah Geospatial Technology Education Program (NUGTEP)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Michael Hernandez, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2019
* USD 183,336.00

This project addresses the increasing demand for a skilled geospatial technology
workforce by government and industry throughout northern Utah. Increasingly,
employers require the expertise of geospatial technicians to perform geospatial
tasks across a multitude of disciplines. To meet this demand, this project
develops the Northern Utah Geospatial Technology Education Program (NUGTEP) to
address the region's needs. NUGTEP prepares post-secondary students for
successful employment as well as providing additional educational opportunities
for individuals already in the geospatial workforce. The foundation for the
NUGTEP curriculum is the U.S. Department of Labor Geospatial Technology
Competency Model and associated best practices identified by the National ATE
Geospatial Technology Center (GeoTech Center). Specific competencies important
to the regional Utah geospatial workforce community are also being emphasized in
curriculum development. NUGTEP is divided into a two-tier structure. The new
Community College First Tier provides students with the opportunity to earn an
entry-level certificate or associate degree in Geospatial Technology. The
University Second Tier offers an advanced certificate or college minor in
Geospatial Analysis. The two-tier model provides students with opportunities to
earn credentials in Geospatial Technology, enter the workforce, or if desired,
seamlessly advance into the higher level University Tier. The project also
provides students internship opportunities that may lead to future employment in
the region. Furthermore, NUGTEP serves as a catalyst for future educational
outreach efforts in regional secondary schools, and includes the development of
summer workshops for secondary teachers who can then introduce their students to
the emerging career opportunities available in geospatial technologies.