* 1304076
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Chad Mangum, Mangum                  Chad           R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Chad Mangum of North Carolina State University to conduct a
research project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at Xiamen University in Xiamen, Fujian, China. The project title
is "An Alternative Description of Infinite Dimensional Algebras: Representations
of Twisted Toroidal Lie Algebras." The host scientist is Dr. Shaobin Tan.

The representation theory of Lie algebras has been a significant area of
mathematical research for several decades, particularly that of affine Lie
algebras (an infinite dimensional generalization of finite dimensional
semisimple Lie algebras). A generalization of affine algebras known as toroidal
Lie algebras will be the topic of this research endeavor, in particular the
twisted 2-toroidal (a natural generalization of the so-called twisted affine
algebras, as opposed to nontwisted). The realization of affine algebras as a
one-dimensional universal central extension of a loop algebra is expanded to
include Laurent polynomials in 2 variables (hence the term 2-toroidal), with the
universal central extension now itself being infinite dimensional. A Drinfeld
realization of such algebras (which defines the algebra via generators and
relations) will be sought, as well as progress toward both fermionic and bosonic
representations of such algebras.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, since the host researcher is an expert in
toroidal Lie algebras, the Fellow has the opportunity to begin cultivating an
international network of pioneers in the field. The Fellow plans to present the
results of this work at a seminar upon returning to the U.S., aiding the
dissemination of results into the relevant mathematical and scientific
communities. The results themselves are likely to have applications to other
areas of mathematics and physics (such as particle physics), which is itself a
broader impact. Sharing not only results but also other aspects of the Fellow's
EAPSI experience with others will advance the program's goals further by making
more scientists aware of them, helping to establish even more broadly the goals
of long run international collaborations and globally aware scientists.