* 1304398
* Collaborative Proposal: The Role of Arctic Amplification in Modifying Mid-latitude Atmospheric Circulation and Promoting Extreme Weather Events
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Stephen Vavrus, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 380,922.00

Intellectual Merit: recent work has suggested and demonstrated a mechanism
connecting Arctic Amplification (AA ? enhanced Arctic warming) with an increased
probability of extreme weather events in northern hemisphere mid-latitudes, as
well as a feedback to arctic wind patterns that drive further ice loss. This
study will extend this work using output from reanalyses, model simulations from
the CMIP5 archive, and experimental CESM model runs to investigate how and why
the ongoing loss of arctic sea ice and high-latitude terrestrial snow cover may
cause mid-latitude weather patterns to change. Past and projected patterns in
500 hPa heights will be analyzed using a combination of Self-Organizing Maps
(SOMs) ? a neural-network-based technique that reduces large data sets to their
representative patterns ? a new meridional circulation index, and an extreme
weather index to address the hypothesis that Arctic Amplification of past and
future global climate change promotes circulation patterns that favor extreme
weather events in middle latitudes of the northern hemisphere. The PIs suggest
that changes in the energy budget of the arctic surface, because of sea-ice loss
and earlier snow melt on high-latitude land, reduce meridional thickness
gradients, which induce generally weaker zonal flow aloft and higher amplitude
circulation features. They think these upper-level flow patterns slow the
eastward progression of large-scale atmospheric Rossby waves, favoring more
persistent weather conditions that increase the probability of extreme weather
such as cold-air outbreaks, heat waves, droughts, and heavy precipitation. They
believe the primary physical mechanism driving the change is an enhanced and
seasonally varying arctic heating: in fall/winter it is ocean-based associated
with substantial sea ice loss, while in warmer months it is land-based due
primarily to earlier snow melt and reduced soil moisture. Higher-amplitude flow
trajectories may also exacerbate sea-ice and snow-cover loss, thereby
constituting a positive feedback loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because extreme
weather events, such as temperature and precipitation extremes, are often caused
by high-amplitude, slow-moving upper-level circulation patterns, this analysis
will focus on detecting and characterizing these patterns, interpreting the
weather conditions associated with them, and identifying regions that are likely
to be affected. This study attempts to connect arctic change with the rest of
the global climate system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Changes in
extreme weather as a result of greenhouse gas accumulation will directly and
dramatically affect millions of people across the globe, thus a better
understanding and more accurate future projection of changes in the frequency,
location, and severity of droughts, floods, and temperature extremes are
urgently needed by decision-makers at all levels of society. Preliminary work
has already attracted world-wide attention via articles in prominent newspapers,
radio interviews, interviews for the Weather Channel, magazine articles, and
numerous online blogs. This will also be an opportunity for a new post-doc. The
PIs will prepare a module for the NSF-supported ?Beyond Penguins and Polar
Bears? project for K-5 teachers. Both PIs make frequent public and school
presentations on climate-change related issues, and because extreme weather is
so relevant to society at large, results from the proposed study will figure
prominently into these presentations.