* 1304917
* EAGER:Development and Application of Genetic Programming in Design and Optimization of Ultra-wideband Metamaterials
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Magdy Iskander, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2017
* USD 214,632.00

Development and Application of Genetic Programming in Design and Optimization of
Ultra-wideband Metamaterials&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the proposed work are; (1) explore the applications and
investigate the fundamental capabilities of the metamaterial technology in
electromagnetics through the use of Genetic Programming and true 3-D structures,
as opposed to traditional multi-layering approach, (2) Examine possible
miniaturization through true 3-D implementation to facilitate possible
metamaterials applications in what has been noted as the no man's land frequency
bands of a few hundred Megahertz, and (3) Use developed strategies to develop
ultra wideband (50:1) Artificial Magnetic Conductor (AMC) and absorbing ground
planes using novel flexible lightweight patterned materials in these frequency
bands. To create unique and non-intuitive 3D metamaterial structures, this work
will employ a novel approach combining Genetic Programming (GP), a novel
multidisciplinary bio-inspired optimization procedure generating optimized
computer programs as solutions, Lindenmayer-system (L-system) for creating 3-D
structures, non-linear optimization, and scripted text-based geometry input to
full wave EM simulators. Candidate metamaterial geometries will be fabricated
and tested using the rectangular transverse electro-magnetic (TEM) transmission
line test chamber that was utilized in our earlier work in this area. The
metamaterial performance will be further evaluated with antenna measurements
using an UWB dual polarization cylindrical long-slot antenna array.&lt;br/&gt;
Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;GP, having produced unique and quite successful results
in other fields but has seen limited application in electromagnetics and
promises to provide innovative solutions particularly when designing ultra
wideband systems and devices. GP provides an authentic and bio-inspired insight
in the fundamental development of the solution, thus has the potential for
guiding innovative designs, and providing avenues to break new grounds in the
optimization of electromagnetic structures. The proposed integrative and
multidisciplinary approach, therefore, is aimed at using Genetic Programming and
associated L-system to provide unique solutions and lead to more in-depth
fundamental understanding of the capabilities of the metamaterial technology
particularly in challenging application areas such that ultra wideband antenna
designs, ground penetrating radar for Unexploded Ordnance (UXO) and IED
detection, and in Radar Cross Section (RCS) applications requiring UWB
performance at lower microwave frequencies. The developed GP programs will be
disseminated via the Internet and described via publications. Additionally, the
resulting programs and the optimization approach will be incorporated into
antenna and electromagnetics courses in the University.