* 1304810
* Genetic Analysis of Indigenous Dogs from Siberia to Greenland: Implications for Interaction among their Human Companions
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Christyann Darwent, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2016
* USD 211,323.00

This project expands on a current study entitled "Genetic Analysis of
Prehistoric Canis Remains from Across the North American Arctic: Implications
for Interactions among their Human Companions (ARC-1108175)." Dogs and humans
are intimately intertwined in the Arctic, and thus this project is contributing
to anthropological and archaeological discussions concerning the movements and
cultural interactions of indigenous peoples across the north. Because of large
gaps in the human-DNA record, the original proposal not only investigates
questions of the divergence of Asian and North American dogs but also
investigates the possibility of using dog aDNA as a proxy for human movement in
the Arctic. Ancient mitochondrial DNA from pre- and post-1000 AD dogs are
compared to DNA from modern Inuit dogs (tested for independence from Eurasian
stock post-contact) from across the Arctic. This project has already had broader
impacts for Inuit identity, as the researhers have demonstrated that the Qimmiq
or Inuit sled dog is the only indigenous breed remaining in North America (north
of Mexico), and it accompanied ancestors of this region in their migration from
Siberia to Greenland at least 800 years ago. Previous work on the original award
to obtain archaeological bone and tooth samples from Alaska and Canada (North
American Museum repositories) resulted in lower pre-1000 AD dog samples than
anticipated (n=29; ca. 1/3 original estimate). Thus the PIs applied for
additional support to enable travel to the Zoological Museum in Copenhagen,
Denmark, to obtain additional pre-1000 AD samples from Alaska (three sites),
Canada (one site) and Greenland (two sites). At the same time initially positive
results and overwhelming enthusiasm from colleagues resulted in higher than
anticipated post-1000 AD samples (n=400). With more than three times original
estimate, the time to process these samples has increased; however, they are
taking this opportunity to train additional graduate students in ancient DNA
(aDNA).

In addition, the expanded funding will support the use of a new aDNA sequencing
routine known as next-generation that will provide much faster sequencing and
allow for much higher resolution sequences. Training for this method will take
place in Sweden, followed by dissemination of the method to researchers at UC
Davis. The PIs hope that using more fined-grain analysis of modern and ancient
samples using mitochondrial, Y-chromosome, STR and SNP markers, and autosomal
microsatellites will allow them to "estimate the time of divergence between East
Asian dogs and Arctic dogs," and determining whether these dogs diverged in Asia
in the late Pleistocene or later during the later Holocene. Autosomal
microsatellites may reflect enough variability to examine a proposed genetic
bottleneck associated with an epidemic and/or potential culling Inuit dogs ca.
1950-1975. This study has already provided the first study of indigenous Inuit
dogs, and now will produce an archaeological sample large enough to approximate
a biological population. It will also underscore the importance of using human
companions as a proxy for understanding prehistoric human movements and
interactions.