* 1304628
* Laser and Fiber Optics Regional Center
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Gaby Hawat, Indian River State College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,999,967.00

This project is establishing a regional laser and fiber optic (LFO) technology
center to serve states in the southeastern United States: Florida, Georgia,
Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee, Kentucky, South Carolina, and North Carolina.
It is working with a network of 10 colleges and more than 250 companies that are
participating in this regional center. Goals are 1. Continue study of the
specific technician needs of the laser and fiber optic industry in the southeast
region and establish education programs and strategies, priorities and timelines
to satisfy these needs. 2. Better define the specific area of focus for each
partner college and create education programs with the college. 3. Expand the
coalition of partner colleges with LFO education programs to meet industry
needs. 4. Enlist faculty and industry representatives to provide advice and
direction for the Center's activities. 5. Create an outreach education program
for middle and high school science teachers, counselors and administrators that
focuses on LFO topics in order to provide a pathway into the college LFO
programs. 6. Recruit and assist returning veterans and minorities to enter LFO
programs in the southeast U.S.

The college (IRSC) has been a partner of OP-TEC, the NSF/ATE National Center for
Optics and Photonics Education and has a large program. During this
collaboration with OP-TEC, IRSC authored educational modules in the areas of
optical imaging and solar energy technology. IRSC is also closely collaborating
with Corning Fiber Optical Systems for training on the latest fiber optic
technologies. Employers prefer hiring local talent because of the high turnover
rate they have experienced with technicians hired from out of state. This
project is working to establish additional LFO education opportunities at other
colleges in the region located close to employers.

Intellectual Merit: Lasers and fiber optics technologies are advanced
technologies enabling complex, sophisticated, and very expensive instrumentation
used in the biomedical field, life sciences, remote sensing, and information
technology. The United States commands global leadership in these technologies,
producing high-wage jobs in the U.S. There is an urgent need to increase the
number of LFO technicians to satisfy the high demand, maintain our world
leadership, and create more high-paying jobs. The principal partner colleges
have a proven record of operating successful LFO programs. The PIs are
experienced in the field in establishing programs, working with business and
industry, and developing networks of industry and college contacts.

Broader Impact: The Center is collaborating with the National Center, OP-TEC, to
coordinate and contribute to regional and national needs in LFO. LFO
technicians' starting salaries are well above the national average, thereby
elevating the graduates' economic status. The partnerships created by the
educator and employer networks are having a beneficial and lasting effect not
only to the local region but to the entire nation. In addition, the PI, as
member of the advisory board of the Gender Equity Cooperative, is organizing
events aimed at attracting more women and minorities into this program.
Participating in the Veterans' Retraining Assistance Program and enrolling
cohorts of veterans in LFO and Photonics program can further assist returning
veterans. These continuing initiatives are being duplicated at partner colleges.