* 1304134
* CHARACTERIZATION OF BRINE NETWORK MICROSTRUCTURE IN FIRST YEAR ARCTIC SEA ICE
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Scott Pauls, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 611,484.00

Arctic sea ice mediates the exchange of heat, fluids, and gases between the
ocean and the atmosphere, and in doing so plays an important role in global
climate. Sea ice is highly heterogeneous, with structural, chemical and phase
changes occurring on very small time and relative temperature scales. The
current rapid decline of the Arctic sea ice cover is accompanied by a transition
from multi-year ice to mostly first-year and thinner sea ice. Current
understanding of the morphology of brine networks in sea ice, and their
variability, is inadequate both for the most accurate interpretation of sea ice
data and for use in regional and larger scale climate models. Using micro X-ray
computed tomography and applied mathematics, the investigators propose to
describe in detail the morphology and variability of brine networks in first-
year sea ice. The overall goal of the proposed work is to improve our ability to
determine the transport of heat, gases, chemical species, and salts through and
within sea ice, and specifically to shed light on the brine drainage and
desalination processes and how they change with temperature. Drawing on
experience in both microstructural analysis of ice and applied mathematics, the
investigators will produce quantitative physical descriptions of pore
microstructure in first year sea ice, which can then be used to interpret bulk
properties. They will use both laboratory grown sea ice and natural first year
sea ice collected at Barrow, Alaska. As part of this project, the investigators
will design and build a system for storing and transporting sea ice cores at
their measured in situ temperature gradients, which they will share openly with
other researchers. The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in its
development of quantitative physical descriptions of pore microstructure in
first year sea ice, which can be used in interpretation of bulk physical
properties, and which will contribute to the scientific community's
understanding of sea ice cover and its role in tropospheric chemistry. It will
also contribute to the improvement of regional and global climate models, and to
the understanding of Arctic environmental processes and their role in climate
change. The broader impacts of the proposed activity include the training of a
postdoctoral scientist and direct integration of research and engineering with
education for a number of undergraduate students who will design apparatus, take
part in laboratory and field work, co-author papers, and participate in
conferences. The results of the research will be published in international
refereed journals, presented at conferences, presented in public lectures to the
Arctic community in Barrow and to other audiences, and placed on a web page. The
data will also be available through the National Snow and Ice Data Center.