* 1304863
* Advanced Technological Education for Aerospace and Advanced Manufacturing
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Robert Osnes, Everett Community College
* Continuing Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 09/30/2016
* USD 888,653.00

The Aerospace and Advanced Manufacturing (AAM) program at Everett Community
College, consisting of Engineering Technology, Machining Technology, Composites
Technology and Welding and Fabrication, are being housed in one location to
allow students to experience the different processes that occur in the
manufacturing world from the stages of ideation to the final assembly of a
product. In each of these programs, students are encouraged to broaden their
perspectives by taking electives from the different disciplines in the AAM
program. A twelve-credit Manufacturing Cycle Curriculum, leading to a
certificate in Advanced Manufacturing Essentials, is to be developed. The
Curriculum, required of all AAM students, teaches them the full process and
essential job duties of manufacturing from the design phase to quality
assurance. Students are expected to work on projects that can be feasibly
produced in one program and be able to communicate the issues that occur during
manufacturing to students in other disciplines. In addition, the AAM faculty
work with faculty in mathematics and English to create AAM-context based modules
for developmental courses so that students are prepared for the technical
courses. In professional development workshops, high school and community
college faculty develop modules to engage high school students in learning the
STEM content needed for technical programs.

The project funds career coaches to assist high school students and their
parents to become aware of technical careers and pathways that include community
college. The project also funds a Navigator position to guide at-risk community
college students to appropriate services. The evaluation measures the
effectiveness of these strategies to recruit, retain and place AAM students and
determines their preparation for the requirements of the workplace.

Worker productivity requires that workers not only have technical operation
skills, but a broader understanding of how their task relates to both the
quantity and quality of the final product. Workers' knowledge of the full
manufacturing cycle puts their work in context of not only what they do, but why
they do it and how their work relates to the company's purpose. The idea of the
AAM program is to have the different departments work together to ensure that
students understand the entire manufacturing and life cycle processes.