* 1304479
* Collaborative Research: SIMBUILDING: TEACHING BUILDING SCIENCE WITH SIMULATION GAMES
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Amanda Hatherly, Santa Fe Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2017
* USD 299,963.00

This project is developing innovative simulation games for teaching and learning
building science, integrating them into existing courses at Santa Fe Community
College (SFCC), pilot testing them at SFCC and three other community colleges in
New Mexico, and evaluating their educational effectiveness through tracking and
analyzing learner data. The versatile and powerful simulation game engine,
SimBuilding, being developed supports three types of simulation games in both
English and Spanish: diagnostics games; construction games; and operation games.
These different types of games will support both traditional students as well as
building professionals seeking continuing education to improve their knowledge
and skills. SimBuilding games allow for learner data to be automatically logged
and analyzed to assist in understanding how students learn through the games.
From this information, an intelligent tutoring system coaches the student as
needed providing personalized learning. An independent consultant works with the
project team on research and evaluation of the overall project and on
determining the effect of the games on student learning. The SimBuilding games
and associated curricular modules are being disseminated through community
college faculty workshops, outreach to high school students and teachers, and at
national building and green energy meetings and their websites.