* 1304515
* Alabama Bridge to the Doctorate UAB
* EHR,HRD
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Louis Dale, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 05/31/2015
* USD 987,000.00

The Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) is a senior
? level alliance that has an infrastructure uniquely positioned to implement a
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) program as described in the solicitation: NSF
12-564. Moreover, Alabama LSAMP has had success with previous BD programs and
has secured the experience necessary to continue the implementation of this
important national program. While gaining this experience, the alliance has
learned many lessons in implementation of a successful BD program. The lessons
learned will ensure that all BD students will transition successfully into
science; technology; engineering and mathematics (STEM) Ph.D. programs and the
professoriate and/or STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) will serve as the site of the BD program. Fourteen
underrepresented minority STEM students will be recruited nationwide to
participate in the program. Twelve of the selected students will be supported by
NSF funds and two supported by UAB funds committed to the program by the UAB
president. The recruitment efforts will be led by the dean of the college of
arts and sciences and interim dean of the school of engineering. UAB has a
proven record of recruitment, retention, graduation and placement of STEM
students in doctoral degree programs. Selected BD participants will receive an
annual stipend of $30,000 plus tuition, fees, health insurance, an assigned
faculty mentor and the opportunity to attend and participate in at least one
professional scientific meeting each year. In addition, BD participants will be
required to attend special topic seminars concerning graduate school
matriculation designed specifically for the program and procedures for applying
for NSF and other fellowships. Linkages will be established with the NSF AGEP,
IGERT and other programs. At the end of the two year award period, BD students
remaining in UAB doctoral programs will be guaranteed a continuation of the same
level of financial support through a combination of departmental fellowships and
additional financial support from the university. BD students not remaining at
UAB will be connected to doctoral programs at other institutions and will be
assisted in securing fellowship and other support at the selected institution.
All BD students will be tracked into doctoral degree programs and the workforce,
including the professoriate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will be
evaluated by the Alabama LSAMP Social Science Research Team, consisting of two
UAB social scientists involved with the regular LSAMP program. Assessment data
will be collected and evaluated at intervals during the two year grant period
and beyond. In collaboration with other BD site coordinators and national LSAMP
PIs, Alabama LSAMP will publish the annual National LSAMP BD Magazine with funds
leveraged from its regular LSAMP award. The magazine is an excellent source of
publicity for the BD program as well as an important networking tool for BD
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - The project is an important
step in advancing the knowledge of underrepresented minority students in STEM.
The experiences gained by these students working with science and education
faculty will position them for excellent career advancement and contribute to
the nation's great need for minority scientist in both research and the
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - The project broadens
participation of underrepresented groups in graduate education with the real
prospect of increasing the number of such groups attaining doctoral degrees in
STEM and entering the professoriate. Discovery and understanding resulting from
this project will be disseminated via a national BD publication to other
institutions and programs focusing on graduate education.