* 1304931
* Digitization PEN: Increasing the Robustness of the Ordovician and Pennsylvanian Dataset of PALEONICHES-TCN
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Derek Briggs, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 120,692.00

Invertebrate fossil collections hold millions of specimens that record the
history of diversity and evolution of life on earth. Over 123,000 historically
important specimens in the Yale Peabody Museum (YPM) will be recorded in a
database with identification, geologic age, and the location of where the
fossils were collected. The database, combined with similar databases from
collaborating museums and those involved with the Paleoniches Thematic
Collections Network, will show where animals lived over the course of hundreds
of million years and help us understand how long-term climate change affected
their distribution over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;YPM will hold a workshop to
teach other professionals how to database fossil collection locations through
creation of an integrated data management infrastructure that allows researchers
to view the objects on a map and analyze data. Those maps, along with
information about some of the most important fossils, will become part of a
multimedia educational cart for use in public exhibition areas. This project
will rely on employment of undergraduate student workers who will gain
experience in scientific and museum collections research. It will also provide
internships for two students in the YPM EVOLUTIONS program (NSF GEO1108086:
Track 1: GEOPATH: Geoscience Educational Opportunities Promoting Advancement to
Higher Education), an afterschool program for underserved high school students
from the New Haven, CT region. This award is made as part of the National
Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing
Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this
award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).