* 1304383
* Collaborative Research: MAPS - MetaAnalogy via Performance Specification
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Julie Linsey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2016
* USD 217,472.00

This collaborative research will define a new approach for retrieving useful
analogies for innovation based on the relevant performance characteristics of
critical functions. Analogy matching is made possible by the novel incorporation
of Non Uniform Rational B-spline (NURBs) based metamodels that enable efficient
representation of critical function performance. These metamodels are obtained
from simulations, engineering models (such as bond graphs) and/or experimental
data collections. This approach will enable multiple analogies to be presented
to the designer with a quantified match quality metric related to the desired
performance benefit to the design. The impact of this approach for inspiring
novel designs will be measured through controlled experiments measuring the
impact of the MetaAnalogy via Performance Specification (MAPS) technique at both
the conceptual design phase and throughout the design process. Working
prototypes from the experiments will allow for direct quantification of
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering innovation is critical to meet a
vast array of challenges including the grand engineering challenges of the 21st
century in the form of energy and environmental solutions. If successful,
results of the research will provide a critical foundation for new approaches to
analogy retrieval based on quantitative performance measures along with function
for use in education and industry. Class modules applying MAPS to analogy-based
innovation will be created. Workshops integrated with webinars on MAPS and
design by analogy will be used to disseminate research results beyond the
educational sector and to provide necessary educational tools to bring design by
analogy and quantification via Metamodeling into the classroom.