* 1304724
* Size Dependent Mechanical Properties for Elastic Polymer Gels
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Alfred Crosby, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project, supported by the Polymers Program of the Division of Materials
Research and the Mechanics of Materials Program of the Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation, will develop fundamental knowledge of
mechanical properties for ultra-soft materials. The primary goal will be to
experimentally investigate the effect of size scale on achieving large strain,
resilient mechanical responses in ultra-soft materials. Ultra-soft materials
with these attributes are important for numerous applications, from protective
devices to tissue engineering. Recently, many novel polymers which mimic
naturally-occurring gels, such as resilin, have been demonstrated with some
success, but these polymers are often complex and potentially difficult to
implement practically. An alternative strategy may be found by understanding the
mechanical properties of ultra-soft materials at small size scales. This
strategy is motivated by a well-known property for metals and ceramics that size
can influence the sensitivity to defects under mechanical loading. Thus, metals
and ceramics fabricated on small size scales can display extraordinary
mechanical properties. For ultra-soft materials, these effects have not been
experimentally measured. In the proposed research, scaling relationships provide
guiding hypotheses that predict the existence of optimized size scales for large
strain reversible deformations for swollen polymer networks. These hypotheses
will be experimentally confirmed using standard and novel characterization
methods on two different gel materials. The results of this research will lead
to new characterization methods and understanding for both synthetic gels and
living tissues, as well as new materials strategies for creating ultra-soft
materials that can achieve high strains, high strength, and high resiliency.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Ultra-soft materials are attractive for many technologies, from protective gear
to tissue engineering. Currently, these materials are either brittle, not
allowing them to stretch very far, or they are able to stretch far by
dissipating energy, similar to the way Silly Putty works. Recent efforts have
focused on creating new polymers that mimic the structure and properties of
biological proteins, such as resilin. However, these new materials are complex
and may be difficult to implement practically. One possible strategy for
overcoming these challenges is to take advantage of predicted mechanical
property enhancements at small size scales. It is well known that metals and
ceramics display improved mechanical performance on small size scales relative
to their molecular size scale; however, similar experimental investigations have
not been conducted on ultra-soft materials. The proposed research will
experimentally investigate the mechanical properties of ultra-soft materials at
small sizes to achieve high strains, high strength, and high resiliency. The
lessons learned are anticipated to impact the development of new protective
devices; to influence the characterization for soft materials including living
tissues; and to provoke new questions related to traumatic damage in soft
biological tissues, such as the brain. In addition, an innovative workshop
program on Bioinspired Materials Design will be developed to inspire high school
students from diverse backgrounds to pursue future careers in science and
engineering. This program will allow students and the general public in Western
Massachusetts to realize the importance of materials and mechanics research, the
role of creativity in scientific and engineering discovery, and the difficulties
that arise when bioinspiration is used without foundational principles.