* 1304681
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Fishing livelihoods and fisheries management in Northwest Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Courtney Carothers, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2014
* USD 14,962.00

This dissertation research employs an ethnographic method to analyze motivations
for individuals? participation in small-scale fisheries. The majority of
fisheries in Iceland are managed under a nationwide privatized program where
access to the right to fish is limited, and these limitations can negatively
impact small-scale fishing operations. This project aims to better understand
the opportunities and constraints that varying management schemes have on the
cultural dimensions of small-scale fisheries. The economic literature that
fisheries privatization is based upon assumes the primary motivation for fishing
to be profit maximization. However, research from around the world suggests that
a wide range of motivations for engagement in fisheries exists outside profit
generation. This research compares individuals engaged in non-privatized small-
boat fisheries with those participating in the small-boat privatized fisheries
in a two-phase design that uses methods of semi-directed interviewing and the
deployment of a questionnaire to gather qualitative and quantitative data.
Results will add to new knowledge exploring the effects that the privatization
of marine resources has on individuals? abilities to access marine resources.
This research will also bring a new perspective to fisheries management in
Iceland and abroad by providing a better understanding of the variations of
motivations in fisheries and exploring the ways political and social
institutions affect how humans organize around resources.