* 1304607
* GOALI: Novel Epitaxial Vanadium Oxide Thin Film Heterostructures Integrated with Si(100)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 595,766.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The frontier of solid state devices depends upon the
integration of materials with new properties and functionalities on a computer
chip. The funding of this project is very timely, as it focuses on the discovery
of exciting electrical, optical and magnetic properties in vanadium oxide and,
more importantly, on the integration of these properties and functions on a
single-crystal silicon computer chip. This is a major step in this field, as
present sensors are hardwired with computers, making these systems bulky and
slow. This integration allows the fabrication of novel magnetic sensors,
nonvolatile memory devices, and novel smart infrared sensors which have rapid
sensing, manipulation and response functionalities on a single computer chip. In
turn, this enables a variety of infrared, magnetic and optical sensors in night
vision and bolometer applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
epitaxial integration of vanadium oxide is achieved by the principal
investigator's (PI's) patented paradigm of domain matching epitaxy, where
integral multiples of planes match across the film-substrate interface. This
paradigm is used to control stresses and strains and thereby manipulate the
properties more precisely. To overcome interfacial interactions and maintain
single-crystal growth on silicon substrate, Prof. Narayan uses novel interposing
buffer layers and control functionalities of vanadium oxide based thin film
heterostructures. New electrical properties and functionalities are created by
pulsed laser irradiation, ion irradiation and vacuum annealing, where laser and
ion beams can be used to write functionalities in a controlled way for next-
generation smart solid state devices. This research involves close collaboration
with and technology transfer to industry (Kopin Corporation) and National Labs
(Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)). Advanced sub-Angstrom characterization
at ORNL is quite complementary to the atomic scale characterization facilities
at North Carolina State University (NCSU). This project enables close research
collaboration and training of graduate and undergraduate students from North
Carolina A&amp;T State University and Shaw University (both minority-serving
institutions). Under the leadership of the PI, NCSU has launched a Master's of
Science (MS) degree in Nanoengineering through the Engineering Online network,
where students around the globe can complete MS degrees at a distance. As a part
of this program, the PI teaches a series of courses where students learn the
latest developments in thin film epitaxy, defect control, processing,
characterization and modeling and next-generation multifunctional smart devices.