* 1304583
* Evaluating the Fitness of a Pre-RNA World Polymer by Darwinian Evolution
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,01/31/2016
* John Chaput, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Professor
John Chaput of Arizona State University to evaluate the fitness of threose
nucleic acid (TNA) as a functional genetic polymer. This project will combine
chemical synthesis with molecular biology and genetics to isolate TNA molecules
that emulate a key emergent property of life-the ability to copy genetic
information from one strand to another. The goal is to evolve TNA molecules that
can fold themselves into well-defined three-dimensional structures with
catalytic domains that can template-direct the joining of two TNA strands. This
process, referred to as ligation, would demonstrate that early genetic polymers
could have performed the chemistry necessary to copy genetic information.
Fitness will be determined by comparing the catalytic efficiency of TNA ligases
to previously discovered DNA and RNA ligases. Information from this study will
provide new insight into the fundamental chemistry of nucleic acids supported on
an "unnatural" threose sugar backbone, as relates to essential biological
function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely believed that life on Earth arose
through a series of discrete chemical steps that gave rise to organisms with DNA
genomes and protein enzymes. The path from chemistry to biology likely consisted
of many individual steps, each raising its own set of scientific questions. One
of the most interesting questions concerns the origin of DNA and the role that
alternative genetic polymers may have played in the evolution of our genetic
system. According to one hypothesis, life evolved from self-replicating genetic
polymers that could store information and catalyze reactions. Presumably, any
such molecule would have needed to store genetic information and pass that
information along to progeny molecules. In this project, we will push the limits
of the possible by examining an alternative potential scaffold for transmitting
genetic information, based upon a 4-carbon sugar backbone, and by asking whether
such a nucleic acid can copy portions of its own sequence. In addition, this
project includes an important outreach component designed to increase
participation of members of groups that are traditionally underrepresented in
the STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
(MCB) Division of the Biological Sciences (BIO) Directorate.