* 1304980
* EAGER:  Testing the Hypothesized Grand Canyon-Appalachian Connection
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* William Thomas, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 06/30/2015
* USD 111,256.00

EAGER: TESTING THE HYPOTHESIZED GRAND CANYON-APPALACHIAN
CONNECTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;George Gehrels and William
Thomas&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has a
specific goal of testing the hypothesis that some of the sand that make up the
sandstones of the Grand Canyon were supplied primarily from the Appalachian
mountains, and a more general goal of reconstructing dispersal pathways for
sediment across the US during late Paleozoic (350-245 million years ago) time.
Conducting source area studies for this time period is challenging because of
the complex interplay of mountian building processes and climate. During this
time the Ouachita-Appalachian-Caledonian mountain range formed as result of
collisional interactions during assembly of the supercontinent Pangea, the
Cordilleran mountain range experienced arc-type magmatism and several phases of
convergent tectonism, and the Ancestral Rocky Mountains were uplifted. There
were also dramatic changes in regional and global paleoclimate as North America
moved northward across the paleo-equator and as southern hemisphere glaciation
created large changes in sea level. North America accordingly serves as a
fabulous laboratory in which to examine the interplay between these disparate
processes, potentially serving as an ancient analogue of our modern world. The
hypothesized Grand Canyon-Appalachian connection is based on detrital zircon
grains of ~720-280 Ma that appear in increasing abundance in Mississippian
through Permian strata of the Grand Canyon, as reported in the June 2011 issue
of Lithosphere by Gehrels and colleagues. These young grains were interpreted to
have been shed from the Appalachian orogen primarily on the basis of
similarities with crystallization ages of Appalachian plutons and detrital
zircon ages reported from upper Paleozoic strata of the Appalachian foreland
basin. This interpretation was challenged in the August 2011 issue of
Lithosphere by Thomas because there is little evidence that clastic detritus was
transported westward out of the Appalachian foreland basins, and because the
young sediment could have been shed from other orogens (e.g. the Fanklinian
system to the north) and in part from local igneous rocks. Thomas (2011) also
proposed that testing these hypotheses by combining additional DZ provenance
data with facies relations, thickness patterns, and petrographic characteristics
of upper Paleozoic strata would enable reconstruction of the dispersal pathways
of sediment transport across North America during late Paleozoic time. We
propose to combine U-Pb age and Hf isotope determinations of ~60 samples with
traditional stratigraphic information to specifically test the Grand Canyon-
Appalachian hypothesis and more generally reconstruct late Paleozoic dispersal
pathways of southern North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three impacts beyond
the geologic contributions noted above include:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Providing
opportunities for faculty members and undergraduate students at academic
institutions near study areas to become involved in sample collection, analysis,
and interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Advancing the field of provenance analysis by
integrating U-Pb geochronology, Hf isotope analysis, and traditional
stratigraphic/sedimentologic analysis of sandstones in an effort to reconstruct
dispersal pathways and to examine linkages between tectonics and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Sharing information with the public by providing
operators of State and National Parks near our study areas with the results of
our work, following the model of the 'Trail of Time' exhibits at the Grand
Canyon.