* 1304214
* Hierarchical and Shape-Intelligent Colloidal Particles via Lithographically Patterned Layered Precursors
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Rigoberto Advincula, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2015
* USD 283,975.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The design and synthesis of nano- to micron-sized particles have been a
perennial theme in interfacial and materials science. Particles have been
prepared with a range of shape, size, and polydispersities more commonly through
the sol-gel or emulsion polymerization methods. There has been a high interest
on core-shell, hollow-shell, and hybrid particle systems. However, for polymer
particles, hollow-shell templating and emulsion polymerization methods are
largely limited to spherically shaped particles. This project aims to go beyond
these limitations by employing a high-throughput particle fabrication method
that offers various complexities in shape, size, size distribution, and core-
shell architectures through lithographic methods. Specifically, novel particles
based on lithographically patterned polymer precursor films of layer-by-layer
(LbL) polyelectrolytes with a top layer of grafted polymer brushes by surface
initiated polymerization (SIP) will be explored. The phase-interaction parameter
contrast between the two layers will enable a "lift-off and fold-in" mechanism
in a selective solvent: the LbL component folding in to form the interior core
and the SIP as the outer shell. Many of the well-documented chemistries,
fabrication methods, and applications of the LbL and SIP methods can be
incorporated. It should be possible to distribute hierarchically the chemical
species within these polymer particles allowing for anisotropically phase-
separated multiphasic particle compositions. A fundamental challenge of the
protocol is to match the kinetic and thermodynamic considerations of the
solvent, temperature, and pressure environments once the particles are released
from the surface. Various interfacial-sensitive spectroscopic, scattering, zeta
potential, and microscopic techniques will be utilized to characterize these new
colloidal materials. These particles are expected to be useful for the
encapsulation of molecules, dyes, inorganic nanoparticles as nanocarriers and
also serve as an important platform for the investigation of colloidal phenomena
in polymeric and hybrid materials that can be augmented by theory and
simulations studies.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The project will make available novel materials and products that can be used
for the pharmaceutical industry, display industry, and environmental or health
monitoring protocols. For example: drugs can be encapsulated and released by
design; new light emitting materials can be made based on encapsulated
nanoparticles, and particles with various artificial shapes and sizes can be
used to mimic harmful viruses and bacteriophages. A number of scientists and
engineers will be involved in exploring the limits of lithographic technologies
similar to processes used for the semi-conductor microprocessor industry but
applying it to particle production and investigation. An important immediate
impact is the education and training of young scientists and researchers who are
skilled in the synthesis and characterization of new materials combined with
developing high-throughput fabrication methods. Two advanced Ph.D. candidates
who are experienced and qualified in materials synthesis, colloidal fabrication,
and surface characterization will be trained. Highly qualified undergraduate
students will also be mentored. The analytical and materials expertise in the
Advincula Research group encompasses different areas of polymer materials,
hybrid materials, and surface science and has also been an effective platform
for science and education outreach among high school students. The Principal
Investigator (PI) will offer a Departmental course to include the design and
uses of colloidal particles and the importance of surface analysis in materials
research. The PI will target talented minority students and women to
participate, a commitment by the PI since the beginning of his academic career.