* 1304920
* 2013 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 01/31/2015
* USD 28,604.00

2013 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers; June 3-7 2013; Pennsylvania
State University, College Park

Modern astronomical research often involves organizing vast surveys of imaging,
photometric and spectroscopic data producing terabyte to petabyte databases and
billion-object catalogs. An alphabet soup of time-domain surveys underway in
visible light, and a new generation of radio interferometric telescopes, will
soon be producing enormous datasets. While the promise is great, the scientific
goals cannot be achieved with the narrow suite of statistical methods and old-
fashioned labor-intensive approaches in common use by the astronomical
community. Modern statistical procedures implemented with computationally
efficient algorithms are essential. However, due to the structure of
undergraduate and graduate curricula, U.S. astronomers are generally not well
trained in statistics. Most learn elementary methods through books written by
and for physical scientists and covering only a narrow range of problems,
providing inadequate conceptual foundations in mathematical statistics and
little guidance to vast fields of applied statistics.

The five-day 2013 Summer School for young astronomers in statistical inference
will present concepts and methodologies at an intermediate level, using
experienced instructors and an innovative curriculum. This is the latest in the
series of intensive week-long Summer Schools in Statistics for Astronomers,
initiated in 2005 by the group at Pennsylvania State. If maintained at a steady
state, these Summer Schools will train about 10% of the nation's young
astronomers, filling a critical lacuna in the US scientific workforce.