* 1304637
* Collaborative Research: Decoding and Predicting Greenland's Surface Melt History &amp; Future with Observations, Regional Atmospheric Modeling and GCMs
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gregory Reed, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2017
* USD 108,092.00

The investigators plan a three-year effort to improve understanding and
prediction of surface melting on the Greenland ice sheet. Satellite remote-
sensing, regional climate modeling and nonlinear analysis techniques will be
used to: assess variability of observed surface melt occurrence; benchmark
model-based melt proxies versus observed melt; diagnose synoptic-scale
meteorological/sea-ice controls on melt; and assess future change in melt
proxies based on regional models driven by CMIP5 (Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project Phase 5) general circulation models (GCMs). Understanding surface melt
on polar ice sheets is important because surface melt affects albedo, can
produce useful paleoclimatic records, contributes to mass balance through
runoff, and is a trigger for ice-shelf collapse leading to ice-flow acceleration
and sea-level rise. Improved understanding of the synoptic-meteorological causes
of melting, and of the ability of state-of-the-art models to simulate melting
accurately, would help assess the effects of future warming on melting, ice-
sheet flow and sea level rise. The investigators propose three main research
themes to help address these issues: (1) regional-atmospheric-model skill
assessments and diagnosis of present synoptic controls on surface melt; (2)
application of results from the model skill assessments to GCM-based climate
scenarios for estimates of future change; and (3) expanding satellite-based
retrieval of surface melt state characterization through retrieval of melt
magnitude using a novel fusion of passive microwave and optical/thermal
satellite data. In addition to addressing key questions relating Greenland ice
sheet balance to sea-level change, the project includes outreach to the public,
primarily through a web site, and numerous educational impacts. The project
would support undergraduate and graduate students, and involves investigators
from a primarily undergraduate institution with a significant population of
first-generation college students, and from a Hispanic-serving institution. All
data and model results will be archived and made available through the ACADIS
data center.