* 1304600
* AMTEC II
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Danine Tomlin, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 01/31/2018
* USD 3,240,279.00

The Automotive Manufacturing and Technical Education Collaborative (AMTEC)
builds on the synergies of an established industry-wide partnership between 33
community colleges and 19 automotive equipment manufacturers across eleven
states. The Center has developed, tested and disseminated an industry-driven,
standards-based, modularized automotive technology curriculum that addresses
most of the competencies industry requires of technicians. Professional
development is provided for community college faculty and high school teachers.
The work is expanded by institutionalizing the AMTEC Career Pathway, the
instructional and industry-endorsed collaboration models and by fostering an
environment of evidence-based decision-making using analytics to sustain and
improve performance. New strategies such as fault based scenarios, accelerated
learning, use of simulators, and competency-based instruction are implemented.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMTEC has developed and implemented an effective,
efficient three-tiered process to assess student achievement. Pre and post
module assessments measure student progress. End of course assessments are
developed by industry as are certification examinations. The assessments provide
information about how well students or industry candidates progress through the
industry-defined occupational standards. The data provide the evidence to be
used by partner colleges to improve their programming and curricula as AMTEC and
they make decisions about what works with students. The Center gathers data on
employer satisfaction with graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center moves
toward being a strong convener of automotive educators and the auto industry to
provide professional development of faculty and teachers, standards, curricula,
online resources, assessments and certificates that can be used by community
colleges to educate the industrial maintenance and service technicians needed by
the automotive industry.