* 1304216
* Edugaming:  Student-Teacher Collaborations to Strengthen the STEM Pipeline through Educational Game Development
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Mary Rasley, Lehigh Carbon Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie August
* 06/30/2018
* USD 794,000.00

This project builds on a previous ATE project which created four associate
degree programs in Computer Game and Simulation Development with foci on game
programming and digital arts. In this new project, the STEM education and
workforce pipeline is strengthened in several ways. Workshops are being offered
to train educators and pre-service teachers to design and develop tabletop
educational game prototypes using an "Edugaming" framework to enhance STEM
classroom education and student engagement. After the workshops these prototypes
are then computerized through a collaboration of community college students in
the Computer Game and Simulation Development major with the teachers from the
workshops. This collaboration provides unique internship experiences for the
students in which they hone their communication, teamwork, and project
management skills. The final computerized games are played by K-12 students to
strengthen their classroom learning. The players of the games are immersed in
STEM concepts, encouraging further exploration of the topics and promoting
interest in STEM careers. The community college student field experience through
the student-teacher collaborations and the structured framework for developing
educational games are models that are being disseminated through the project
website, ATE centers, publications, and conferences to reach broader audiences.
In addition, annual regional conferences are being held to bring together game
industry representatives, STEM educators, and students to engage in
conversations leading to the development of additional educational game
curricula and learning experiences that increase the number of students entering
STEM fields.

The project's evaluation plan is assessing: how the project influences the
community college and secondary students' career choices and their interest in
STEM; the instructional effectiveness of the prototype board games and the
associated computerized games that are developed; the path of community college
students who graduate, tracking how many continue on to a bachelor degree
program (and whether in STEM) and how many go directly into the workforce (and
whether the jobs are STEM-related); and on the effectiveness of the regional
conferences across all participants.