* 1304523
* Collaborative Research:   Asynchrony in the timing of goose-vegetation interactions:   implications for biogeochemical cycling in wet sedge tundra
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2018
* Karen Beard, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 01/31/2018
* USD 454,093.00

Terrestrial high-latitude ecosystems are experiencing dramatic increases in
temperature, changes in precipitation, and advancement of the growing season
with important implications for trophic interactions. Uncoupling of the temporal
relationships between migratory animals and the phenology of the forage they
rely on for energy, nutrition, and rearing of young is one of the most glaring
consequences of these changes. Furthermore, herbivores in high latitudes are
likely to mediate biogeochemical responses to climate change substantially
altering ecosystem function. However, little is known about how changes in the
synchrony of herbivore-vegetation interactions will influence biogeochemical
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be conducted on the Yukon-
Kuskokwim (Y-K) Delta in western Alaska, where there is strong evidence that
climate change is driving temporal decoupling of the evolved linkage between the
phenology of plants and the timing of goose migration. There is an urgency to
the research because: some of the most rapid climate changes in the world are
underway in Alaska, leaving migratory geese and the ecosystem processes they
influence vulnerable to new conditions, and with the rapid advancement of the
growing season, migratory goose feeding ecology is lagging substantially,
threatening an irreplaceable subsistence resource for Native
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research objective is to quantify
how an advancing growing season and changes in the synchrony of vegetation-goose
interactions alter the magnitudes and patterns of C and N cycling in the Y- K
Delta. Two specific questions will be addressed with an experiment: How does the
timing of plant growth interact with goose arrival time to alter summer-long
magnitudes of plant production, foliar chemistry, and N availability; and, How
does the timing of plant growth interact with goose arrival time to alter
summer-long magnitudes of net ecosystem CO2 exchange, gross ecosystem
photosynthesis, and ecosystem respiration? SAVANNA-YK, a biogeochemical model
that considers grazing a critical control on vegetation and trace gas processes
in the Y-K Delta, will be used to predict how these ecosystem processes and
plant-herbivore interactions will continue to change, altering the nature of
ecosystem processes and landscape dynamics in years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research is three-fold:
The focus on phenologic decoupling of migratory birds and their primary forage
on ecosystem biogeochemical cycles is the first of its kind. More specifically,
the research is the first to investigate how the timing of herbivory interacts
with plant phenology to affect biogeochemical cycles compared to other programs
that have focused on the presence or absence of herbivores and/or on herbivore
density effects on these cycles; The research is the first to take an
experimental approach to the issue of trophic mismatch in the western Alaskan
sub-Arctic while integrating these findings with forecasting ecosystem models
tailored to wet sedge systems of the north. This combination allows
investigation into how climate change effects on herbivore-vegetation
interactions will influence large spatial scales in years to come; and The
research focuses on plant species that are critical to migratory geese, while
other northern studies focusing on climate change effects have focused on tundra
plant species that are not critical to migratory bird foraging
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research will be
realized throughh several activities. First, a citizen- science observatory will
be established using protocols of the National Phenology Network. Students
throughout the Y-K delta will record goose arrival times and key phenological
events in grasses and woody plants. Second, students from Bethel Regional High
School will be recruited to assist in the field research and be given the
opportunity to develop small projects. Researchers will visit village classrooms
each spring to introduce the project, climate change, and plant-animal
interactions; share results of previous and ongoing research in the study area;
and recruit interested students. Third, Native Alaskan undergraduate students
through the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program (ANSEP) will be
recruited as field and laboratory technicians; these students may also develop
their own projects. Fourth, Virtual Science will be used with local teachers to
develop blogs, pod-casts, and instructional videos that can be distributed to
remote classrooms throughout western Alaska and beyond. Fifth, objectives and
results will be communicated to Native organizational bodies, which have
representatives from each major village, to build knowledge and support for the
research, and provide educational outlets for families who rely on geese for
subsistence. Finally, one post-doctoral researcher, one graduate student, and
several undergraduates will be provided new training, mentoring, and an
opportunity to collaborate on project activities and present their findings at
scientific meetings.