* 1304245
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Reconstructing Hydroclimatic Asian Monsoon Variability for the Past Millennium from Tree Rings:   Myanmar and Vicinity
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Caroline Ummenhofer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2017
* USD 98,200.00

More than a billion people depend upon the Asian monsoon rains, but
understanding the dynamics behind its modulations on interannual, decadal and
centennial scales is hampered by gaps in observational data. The El Ni√±o-
Southern Oscillation, along with the Indian Ocean Dipole Mode and other
phenomena, can cause severe drought and flood conditions over South and
Southeast Asia, which may intensify with projected warming. The region
surrounding Myanmar appears to represent a hinge line or transition between
major components of the Asian monsoon, but until now has remained largely
undocumented. Due to recent political changes Myanmar is now accessible to
international scientists, and this team of researchers from the Lamont Doherty
Earth Observatory of Columbia University and the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution is among the first to gain such access. This research will generate
multiple tree-ring records from teak and other species in Myanmar and adjacent
China and Thailand that have been shown to document hydrological variability in
the region. The field and analytical work will be complemented by modeling
studies of the regional monsoon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide
some of the first data from an important transitional zone for the Asian
monsoon, thereby improving present understanding and modeling of monsoon
dynamics over the past millennium. This information is critical for future
planning and mitigation of monsoon extremes. There are strong international
partnerships with scientists from Myanmar, Thailand, China, and New Zealand. The
PIs will host and train several Asian collaborators at Columbia University and
offer research experience for undergraduate students through summer internships
at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. In addition, the research will
continue their outreach to inner city students from the Manhattan Center for
Science and Mathematics. A workshop in Myanmar on monsoon-related climatology
will be conducted in the project's final year. The results of this research will
be particularly and directly relevant to the welfare, food security and forest
management needs of those vulnerable populations who live within the direct
influence of the Asian monsoon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being co-
funded by NSF's Office of International and Integrative Activities.