* 1304422
* P2C2:  Detection of Long-term Variability in Storm Tracks Using Seasonally Resolved Tree-ring Isotope Records: Implications for Hydroclimatic Change in the U.S. Pacific Northwest
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Erika Wise, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2017
* USD 639,946.00

The trajectory of incoming storms from the Pacific Ocean influences
precipitation patterns in the western United States, shaping drought and flood
events. Long-term changes in these trajectories may have resulted in North
American "megadroughts" and other extreme climate events, but little is known
about the range of variability in storm-track patterns, particularly at a
seasonal timescale. The isotopic composition of precipitation, which reflects
atmospheric circulation patterns, is recorded in tree rings. In this
collaborative study, researchers from the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, the University of Arizona, and the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, will
use seasonally resolved tree-ring data (based on earlywood and latewood widths,
&amp;#948;18O, and &amp;#948;13C) and weekly precipitation isotope sampling at
nearby sites to reconstruct storm-track position and moisture delivery pathways
to the U.S. Pacific Northwest. Four major objectives of this project are to: (1)
develop a long-term record of storm track using stable isotopes in tree rings;
(2) determine the seasonal signal embedded within the tree rings; (3) examine
controls on spatial drought patterns through time in the Pacific Northwest; and
(4) evaluate implications for future climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will help characterize the stability of the moisture-delivery system to
the Columbia River Basin, with implications for water resources. Given the
projected changes in storm track and seasonality in future climate scenarios,
understanding past limits in these systems will be important for evaluating the
potential impacts of future trends. Data generated through this project will
extend spatial coverage of tree-ring isotope records across North America. In
addition to providing research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, the researchers will collaborate with teachers in the Pacific
Northwest through citizen-science partnerships that will involve middle- and
high-school students in data collection and enhance science education in public
schools.