* 1304036
* AMP It Up! Advanced Manufacturing Partnerships: Education and Industry Working Together to Develop Highly-Skilled 21st Century Technicians
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* William J Hendrix, Gadsden State Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2018
* USD 2,068,453.00

The Consortium for the Alabama Regional Center for Automotive Manufacturing
(CARCAM), a regional NSF ATE Center led by Gadsden State Community College, is a
collaboration of eleven community colleges in Alabama working with industry and
state government to focus on advanced manufacturing in the automotive-related
industry. Together with the industry, CARCAM has developed courses and an
Associate's degree in automotive technology and graduated students needed by the
industry. Professional development is offered to incumbent workers and faculty.
Students in the program have a high rate of getting scholarships from Alabama
Automotive Manufacturers Association. The new degree programs address new and
emerging areas of clean energy, lean manufacturing, quality control, safety
robotics and workplace ethics of concern to the automotive industry. As
aerospace and aviation companies are moving into Alabama, new courses and
programs related to automotive manufacturing are being developed. New emphases
include the development of new career pathways, engaging the industry liaison
with the Alabama Department of Education, serving as a hub for promising
practices, leading expansion into new areas of employer needs, providing
professional development for faculty and teachers, and broadening participation
to minorities, women and veterans.

The goals for CARCAM are to implement a Curriculum Gap Analysis Model to update
curriculum that reflects regional industry needs, provide professional
development for faculty and teachers, to educate technicians that are highly
sought after by industry and to create networks that are valued by state
agencies and professional organizations in Alabama and neighboring states. The
evaluation concentrates on providing evidence of the extent to which these goals
are achieved.

CARCAM is successfully developing a consortium of collaborating community
colleges that works with the automotive industry and the State agencies to
contribute to economic development in Alabama and neighboring states.