* 1304872
* Collaborative Project: Geospatial Connections Promoting Advancement to Careers and Higher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Mark Manone, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 447,670.00

This collaborative project by Mesa Community College and Northern Arizona
University is developing career and educational pathways in geospatial
technology (GST) from secondary schools through two-year colleges and
universities. Components include a) course and curriculum development that
integrates GST and project-based learning as components of a broad range of
courses within colleges and secondary schools, b) sustained professional
development and support for college faculty and secondary teachers to implement
the curriculum, and c) increasing awareness of and training for GST-related
careers through internships, outreach and industry involvement. The curriculum
is aligned with the Geospatial Technology Competency Model and informed by
industry representation on the project's advisory board. The intellectual merit
of the project lies in its comprehensive approach to infusing geospatial
technology and data-processing and analytical skills within a pathway model
aligned with workforce needs. Broader impacts include building technological and
instructor capacity in GST within both urban and rural schools across the state,
engagement of students from groups traditionally underrepresented in GST
careers, and contributing to the development of the future GST workforce in
Arizona.