* 1304726
* UPDATE: Utilities Pipeline Development for Advanced Technological Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2019
* Amy Kox, Northeast Wisconsin Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Pushpa Ramakrishna
* 05/31/2019
* USD 741,146.00

The Utilities Pipeline Development for Advanced Technological Education (UPDATE)
project at Northeast Wisconsin Technical College addresses critical issues in
the advancement of educational materials to support the evolving energy
utilities industry. As the electrical power Smart Grid is being developed in all
parts of the nation, the educational and professional development products from
the UPDATE project have the potential to benefit both employers and technicians
in the energy utility industry. Supporting the development of the Smart Grid
contributes to enduring, reliable delivery of electrical power, which is vital
to economic health and national security. Project outcomes include developing
pathways both for new entrants into the energy utilities workforce and for
incumbent workers in need of currency in Smart Grid
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smart Grid technology is changing the methods
and the infrastructure used for the delivery of power on the nation's electrical
grid. The UPDATE project supports the establishment of a more highly skilled and
adaptable energy utilities workforce. This is being accomplished by producing
educational materials for utilities technician education that are enhanced with
competencies for Smart Grid technology. Additionally, the UPDATE project is: 1.
providing professional development opportunities for two-year college educators
in the energy and utilities fields; 2. establishing outreach programs to inform
middle and high school students and their teachers and counselors about careers
as utilities technicians; and 3. developing standard credentials for Smart Grid
technician education at the certificate and associate degree level. The UPDATE
project team is working with experts from the Electrical Power Research
Institute to validate the new curricular materials, identify core competencies
related to Smart Grid technician education and explore industry recognized
credentials for Smart Grid technicians.