* 1304431
* Technicians in Engineering, Automation and Machinery
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Bryan Burkhardt, Des Moines Area Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2017
* USD 199,713.00

This project is focusing on the issue of declining student enrollment in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields by offering a
retooled Applied Associate of Science (AAS) Engineering Technology (ET) degree
to meet the needs of Iowa employers for highly qualified ET workers. It is also
developing a comprehensive marketing and recruitment plan to attract students to
the program and inform them about ET career and educational pathways.
Ultimately, the program is increasing the quality and availability of
individuals in Iowa pursuing technology related careers, providing clearly
articulated educational pathways, and filling a gap in the needs of the business
community for highly qualified ET employees.

Intellectual Merit: The AAS curriculum is being developed to align with the
standards of the Accrediting Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET). This
accreditation is offering students an improved chance of finding employment or
of pursuing a baccalaureate degree through an articulation agreement with a
partner institution. Implementation of an ABET-accredited curriculum is a unique
approach to attracting more individuals, including those from underrepresented
groups, into technology related fields of study since ABET accreditation
provides assurance that a college program meets the quality standards
established by the profession. It also adds a level of confidence to
participants that the program contains the foundation and skills directly
aligned with the intended career. A critical ABET component is the continuous
improvement aspect of education, ensuring that the program exercises a high
degree of self-analysis as to content and quality. The project also includes
outreach efforts to high school students and their parents that are designed to
provide information on the careers available in ET and the benefits of pursuing
an educational path in this field. High school teachers and counselors are
receiving similar information along with professional development opportunities.
Formative and summative evaluations are assisting in determining the impact of
the retooled curriculum and its implementation at the high school level, along
with additional activities provided along the career and educational pathways
pursued by program participants.

Broader Impacts: This project is increasing recruitment, completion, and
retention of ET students through implementation of an industrially-relevant and
rigorous program of study and thereby increasing the skilled workforce in Iowa.
Employers across the state have indicated an unmet need for qualified technology
employees and studies indicate an overall lack of the middle-skill employees
that are critical to the manufacturing sector in the state. This project is
serving as a model for providing ET instruction both at the community college
level and through high school Career Academies, thus fostering an interest among
high school students as they decide upon their future educational plans. The
materials developed during this project, including the AAS and summer camp
curricula, marketing materials, and professional development materials, are
being made available to institutions across the state and the nation with the
intent that the information could be utilized and/or modified asynchronously and
independently. Articulation agreements that are being developed with four-year
institutions in Iowa are applicable to similar technology programs at community
colleges throughout the state.