* 1304807
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Impact of Arctic Sea Ice Variability on the Greenland Ice Sheet Surface Mass and Energy Balance
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Julienne Stroeve, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2018
* USD 405,907.00

The Arctic Ocean is rapidly losing its summer sea ice cover, leading to
anomalous warming of the overlying atmosphere in autumn. Concurrent with this
sea ice loss, the Greenland ice sheet has been losing mass recently, with
increased surface melt and discharge rates. These changes are of great
socioeconomic concern as continued negative trends in the extent of floating sea
ice cover and ice sheet mass are likely to have widespread impacts on climate
and global sea levels. The investigators propose that the simultaneous decreases
in sea ice cover and increased melting of the Greenland ice sheet are connected.
On the one hand, both may be largely responding to the same forcing to some
degree, such as a generalized warming signal, amplified over the Arctic. On the
other hand, it can be hypothesized that sea ice variability, through influences
on mixed ocean layer temperatures, overlying air temperatures, column water
vapor and atmospheric circulation, influences Greenland ice sheet surface melt
and accumulation. Through a combination of data analysis, process studies and
modeling, this project seeks to define the interactions between sea ice loss and
Greenland ice sheet melt and accumulation. The following major research
questions provide a framework for the study: 1) Does sea ice variability
influence Greenland ice sheet surface melt (where, when, and how)? 2) What is
the nature of storm activity around Greenland in the context of ice and ocean
conditions and how might changes in the marine environment influence Greenland
surface melt and accumulation in the future? This investigation will take
advantage of up-to-date satellite sensor data, in combination with several new
atmospheric reanalysis data products, station data and a state-of-the-art
regional climate model, performed by a research team who are specialists in
regional climate modeling, analysis of geospatial and sequential data analysis,
satellite remote sensing and hydroclimatology in the Arctic and Greenland. This
project will support students at the University of Colorado, the City College of
New York and Rutgers University. The project also includes efforts to recruit
undergraduates from underrepresented groups and will support a New Jersey high
school teacher to develop lecture plans to be disseminated to a wide audience of
K-12 educators at conferences and in journals.