* 1304137
* Seal-Tag Hydrographic Observations in Ice-Ocean Fjords, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* David Holland, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2020
* USD 325,582.00

This project involves a marine-mammal sensor-tagging approach that will allow
for sustained oceanographic observations along the periphery of the Greenland
Ice Sheet. This effort is motivated by a successful pilot project involving
ringed seals in two Greenland fjords this past summer. The pilot proved the
viability of the technique, which makes use of ringed seals who spend the
majority of their time in such fjords and who may be appropriately equipped with
integrated, location-tracking, CTD, and satellite communication instrumentation.
The observations, which will be collected in partnership with colleagues at the
Greenland Institute of Natural Resources, will be archived in national data
bases, on a project website, and made widely available to others in near real-
time. This project will address a currently missing, critical component of the
Arctic Observing Network, namely observations of ocean temperatures and
salinities along the periphery of the Greenland Ice Sheet. The methodology will
lead to a practical, sustainable data stream for hydrographic properties in the
notoriously difficult to access regions of the Greenland inner fjords, thus
further filling out the overall Arctic Observing Network data portfolio. Such
observations are needed to develop improved physics that can subsequently be
directly used in IPCC class, coupled climate models. The data collection will
also be of immense value to researchers studying the behavior of the ringed
seals in Greenland. Virtually no behavioral data exists for these seals in the
ice-ocean fjords, and the project data can be used to learn about the habitat
and distribution of the seals, and ultimately of their possible vulnerability to
climate change.