* 1304953
* An Investigation of Best Practices and Lessons Learned from LSAMP Bride-to-the-Doctorate Programs
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Lesia Crumpton-Young, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2014
* USD 598,140.00

Recent statistics show that very few US citizens pursue graduate studies in STEM
fields. Of the US citizens that chose to pursue graduate studies in STEM fields
a small percentage of these students are from historically underrepresented
groups. Of those that chose to pursue graduate studies in STEM fields, there are
many factors that enhance or inhibit successful matriculation through the
graduate school process. Thus, researchers from the Center for Advancing Faculty
Excellence(CAFE'), Florida A&amp;M University, and Prairie View A&amp;M
University will work closely with LSAMP BD Program Sites to perform a
descriptive research investigation aimed at identifying best practices and
lessons learned strategies that can be employed within STEM graduate programs to
broaden participation while ensuring student success. As a result of
successfully completing this descriptive research investigation, a blueprint for
designing and implementing various practices, procedures, and policies proven to
ensure the success of broadening participation in STEM graduate education
programs will be created. The creation of this blueprint describing best
practices and lessons learned will allow valuable information to be shared among
STEM graduate program faculty, staff, students, administrators, and other key
stakeholders. It is envisioned that this resulting blueprint will become the
conduit by which graduate programs can successfully produce the talent needed to
fuel the STEM workforce of the future. Hence, this blueprint will serve as a
valuable resource to the national STEM community.