* 1304404
* Empowering the visually impaired by understanding links between tactility and properties of surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Christian Schwartz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2014
* USD 147,864.00

In blind or visually impaired (BVI) individuals, a primary means of delivering
information is through tactile channels such as Braille and raised-line
illustrations. However, these systems present complications in translating non-
tactile information to these forms, and also result in cumbersome and space-
consuming materials for instruction and communication of technical and artistic
ideas. This is a considerable hindrance to the ability of BVI persons to fully
participate in engineering and the sciences, which rely heavily on the
presentation and manipulation of graphical information during instruction and
peer discussion. A revolutionary improvement in technology is required to
address this issue. Currently, there is a lack of fundamental science to address
how surfaces can be manipulated to convey tactile information. Thus, there is a
critical need to better understand the causative relationships between surface
properties (mechanical, textural, thermal, chemical) and the resulting tactile
attributes of surfaces (texture, softness, abrasiveness, etc.), as well as a
need to train engineers to objectively consider tactility and other sensory
attributes during design. Addressing these needs will have a transformative
effect not only on the materials science-based understanding of human
interaction with surfaces, but also on the paradigms of education and
professional occupation of the visually impaired. The objectives of this
proposed work are to test the hypotheses that: 1. Surface tactility can be
described quantitatively by a collection of objective tactile descriptors and
associated scores, 2. Objective causal relationships exist that relate tactile
attributes to engineering-based surface properties, 3. Tactility can be used
with a problem-based learning approach to educate engineers to address sensory
design goals, as well as attract BVI students to study engineering and science
in college. This work will employ a thorough experimental approach. Quantitative
Descriptive Analysis (QDA) will be used with human evaluators to meticulously
identify and quantify the individual tactile descriptors of both textile and
solid polymer surfaces. Surfaces will also be analyzed by a number of methods
including tribological testing, dynamic mechanical analysis, and surface
topography measurement. Statistical and neural network techniques will be
employed to identify and investigate relationships between the tactile
descriptors and the surface property values. The research tasks will be closely
integrated with the educational activities of this work through a number of
innovative mechanisms. Intellectual Merit. This work is novel and transformative
because it will be the first broad engineering based approach to understanding
how to directly control and optimize the tactile feel of a variety of surfaces
and thus produce insights into efficient means of conveying tactile information.
This knowledge will also foster new fields of research that will bridge the gap
between engineering and neuroscience. Control of tactility will revolutionize
paradigms in such fields as haptic displays and textiles, but more importantly
will open new doors into the possibilities for educational tools for BVI
students as well as technologies to facilitate greater participation of these
persons in engineering and science. There is a unique synergy with the
biotribology and polymers background of the PI and the resources of his
institution that maximize the probability of successful completion of this work.
Broader Impacts. These results will have far-reaching impact on the fundamental
understanding of the materials science based origins of tactility. The work will
also serve as an instructional platform to expose students to design experiences
that incorporate sensory assessment of engineered products. A problem based
pedagogical approach, termed iSENSE, will be incorporated into graduate and
capstone design courses. A goal of iSENSE is to enable engineering students to
transcend discipline paradigms in order to address real-world design challenges
that involve sensory assessment. iSENSE also targets the recruitment of middle-
and high school BVI students to engineering and science, by their participation
in PI-led enrichment courses that will incorporate tactility into engineering
design inspired activities. Undergraduate engineering students will work on
design projects to develop instructional technology to help facilitate the
learning of the BVI students during these enrichment courses.