* 1304686
* CO2 evasion from the Greenland ice sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Andrew Jacobson, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 338,987.00

Total freshwater runoff from the Greenland ranks among the 12th and 13th largest
rivers of the world, yet analyses of its geochemistry are surprisingly sparse.
Insufficient data are available to identify what carbon cycle feedbacks
presently occur and how they might change in the future. Preliminary research
suggests that rivers draining the Greenland Ice Sheet yield a previously unknown
flux of CO2 to the atmosphere: water emerging from beneath the Russell Glacier
in West Greenland has CO2 partial pressures 3 to 10 times supersaturated with
respect to atmospheric equilibrium, likely originating from subglacial microbial
metabolism. Despite consumption through chemical weathering during downstream
transport, some of this CO2 evades to the atmosphere. Key questions concern if,
how, and to what extent CO2 evasion will either increase or decrease as the ice
sheet decays in a warmer world. Through seasonal samplings and targeted
hypothesis testing, this project aims to improve understanding of modern-day
processes. The work would focus on a source-to-sink characterization of the
Akuliarusiarsuup Kuua River, from its origin at the terminus of the Russell
Glacier to its mouth at the head of the Kangerlussuaq Fjord. The objective is to
measure and model downstream gradients for pH, major ions, dissolved organic
carbon, carbonate system parameters, and the carbon isotope composition of
dissolved inorganic carbon. In addition, the oxygen and hydrogen isotope
composition of water will be used to identify water sources and flow paths, and
the radiocarbon content of dissolved inorganic and organic carbon will constrain
the age of the carbon. These data would be used to test five hypotheses designed
to elucidate how microbial activity, hydrologic processes, and chemical
weathering regulate the magnitude of CO2 evasion. In addition to teaching and
training a Ph.D. graduate student, the PI would advise undergraduate student
researchers who would conduct fieldwork and write senior honors theses. The PI
and his student group would also engage K-12 underrepresented minorities in
education and outreach activities illustrating the greenhouse effect and its
relationship to the proposed study.