* 1304544
* Collaborative Research:  Integrated Characterization of Energy, Clouds, Atmospheric state, and Precipitation at Summit (ICECAPS)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Ralf Bennartz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2019
* USD 457,661.00

In 2010, the observatory at Summit, Greenland, in the center of the Greenland
Ice Sheet (GIS), was expanded to include a comprehensive suite of cloud-
atmosphere observing instruments including microwave and infrared spectrometers,
cloud radar, depolarization lidar, ceilometer, precipitation sensor, sodar, and
a twice-daily radiosonde program. This observing effort was termed ICECAPS
(Integrated Characterization of Energy, Clouds, Atmospheric state, and
Precipitation at Summit). A continuation of this project is proposed here, with
moderate enhancements to include atmospheric aerosol observations. Measurements
from this expanded instrument suite will be used to derive critical baseline
atmospheric data products including:&lt;br/&gt;* Atmospheric State -
tropospheric temperature, moisture, and wind profiles&lt;br/&gt;* Aerosols -
concentration of total particles and cloud condensation nuclei&lt;br/&gt;* Cloud
Macrophysics - occurrence, vertical boundaries, temperature&lt;br/&gt;* Cloud
Microphysics - phase, water content, and characteristic particle
size&lt;br/&gt;* Precipitation - type and rate&lt;br/&gt;Together these
products, when combined with similar ongoing measurements at Summit, can be used
to study processes that impact the surface energy budget and precipitation at
the site, as well as addressing questions related to atmospheric stability,
cloud phase composition, the persistence of stratiform clouds, and aerosol-cloud
interactions. It is further anticipated that these observations will continue to
be used by a broad cross-section of the scientific community to promote
understanding of GIS and Arctic climate, validate satellite observations, and
evaluate model simulations. Graduate students play significant roles in most
aspects of this project, gaining valuable experience with polar field work,
operating instruments, and processing data. In addition, this research team has
developed a unique education and outreach plan to work with students from local
schools using simple, proxy instrumentation to help develop their understanding
of atmospheric principles and observations, and to enhance the scientific
curriculum in their schools via a wide range of outreach activities.