* 1304821
* Linking Employers and Academic Needs
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* John Floyd, Eastern Shore Community College
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 06/30/2017
* USD 198,248.00

This project is assuring that students complete certificates or AAS degrees in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) related fields;
increasing opportunities for women and under-represented students; and enhancing
and disseminating the Lean Internship Model within the college and other
academic institutions. It is also providing on-site faculty professional
development at the nearby NASA Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) and the Navy
Surface Combat Systems Center (SCSC) to enhance faculty understanding of
aerospace and defense industry education needs. It is building on a successful
American Association of Community College (AACC) Mentor Links ReConnect project
supported by NSF. The internship program initiated through that effort is being
further developed and enhanced into a scalable model using LEAN principles to
maximize efficiency and provide the best value and outcomes for students and
industry customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary project audiences are
students enrolled in AAS degree programs in Electronics Technology; Electronics
Technology: Computer Technician Specialization; and Business Technology:
Information Systems Technology Specialization. Other eligible programs include
Certificate Programs in Computer-Aided Drafting and Design; Electronics;
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning; Industrial Maintenance Technology;
Information Systems Technology; and Welding. The focus is on Career Pathways for
STEM programs that provide science and engineering technicians for NASA WFF,
Navy SCSSC, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and related
aerospace and defense industry support contractors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is expanding and
developing new internship pathways that prepare students for entry-level STEM
careers. It is ensuring that local students have the opportunity to improve
their technical education and motivating them to successfully complete
credentials and obtain technological employment locally and in the broader
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project is advancing knowledge
and understanding within community college STEM programs by providing a model
that builds industry partnerships and results in student internships and faculty
professional development. These academic and industry partnerships are promoting
teaching, training, learning, and diversity in the technical workforce and
positively impacting the geographically isolated, low-income, and ethnically
diverse population area served by the college both academically and
economically.