* 1304007
* RUI:  Collaborative Research: Fire regime influences on carbon dynamics of Siberian boreal forests
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Scott Goetz, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 370,883.00

Boreal forests cover 40% of the vegetated land area above the Arctic Circle and
are a critical component of arctic ecosystems. Global change models predict
boreal forests will become increasingly susceptible to fire activity with
climate warming. Because these forests contain a large proportion of global
terrestrial carbon (C) stocks, changes in the fire regime are likely to alter
global C cycling. Increased fire activity will increase C emissions to the
atmosphere, with a potential positive feedback to climate warming. However, an
altered fire regime may also initiate cascading effects on forest regrowth and
permafrost degradation that could magnify or offset this feedback. Fire effects
on these ecological mechanisms remain uncertain but will ultimately determine
whether arctic ecosystems act as a C source or sink under future climate change
scenarios. The primary objective of this research is to increase our
understanding of post-fire C dynamics in boreal forests of the Siberian arctic
by elucidating the ecological mechanisms by which increased fire severity could
influence C accumulation and storage over the successional interval. The
overarching hypothesis is that post-fire soil organic layer (SOL) depth
regulates net ecosystem carbon balance (NECB) through indirect impacts on forest
regrowth and permafrost stability because of its role as a barrier to seed
germination and thermal regulator. The team will: 1) link near term fire effects
on SOL depth to changes in larch recruitment and permafrost characteristics in
experimental burn plots created in 2012, 2) determine the relationship between
post-fire stand structure and above- and belowground C pools at the local and
landscape level across stands of varying age and topographic positions, and 3)
test via experimental manipulations and field observations the mechanisms by
which fire-driven changes in stand density indirectly affect moss growth, SOL
development, and susceptibility of deeper C pools to warming, decomposition, and
release into the atmosphere. This research will offer novel insights into the
importance of both vegetation and soil processes within arctic ecosystems in
determining the net feedback of an intensified fire regime to the climate
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Larch forests of the Siberian
arctic comprise 20% of all boreal forest ecosystems and are distinct from other
boreal forests in that they consist of a single tree genus (Larix spp.) with a
deciduous growth habit and often grow on continuous, C-rich ?yedoma? permafrost.
Thus, their response to warming climate and an altered fire regime is likely to
differ from boreal forests in other regions. Uncertainties regarding current C
pools in Siberian boreal forests remain a significant factor affecting our
ability to predict climate-induced changes to the global C cycle. The proposed
study will contribute to our understanding of how arctic forest fires impact
global C cycling and provide essential data necessary for scaling-up arctic C
pools, estimating C emissions from arctic fires, and calibrating predictive
models of future global C cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will result in the training of undergraduate and graduate students from
two predominantly undergraduate institutions and one Hispanic-Serving
Institution. The PI and her students will develop outreach activities with local
K-12 schools in south Texas to help teachers create lesson plans involving
arctic science, boreal ecology, and climate change and involve researcher
presentations to science classrooms to provide real-life examples of arctic
research and expose K-12 students to different career and educational paths in
the sciences.