* 1304591
* GeoTech Center: Innovation in Geospatial Information Science and Technology Education
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2020
* Vincent DiNoto, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2020
* USD 2,976,294.00

The National Geospatial Technology Center of Excellence (GeoTech Center) is a
collaboration of two-year colleges, universities, professional organizations,
and industry focused on a specialized set of information technologies referred
to as Geospatial Information Science and Technology (GIST). The GeoTech Center
embraces the opportunity to provide systemic educational change in GIST and
assist in the proliferation of successful learners, thereby expanding the field
with a well-qualified workforce having a recognized set of industry-defined
skills and competencies. The goals of the GeoTech Center are to: 1) Build a
Community of Practice focused on GIST by forging relationships between
professionals from industry, government and academia; 2) Create and disseminate
relevant GIST Curricula and pedagogical tools based upon the current needs of
the geospatial industry and the expanding community of ancillary users; 3)
Facilitate professional development by offering faculty access to innovative
teaching strategies, insight into GIST in related STEM fields, and tools to
address differing learning modalities; 4) Provide resources to include a
national map of programs, GIST competency assessments, model courses, programs,
and additional services through the GeoTech Center Clearinghouse; and 5) Support
student success in GIST through the creation of competency protocols, career
pathways, and career clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GIST field is important
to a variety of industries and therefore it is important to have an educational
leader that can meet its existing and changing workforce demands. This Center
builds upon previous work and clearly outlines the next steps that are needed,
including developing pedagogical methods, in-depth curricular content, and
student and faculty resources. These efforts create a community of practice
focused on Geospatial Information Science and Technology, as it brings educators
together to work on industry-defined needs and demonstrate a broad, national
impact on education that will help the US remain globally competitive as
essential core needs of the GIST industry are achieved.