* 1304941
* Digitization PEN: Digitization of two Important Medium-sized Collections to Join the North American Bryophytes and Lichens TCN
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Michael Donoghue, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 70,980.00

An award is made to join the University of Minnesota (MIN) and the Yale
University (YU) herbaria to the North American Lichens and Bryophytes: Sensitive
Indicators of Environmental Quality and Change Thematic Collections Network
(LBCC TCN). A total of 91,300 lichen and bryophyte specimens will be imaged and
georeferenced. Historical records of lichens and bryophytes, along with
geographic coordinates of collecting localities, are ideally suited for
investigating a variety of questions related to global environmental change. The
collections included in this PEN are each important regional repositories of
North American specimens, and digitizing them will fill a considerable gap in
the TCN's goal of digitizing nearly all lichen and bryophyte specimens in North
America and add historically important specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
resulting from this project will be of immediate use to scientists who study how
ecosystems respond to climate change and who use lichens and bryophytes as
indicators of air quality. Societal benefits of this work include improved
understanding of what causes ecosystem change and how environmental change may
affect human health, our economy, and our environment. This project introduces a
new generation of students to museum collections by offering internships to high
school students of diverse backgrounds and by involving undergraduates and
graduate students in project activities. This award is made as part of the
National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the
Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting
from this award will be available through iDigBio.org.