* 1304694
* Hybrid Materials for Life Science Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Lia Stanciu, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 03/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research in
support of the 2013 Materials Research Society Spring Meeting titled "Hybrid
Materials for Life Science Applications" is cofunded by the Biomedical
Engineering program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems. This Materials Research Society Symposium will focus on
applying basic science and engineering principles that advance the design and
synthesis of novel materials with emphasis on the following: Synthetic routes,
including precursor development and functionalization; Interface structures in
biological-inorganic materials; Structure-property relationships in hybrid
biological materials for electrical, optical, mechanical, chemical,
electrochemical, and photochemical applications; Materials and devices for
sensors and detectors, biocatalysts, bio imaging, devices with integrated
biological functionality; Absorption, adhesion, and adhesion promoters for
biomolecules on inorganic surfaces; Smart biomaterials and drug-delivery
devices; Functional biopolymers/ inorganic materials; Modeling and simulation of
properties and behavior of multiple scales in hybrid biomaterials; and
Immobilization of biomolecules at surfaces. The planned sessions will provide
cutting-edge scientific program and discussion forum that focus on specific
fundamental and applied science and engineering challenges that would facilitate
the translation of biomaterials and tissue engineering sciences to biomedical
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program serves to educate biomaterials
and tissue engineering communities in the highly relevant areas with an
interdisciplinary research in chemistry, biochemistry, analytical science,
materials science, and physics. The symposium has not only excellent
geographical diversity, but also includes many women, underrepresented minority
scientists, and young and senior investigators among the invited speakers and
discussion leaders. They will have the opportunity to interact with leading
scientists throughout the conference, and will be able to present their own
work. These interactions are expected to develop important synergies and
collaborations with professional colleagues.