* 1304152
* Collaborative Research:The Climatic Role of Permafrost- As permafrost thaws, could a weakening terrestrial freezer and an increasingly leaky bathplug amplify Arctic climate change?
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Mark Serreze, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 410,878.00

The Arctic is experiencing rapid environmental change ranging from diminishing
sea ice extent, to warming permafrost, to melting and mass loss on ice sheets
and glaciers. It is important that we advance our fundamental understanding of
the drivers, impacts, and feedbacks of changes in the Arctic?s physical system
and how they relate to Arctic and global climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential thaw of permafrost has received much attention in recent years as a
diagnostic measure of climate change, yet we still do not fully understand the
physical role that permafrost plays in the climate system. The unique physical
attributes of permafrost impose particular constraints upon aspects of the
climate system. For example, annual freezing and thawing of the ground and water
in the ground provides a seasonal damping mechanism through the consumption and
release of latent heat. On longer timescales, cold ice-rich layers of deeper
permafrost can draw in considerable amounts of energy before breeching an
isothermal condition and rising above the freezing point. In essence, permafrost
acts as a terrestrial subsurface freezer. The ice matrix in permafrost soils
inhibits drainage, which leads to saturated near-surface soils and phenomena
such as a perched water table and an ice-rich transient layer at the base of the
active layer. Permafrost can in some respects be considered as a bathplug at the
base of the active layer that causes the active layer bathtub to fill (often
with snowmelt water) seasonally. The existence of such processes, their
seasonality and spatial occurrence are all expected to change, but the impacts
remain undiagnosed. Until recently, climate or Earth system models have not
contained sufficient process representation to allow investigation into the
coupled land-permafrost-atmosphere- climate system. Model capabilities in the
Community Earth System Model (CESM) and its terrestrial component the Community
Land Model (CLM) have advanced considerably in recent years to the level that
the role of permafrost on the physical climate system, in both the present
climate and in a possible future with much less permafrost, can now be
meaningfully investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the contribution
of permafrost to present and future climate trajectories, this project will
conduct a series of targeted model experiments with the latest version of CESM-
CLM. The researchers will seek answers to the questions: What control does
permafrost, as a terrestrial ?freezer? and ?bathplug,? exert on Arctic climate?
and How will a loss of permafrost feed back onto the amplitude, seasonality, or
rate of Arctic climate change?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical experiments will
be conducted in both off-line and coupled simulations with various influences of
permafrost on the climate system artificially manipulated to illuminate the
present-day role of permafrost on the climate system and how its loss can
feedback onto climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
research begins with an evaluation of CLM?s capabilities in the Arctic. The CLM
model is used extensively by the broader science community. Through a series of
experiments they expect to gain an understanding of the mechanistic role of
permafrost within the climate system and how those mechanisms will influence the
trajectory of overall Arctic change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the work are several. Understanding the longer-term impacts of permafrost on
the climate builds intellectual capital that can aid with seasonal to decadal
prediction with feedbacks to forecasting. Arctic change both hinders and
encourages socio-economic development, thus system-wide understanding will aid
efficient and responsible use of regional resources. Through the support of a
graduate student the project will contribute to the next generation of
researchers and improve scientific literacy, as the student is exposed to the
cutting edge of climate modeling and develops analytic skills that can also
translate to numerous sectors of the economy.