* 1304103
* Advancing Manufacturing through Applied STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Mark Hendrickson, Chippewa Valley Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Heather Watson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 797,298.00

Collaborating with rural secondary schools, representatives from the
manufacturing industry, and a learning technology company, Chippewa Valley
Technical College (CVTC) is developing a Mobile Simulation Laboratory and
associated curricula to bring advanced manufacturing equipment and simulation
technologies directly to high school teachers and students. Curricula are broken
down into four modules: Machining, Welding, Automation, and STEM in
Manufacturing. High school teachers are working alongside CVTC faculty to team-
teach the Mobile Simulation Laboratory modules. Students completing the modules
receive college credit and are encouraged to matriculate into postsecondary
manufacturing programs. The regional manufacturing industry support the project
in an advisory capacity, informing curricula and interacting directly with high
school students through guest speaking events and company/plant tours. A week-
long professional development workshop at CVTC will be held for high school
teachers prior to the Mobile Simulation Laboratory's launch. The goal of the
project is to expand STEM education opportunities, particularly advance
manufacturing education to rural, underserved areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project increases interest in advanced manufacturing among high school students
which leads to increased enrollments at postsecondary manufacturing programs.
Through rigorous evaluation and dissemination of project results, combined with
targeted rural outreach and professional development, the project contributes to
the economic development of the northwestern region of Wisconsin by addressing
the need for more qualified technicians in advanced manufacturing.