* 1304391
* Leadership Capacity Building for Manufacturing and Manufacturing-related Programs
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Steven Wendel, Sinclair Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Heather Watson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 764,765.00

Sinclair Community College along with its educational and industry partners, is
conducting this project to build leadership capacity for faculty in
manufacturing and manufacturing-related programs at community colleges and high
schools.

Intellectual Merit: The project is based on up-to-date research on teaching and
learning, and the problems experienced by US community college manufacturing
technology programs, as well as studies by Society for Manufacturing engineers
(SME). The project takes into consideration the rapid knowledge change in the
manufacturing sector within the framework of the Four Pillars of Manufacturing
Knowledge: Materials and Processes; Product, Tooling and Assembly; System and
Operators; and Competitiveness. Project activities include: 1) providing a
comprehensive 100-hour leadership capacity building program for three cohorts of
instructional leaders; 2) conducting expanded pre-college outreach focused on
manufacturing careers; 3) disseminating information and resources to
postsecondary faculty members and high school teachers.

Broader Impacts: The project has the potential to have a significant impact on
the preparation of the next generation workforce in advanced manufacturing. It
is preparing 80 manufacturing related educators to lead their manufacturing
curriculum aligned with the Society for Manufacturing Engineers approved
manufacturing education standards. The participants represent 30 institutions
(20 two-year degree offering institutions and an additional 10 secondary
institutions) and the program is affecting an estimated 1,000 students seeking
two-year manufacturing related degrees and an estimated 500 pre-college students
per year.