* 1304678
* SaTC Cyber Cafe
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2013
* Wenke Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 10/31/2013
* USD 53,445.00

NSF's Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program now spans multiple
directorates. Of particular relevance to this proposal, the Social, Behavioral
and Economics (SBE) Directorate is now an important part of SaTC. Increasingly,
it is recognized that computer security involves humans and applications, the
forte of SBE's research, in additional to the traditional technical problems the
Computer Science community, the mainstay of the CISE Directorate, have worked
on. Applications of interest are those related to "critical infrastructures",
such as electricity delivery, financial systems, and healthcare, all of which
offer unique security and privacy concerns in addition to requiring traditional
security solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its importance to an eclectic
view of computer security, too few proposals integrating social science research
and security have been submitted to SaTC. The purpose of the "Cyber Café" is to
help promote more interest in proposals that are at the intersection of social
science and more traditional computer security research. It is expected that the
Cyber Café will foster collaborations between the social science and traditional
security communities by informing each of the communities to research interests
of the other community and in general helping the two communities build teams
that will submit proposals to future SaTC solicitations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Cyber Café will be entirely virtual.
Participants will have access to this meeting by phone and the Web but in a
manner that promotes collaboration, interaction, and team building.