* 1304342
* Cybersecurity Program Development
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Calhoun Calhoun, Santa Fe College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

To respond to the needs of both private sector employers and the U.S.
government, this project is designed to develop a program to educate highly
skilled and effective cybersecurity technicians. Not only is there a shortage of
qualified workers in the field, but there is also a lack of skills among many of
those already in the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
the project is to increase the quantity and capacity of qualified cybersecurity
technicians in the workforce. The college is accomplishing this by:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Expanding the cybersecurity curriculum offered by the Networking
Services Technology program at the college to include an 18 credit hour
cybersecurity certificate and an introductory cyber awareness and cyber safety
module which is being taught in all entry-level information technology courses
both at the college level and at the secondary level. &lt;br/&gt;2. Increasing
the diversity of the Networking Services Technology (NST) student population by
significantly escalating the recruitment and retention of female students into
these programs. &lt;br/&gt;3. Developing and strengthening career pathways from
local secondary and rural vocational schools to the cybersecurity curriculum at
the college. &lt;br/&gt;4. Providing professional development opportunities for
college faculty and collaborating secondary school teachers for building
capacity and continued growth in cybersecurity education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Available curriculum and models from
other colleges, many of which were funded by previous NSF grants, are being
utilized in development of this project. In particular, a collaborative effort
with the Center for Systems Security and Information Assurance (CSSIA) is
informing the project with best practices. These models are being applied to the
college programs, with modifications to meet the needs of students and the
community. Program design is incorporating multiple entry and exit points to
facilitate life-long educational and career pathways for technicians already
employed in the workforce. New models are being created that can be successfully
replicated. Throughout the process, success is being evaluated by tracking the
number of cybersecurity graduates, the number of female graduates, and the
number of students who articulate from secondary schools into college credit
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project is building
capacity and strengthening career pathways in cybersecurity between secondary
schools and college credit programs. The design is incorporating elements that
impact secondary students, teachers, and schools in the two rural counties in
the college service district as well as surrounding counties in the region;
students and faculty at the college; members of the current workforce in the
community who need to retrain or upgrade their skills; and regional employers
who need staff with current credentials, training and expertise in
cybersecurity, cyber awareness and cyber safety. Best practices for female
retention and recruitment, including the development of a female mentoring
program and a female post-secondary cybersecurity competition team, are
increasing participation by women in computer and information technology
programs. Professional development opportunities are preparing secondary
teachers and college-level faculty to deliver effective cybersecurity
curriculum, and continued professional development opportunities are sustaining
their currency for teaching effectively. To ensure the widest exposure and
benefit, introductory cyber awareness and cyber safety modules are targeting
general computer users and are being integrated into a large number of
information technology classes, secondary schools, and online to the general
public, employers and other organizations.