* 1304355
* CAREER: Selective Thermal Processing of Biomass-derived Oxygenates by Catalytic Fast Pyrolysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* George Huber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 156,573.00

CBET-0747996, Huber

Intellectual Merit: Lignocellulosic biofuels will become increasingly important
as our society moves away from petroleum-derived resources. The current
roadblock for lignocellulosic biofuels is the lack of economical conversion
processes. The ideal process would selectively produce a liquid biofuel from
solid biomass in a single reactor at short-residence times without co-feeding
hydrogen. We have recently observed that gasoline range aromatics and olefins
can be produced from solid biomass-derived feedstocks in high yields (40 %
carbon yield) in a single reactor at short residence times (10-20 s) without co-
feeding of hydrogen gas over zeolite based catalysts. This introduces a new
concept for biofuel production, which we call catalytic fast pyrolysis. The
hypothesis of this project is that aromatics, alkanes and olefins, all potential
biofuels and biofuel feedstocks, can selectively be produced from thermally
unstable biomass-derived oxygenates in the gas-phase using appropriate
heterogeneous catalysts. We will study the catalytic fast pyrolysis of biomass-
derive oxygenates with three main objectives: 1) Elucidate the chemical reaction
pathways for conversion of biomass-derived oxygenates over heterogeneous
catalysts in the gas-phase. The reactions underlying this process have not been
studied in detail and one of our first goals is to understand the possible
chemical pathways related to these reactions. Our feedstocks include glucose,
sorbitol, cellulose and lignin model compounds. 2) Determine how catalytic
properties (including: pore structure, acid-base strength, nature of active
sites) change the reaction pathway. 3) Develop methods for studying the
conversion of thermally unstable molecules in the gas-phase. Biomass-derived
molecules generally have a low thermal stability. To avoid thermal decomposition
reactions - reactors must be used that allow rapid heating of the feeds (i.e.
500oC/s). We will test three reactor concepts in this project: micro-flash
pyrolysis, down-flow moving-bed, and fixed-bed. These reactors will allow us to
vary the heating rate, space velocity, and contacting patterns.

Broader Impacts: The proposed program integrates research on biofuels with an
educational and outreach component that are designed to demonstrate the
importance of Chemical Engineering in the area of biofuels and renewable energy.
While it is generally accepted that Biology and Biotechnology are vitally
important for biofuels it is less well known that Catalysis, and Chemical
Engineering are equally important. I plan to educate the scientific community,
the general public, media and policy makers on the importance of Catalysis and
Chemical Engineering in relationship to biofuels and renewable energy through a
series of workshops, reports, and poplar science discussions. I also plan to
integrate renewable energy into the core Chemical Engineering curriculum by
developing a course on Energy Technology, creating an energy specialization in
the Chemical Engineering program, and integrating energy concepts into the core
Chemical Engineering curriculum. I have helped establish a multi-disciplinary
Institute at UMass-Amherst focused on biofuels whose aim is to integrate
research and education. I am also working to recruit, mentor and support
minority students in the engineering program by working with Northeast Alliance
for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (NEAGEP), which supports efforts to
recruit and mentor students from population groups underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. The proposed activities
will provide the foundation on which an integrated program that combines
research, education and outreach focusing on catalysis and biofuels will be
developed.