* 1304218
* Intense Laser-Atom Physics in Scaled Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Louis DiMauro, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2016
* USD 719,830.00

The program aims at a comprehensive study of the single atom response to an
intense, ultra-fast burst of electromagnetic radiation that will not only
provide basic tests of basic laws of physics but also initiate some novel
experimental investigations in strong field physics. One objective is to broaden
the scope of experimental investigations by utilizing the wavelength scaling of
the strong field interaction at frequencies lower than the intrinsic electron
motion. Various aspects of the strong field interaction have an implicit
wavelength-dependence that is a crucial scaling parameter and has not been
explored or exploited in a systematic fashion. Addressing these scaling laws
with ionization experiments using ultra-short pulses in the mid-infrared regime
of the electromagnetic spectrum is crucial since it tests the very foundations
of all our understanding of the intense laser-atom interaction. A second
objective is to understand and connect the behavior of atoms in intense x-ray
fields with the more studied optical regime. These investigations are enabled by
the new generation of hard x-ray freeelectron lasers being constructed
worldwide. The first of these devices, which became operational in 2009, is the
Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) at SLAC National Laboratory. Using the
unprecedented x-ray intensities available at the LCLS, this program will explore
the strong-field high frequency regime. Scaling laws suggest that the behavior
at x-ray frequencies will have significant fundamental differences with the
optical regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of an isolated atom with an
intense electromagnetic field is the basis for one of the forefront problems in
atomic, molecular and optical physics. The ability to couple large amounts of
energy into an atom by the absorption of many photons posed many intriguing
questions and has led to many new discoveries. At the core of the problem is the
extreme nonlinear response of the atom to a laser pulse that imposes an external
electric field comparable to the forces binding the electrons to the nucleus.
The continuing interest in this fundamental atomic physics problem is derived
from its broad implications in other areas of physics and technology. The single
atom response is the initial condition of more complex phenomena found in
plasmas, inertial confined fusion concepts, advance particle acceleration and
astrophysics. The intense laser-atom interaction itself is opening new
opportunities in short wavelength science, quantum control and advancing an
emerging discipline in hyperfast electron physics, attophysics and molecular
imaging. The novel long wavelength laser sources developed by this project have
broad applications in science, national defense and technology. Furthermore, the
interdisciplinary nature of this research coupled with state-of-the-art ultra-
fast optical engineering provides a fertile training ground for both
undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, the LCLS XFEL has provided an
exceptional educational opportunity for NSF supported students and a valuable
resource for preparing the next generation of physicist trained in a frontier of
ultra-fast x-ray science. Former group members are contributing to various areas
of science and technology in academia, national laboratories and the private
sector.