* 1304010
* Biosciences Industry Fellowship Project
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Russ Read, Forsyth Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2019
* USD 685,269.00

This project is providing professional development activities to improve the
quality and relevance of a community college bioscience education. Development
of the program leverages two ATE Centers' expertise in professional development
activities, NBC2 and Bio-Link. Biotechnology program leaders from the three
partner colleges are leading the hands-on, "boot camp" laboratory component of
the project. Following the boot camp the fellows participate in industry
internships, and develop industry-relevant curriculum. Project collaborators
supporting internships include Wake Forest University, Wake Forest Institute for
Regenerative Medicine, Joint School of Nanoscience & Nanoengineering and Gateway
University Research Park, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, David H.
Murdock Research Institute, North Carolina Research Campus, Banner Pharmacaps
Inc., Biogen Idec, Cook Medical, Targacept, Tengion, and TransTech Pharma.

The program is (1) helping instructors contextualize learning by providing real-
world exposure through guided, hands-on internships in authentic bioscience
industry/organizational settings; (2) demonstrating key competencies and
critical bioscience workforce skills to help instructors prepare students for
technical coursework geared to industry standards; (3) making meaningful
associations between classroom and workplace by producing inquiry-based
curriculum materials that integrate valid bioscience concepts and processes; (4)
enabling instructors to generate a better-prepared workforce and highlight new
career opportunities; and (5) producing a replicable model for adoption by
community colleges across the country.

Broader impacts of this initiative include developing and implementing an
innovative professional development model that (1) utilizes multi-institutional
partnerships to enable high-impact instructors to further understand industry
principles and prepare them to guide their students toward careers in today's
workforce; (2) generates and sustains collaborations among community colleges,
research universities and industry to increase successful participation in
technology preparation programs; (3) promotes significant and lasting
improvements in the educational community's ability to meet regional workforce
goals; and (4) encourages presentations at appropriate conferences and provides
for replication at other community colleges across the country.