* 1304014
* 2013 Liquid Crystals GRC; Biddeford, ME at the University of New England; June 16 - 21, 2013
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Nicholas Abbott, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 12/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2013 Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on Liquid Crystals (LCs) will explore new advances in liquid
crystal science and technology and their role in novel forward thinking
applications. The conference will be held at the University of New England,
Biddeford, ME from June 16-21, 2013. Liquid crystal science has played a
significant role in many basic and applied fields, including physics, chemistry,
biology and engineering. Composed of anisotropic organic and biological
molecules, liquid crystals interact with external fields and surfaces to
influence strongly their orientational order, structure and properties. From the
basic perspective, the orientational order and collective molecular behavior are
central contributions to the biological science of self-assembly of membranes,
to the dynamics of tissues and muscles activities, and to DNA assemblies. The
extraordinary values and contributions of liquid crystals to the modern photonic
and information display technologies have revolutionized the way we visualize
and present information in so-called information displays, ranging from mobile
to projection devices, flat panel TVs to 3D displays, and eco-friendly e-papers.
The GRC on LCs will focus on their role in self-assembly, nanoscience, and
biotechnology. The conference will address the most important current themes in
liquid crystals presented by the world's leading scientists in the fields of
biomedical science, engineering, and nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2013 Gordon Conference on Liquid Crystals will provide participants with a
unique forum to disclose unpublished data, deliberate and challenge novel ideas
outside the realm of accepted thought, and ultimately push outward the frontiers
of science and innovation for a particular field. The meeting will provide a
forum for career networking and career advancement and will support and
encourage young scientists and graduate students as they take their first steps
in the vibrant and intrinsically interdisciplinary research field of liquid
crystals, helping them establish initial scientific and personal contacts. As a
part of the outreach activities of the Conference, the funding will be used to
support graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior scientists from
underrepresented groups and enable the opportunity to build networks of friends
and mentors and to forge long-term professional contacts. Ten women and minority
speakers/discussion leaders are included in the preliminary program.