* 1304202
* Collaborative Research:  Soil-Snow-Atmosphere Exchanges of Mercury in the Interior Arctic Tundra
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Detlev Helmig, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 416,892.00

The goal of this project is to characterize soil-snow-atmosphere dynamics of
mercury (Hg) in the snow-dominated Arctic tundra. Chemical conversion of Hg in
snowpack from non-volatile forms to gaseous elemental mercury (GEM) can lead to
substantial degassing of Hg from snow, thereby reducing the impact of
atmospheric deposition. Contrary to the GEM chemistry seen in the midlatitude
snowpack, preliminary observations from Toolik Lake, on the north slope of the
Brooks Range, Alaska, provide evidence that photochemical GEM formation and
degassing are suppressed in tundra snow and that for much of the winter,
interstitial GEM is actually converted into non-volatile Hg. These patterns
result in extended periods when interstitial snowpack air is depleted in GEM. If
confirmed, this chemistry would likely signify a net transfer of atmospheric GEM
to snow or underlying soils, thereby increasing Hg deposition to tundra
ecosystems. Proposed project objectives are to investigate (1) the frequency and
underlying processes that determine GEM depletion and formation in arctic
snowpack and tundra soils; (2) the degree to which GEM dynamics cause vertical
Hg exchange between soils, snow, and the atmosphere; and (3) how these processes
provide additional sources &#8722; or sinks &#8722; of Hg via atmosphere-surface
transfer and snowmelt input. GEM concentrations in soils, snow, and air, as well
as vertical exchanges, will be characterized at Toolik Field Station.
Measurements will be made by means of a snow-sampling manifold system allowing
for fully automated and continuous all-winter measurements of trace gases at
multiple depths in the undisturbed snowpack and the atmosphere. These
experiments will be supplemented by flux chamber measurements to assess the
contribution of the underlying tundra soils. Other trace gas observations, and
chemical characterization of soil, snow, melt water, and soil water will be
incorporated to assess the environmental and biogeochemical controls on GEM
dynamics and the Hg budget. This proposed research will leverage ongoing LTER
and NEON projects at the Toolik Field station, providing linkages between in-
snow processes, tundra soil and freshwater biogeochemical cycling, pollution
import into the Arctic, and ecosystem processes. The project will directly
involve high school, undergraduate, graduate students, and a postdoctoral
scientist. It will expand an existing partnership with local high school
chemistry classes through research presentations in classrooms, laboratory
tours, and data analyses using study results. Dissemination to the scientific
community will be accomplished through peer-reviewed publications and conference
presentations, and by communication with U.S. and international regulatory
agencies. The general public will be reached through news releases,
institutional publications, open house events, and a web site. Data will be
archived at the National Snow and Ice Data Center at the University of Colorado
for distribution to the national and international polar research community.