* 1304323
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Justin Lomont, Lomont                  Justin
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Justin Paul Lomont of the University of California Berkeley to
conduct a research project in teh math and Physical Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, China. The project
title is "Probing the Effects of Weak Intermolecular Interactions in
Biologically Relevant Systems." The host scientist is Professor Jianping Wang.

This project uses 2-dimensional infrared spectroscopy to study the effects of
hydrogen bonding between carbon-hydrogen bonds (in sugars or amino acids) and
oxygen atoms (in aqueous or organic solvents). 2-dimensional infrared
spectroscopy is a nonlinear spectroscopic technique that can be used to study
the time evolution of vibrational excitations in molecules. While the existence
of these weak hydrogen bonds has been demonstrated previously, this work
investigates the timescale on which these hydrogen bonds are broken and formed.
The compounds being studied include simple amino acid and sugar monomers in
aqueous solutions, as well as organic solvents. The results obtained are
expected to be broadly applicable toward understanding the dynamics of
biological macromolecular structures.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this collaboration promotes the sharing of
expertise and ideas between the two research groups involved, with the hope of
prolonged collaborations that extend beyond the duration of the summer program.
Researchers from both groups benefit, both personally and professionally, from
this international collaboration. The PI hopes to pursue additional
international collaborations in the future, and this project helps to
demonstrate the challenges and benefits of such endeavors. Upon completion of
the project, the results of this research will be presented at the PI's host
institution and are intended to be published in a peer reviewed journal.