* 1304909
* Cosmogenic 10Be Chronology of Late Pleistocene Cirque Glaciation in Ireland and its Paleoclimatic Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jorie Clark, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2017
* USD 202,499.00

This proposal will reconstruct glacier fluctuations in Ireland and their
relation to past climate change. The team will integrate data and modeling of
the late Pleistocene glacial history of Ireland and its relation to climate
change based on new, internally consistent, high-precision 10Be ages that
constrain the age of cirque glacier moraines from sites that provide broad
coverage of Ireland. Well-dated records of fluctuations of these former cirque
glaciers will provide important paleoclimate information because of their short
response times (~10-100 years) to climate change. Moreover, cirque glaciers
provide limiting constraints on the vertical and spatial extent of the Irish Ice
Sheet that otherwise remains largely unconstrained in the western, southern and
eastern sectors where several cirque-bearing uplands occur. The broadly
distributed study sites are located to provide constraints on regional
variability in equilibrium line altitudes that can be evaluated with climate-
glacier models and provide important insights into the factors controlling the
ice sheet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After collecting and interpreting the limiting
ages of Irish glacial moraines, the team will use results from the transient
simulation of the last deglaciation run with the National Center for Atmospheric
Research Community Climate System Model v3 coupled atmospheric-ocean General
Circulation Model, and from their own set of simulations at 3,000 year intervals
starting at 21,000 years. In order to resolve important regional climatic
forcing (e.g. topographically induced circulations), the team will conduct high-
resolution (5 to 15 km) climate simulations over Ireland with boundary
conditions provided by the General Circulation Model runs. The team will then
use output from the regional model to simulate the mass balance of reconstructed
cirque glaciers by incorporating an energy balance model that they have
calibrated and tested at South Cascade Glacier, WA and Collier Glacier,
OR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal includes letters of support from NCAR/CGD
for CCSM3 model use and interpretation, and from the Purdue PRIME Lab for
beryllium-10 measurements on 81 samples, and will provide support for a graduate
student to be trained in the collection and preparation of samples, as well as
the model runs and their interpretation.