* 1304737
* Interactive Movie: A Tool to Deepen Student Learning about Quality and Regulatory Affairs in Biotechnology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Lisa Seidman, Pellet Productions, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,064,947.00

This project is developing and producing a Web-based interactive movie to teach
students about quality and regulatory affairs as they impact biotechnology
companies. The interactive movie is modeled after "The Lab: Avoiding Research
Misconduct", an innovative and compelling training production developed by the
U.S. Office of Research Integrity (ORI). In the proposed Bio-Link/Pellet
interactive movie, students select the role of one of several characters in a
biotechnology company. The student experiences the culture of a biotechnology
company and the work of their character, and then is presented with situations
and decisions involving specific quality and regulatory affairs issues.
Depending on the student's decisions, differing scenarios are enacted in the
movie. This allows the student to experience both a particular job role in a
biotechnology workplace and also the impact and/or consequences of their
decisions in that role. To enhance the value of the videos for teaching
purposes, the series includes a facilitator's guide with suggestions for
discussion, assessment, classroom activities, and other supports. The proposed
project is improving student learning by providing a contextual learning
experience modeled after the workplace environment of a biotechnology company.
The goal of the interactive movie is to augment the learner's understanding of
what it means to achieve quality in a biotechnology company setting, thus
bridging theory and concepts to the real world of work. The interactive movie
has the potential to engage and transform students by enabling them to safely
experience the consequences of their decisions. The movie scripts are being
developed with assistance from technical experts in the biotechnology industry
to ensure authenticity of the workplace setting, scenarios, characters, work
roles, and quality and regulatory affairs issues. The facilitator's guide
includes assessment tools to help evaluate and enhance student learning. The
interactive movie is being broadly disseminated through links on multiple
websites and available at no cost to the ATE community, colleges, universities,
and K-12 educators across the country. The interactive scenarios is helping
bridge the learning gap between classroom lecture (theory) and real workplace
situations (practice) and helps students be better prepared to succeed and
advance in the field of biotechnology. The movie has the potential to reach a
wide national audience of educators and workforce development trainers, as there
will be no limit to the number of participants accessing the materials. Bio-Link
is providing workshops, webinars, and training videos as well as disseminating a
facilitator's guide to support instructors and encourage the use of the
interactive movie by educators at all levels. The production involves a diverse
cast including people of different ages and ethnicities and both men and women
so as to provide role models for all students.