* 1304053
* 2013 Chemical Reactions at Surfaces GRC, Les Diablerets, Switzerland, April 28 ? May 3, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Peter Stair, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2014
* USD 20,000.00

1304053&lt;br/&gt;Stair &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical reactions at surfaces are
key processes in catalysis, coatings, lubrication, solid state devices, and
other technologies that are critical for improving the quality of life while
simultaneously reducing the adverse impact of human activities on the
environment. The discovery and development of new surface processes and the
improvement of existing ones can make important contributions to securing the
nation's energy supply. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support for
the 2013 Gordon Conference on Chemical Reactions at Surfaces. The conference,
which will be held at the Les Diablerets Conference Center in Les Diablerets,
Switzerland on April 28- May 3, 2013, will bring together leading experts to
discuss the latest and most exciting work in the field. The change in venue will
increase participation by European scientists. The themes and topics are chosen
to illustrate broad concepts in surface chemistry of academic and industrial
interest. Topics include: &lt;br/&gt;- catalysis at surfaces, &lt;br/&gt;-
synthesis of surfaces and novel materials, &lt;br/&gt;- tribology, &lt;br/&gt;-
liquids at surfaces and other interface studies, &lt;br/&gt;- surface
photochemistry,&lt;br/&gt;-fundamental surface chemistry
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A special effort will be made to support young
scientists who otherwise would be unable to attend: junior faculty members,
postdoctoral fellows and advanced graduate students. Participation by young
researchers will add significant value to this conference and will foster
communications among current and future leaders in a field that combines
academic and industrial issues. The setting and program for the conference keeps
the participants on site and maximizes interactions and intellectual discourse
and networking.