* 1304942
* Dynamics of Multiflagellar Swimming in Bacteria
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Michael Graham, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2017
* USD 353,318.00

In this project the investigators will focus on development of biophysical
models of multiflagellar locomotion in bacteria and use of the models to gain an
understanding of the principles underlying locomotion phenomena. They will
explore the parameter and design space, to help build an understanding of how
the biological systems evolved to become the way they are. Principal aims
include the development of mechanistic models for the dynamics of multiflagellar
locomotion at a number of levels of description, and application of these models
toward understanding various observations of bacterial swimming. In particular,
one broad theme that appears upon examination of the experimental observations
is multiplicity. Why are there multiple modes of bacterial swimming? Why do many
species have capabilities to swim with multiple flagellar modes? Is one of the
selective advantages of multiflagellar swimming the multiple possible
configurations of the flagella? The proposed work will begin to systematically
address this theme by building and applying models that begin to approach the
physical complexity of a real multiflagellar organism, will substantially
advance this understanding, contributing not only to fundamental microbiology
but to many applications, such as soil remediation and prevention of infections,
that are closely linked to bacterial motility. By shedding light on how bacteria
swim, the proposed work will also strengthen the intellectual foundations for
development of artificial microscopic swimming machines. The graduate students
who will be educated during the conduct of this research will gain a unique
combination of expertise in biophysics and computational mechanics. As part of
the present project, in addition to participating in the proposed research,
undergraduates will be involved in a K-12 outreach project involving the Boys
and Girls Club of Dane County.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of
Physics and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.