* 1304109
* Collaborative Research:  Refining Long-term Climate Records from the Renland Ice Cap
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2017
* James White, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 10/31/2017
* USD 474,919.00

This proposal seeks to drill, analyze, and interpret a new ice core from the
Renland Ice Cap on the north east coast of Greenland. The project is a
collaborative venture between scientists from the U.S., Denmark's Center for Ice
and Climate at the Univ. of Copenhagen and Germany's Alfred Wegner Institute.
U.S. efforts described here will focus on gas concentrations and gas isotopes
(Sowers, Penn State) and ice isotopes (White, U. Colorado). Danish partners will
also focus on stable isotopes of ice and gas composition, as well as high-
resolution chemistry. German partners will focus on physical properties of the
ice, line scanning and dielectric properties to investigate the factors driving
snow densification and ice core age model development. Ice cores will be
retrieved and processed within this international framework. Given the distinct
possibility that the Renland ice cap will contain ice even older than the
Eemian, an extremely high resolution Radio Echo Sounding (RES) mission will be
flown by the CReSIS group at the Univ. of Kansas over the Renland Ice Cap in the
summer of 2014, in order to help guide site selection for the 2015 drill
project. Renland is an important location for an ice core as it is cold
(infrequent melt layers), constrained by topography so that it cannot
significantly change in elevation, contains ice from the last glacial period
(and possibly the Eemian period), and has not been overrun by the main Greenland
ice sheet. The lack of elevation change means that Renland's isotopic
temperature and total air content records can be used as climate standards
against which to compare other Greenland ice cores. The Renland ice cap is about
400 meters thick so it does not contain brittle ice. These properties will allow
significant scientific progress to be made in mapping out and constraining
Greenland climatic conditions in general, but especially for the Holocene. The
occurrence of brittle ice in other Greenland ice cores has limited our ability
to reconstruct high-resolution climate records due to poor core quality. The
Renland ice core will provide the means of reconstructing greenhouse gas
records, volcanic activity, biomass burning events, as well as key feedback
mechanisms such as sea ice extent throughout the Holocene. Primary objectives of
this project are: 1) link the recent, rapid warming seen in Greenland over the
past decade to the baseline record of the past few centuries, as well as the
broader Holocene record; 2) provide high-quality gas records throughout the
Holocene from a Greenland core to test current theories about the how early
human activity may have impacted the greenhouse gas composition; 3) provide an
ultra-high resolution isotopic temperature record that is tightly coupled to sea
ice near eastern Greenland, as well as a history of climate in this region
hopefully extending back into the last interglacial period. This project will
provide important data to inform the public, and policy makers, about the
earth's climate and what causes changes in that climate. This project proposes
to place both the records of sea ice off eastern Greenland, as well as the
climate record, into the context of natural variability, and further
understanding of recent rapid changes in Arctic temperatures and sea ice. The
project will support graduate and undergraduate students.