* 1304474
* Stackable Training for Laboratory Science and Quality Technicians in Biopharmaceutical and Biomedical Manufacturing
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Henshaw, Mount Wachusett Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Rupa Iyer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 779,716.00

Working with a team of industry partners, this project is developing four
competency-based stackable credentials that lead to a new Associate Degree in
Analytical and Quality Technology (AQT) at Mount Wachusett Community College.
The project is preparing diverse, rural community college students for
employment in quality-related jobs in biopharmaceutical and biomedical device
manufacturing. Products being developed include curriculum modules, stackable
certificates, and a capstone course. Through short duration programs with
contextualized and successively increasing levels of content that ultimately
stack into certificate and Associate degree programs, the stackable approach
provides flexible technical education entry points to students with varying
levels of preparation. The AQT curriculum is being established in a modular
format and incorporated into credit-bearing courses and is also being prepared
for integration into non-credit workforce training courses to meet specific
needs of students and incumbent workers. Students who complete non-credit
training receive credit when all modules associated with a credit-bearing course
are satisfactorily completed. A capstone course is being developed that
integrates time spent in class and industry-based experiences. This course
reinforces student competencies and enhances job opportunities for graduates
through industry internships and exposure to the workplace via industry guest
speakers, industry tours, trade shows and professional meetings, and targeted
industry research.

Intellectual Merit: This project is establishing an integrated technical
education and workforce training program that responds to critical employment
demands in a region of the country with an exceptionally high concentration of
biopharmaceutical and biomedical device manufacturing. This effort builds on the
Ohio Stackable Certificates Initiative and utilizes the modular curriculum
delivery process developed therein. The evaluation effort employs the
Kirkpatrick four levels model of evaluation to monitor the processes and
outcomes of project objectives.

Broader Impacts: The industry-informed curriculum development is designed to
meet the technical workforce demands of regional employers, including the need
to advance incumbent worker skills. It will promote diversity in the technical
workforce by creating opportunities for diverse, rural students and unemployed
workers in need of educational opportunities to reenter the workforce. The
curriculum developed for the AQT associate degree program serves as a model for
other institutions to adopt and implement. Dissemination activities include
writing a technical paper, giving presentations at conferences, providing access
of the curriculum to all Massachusett's community colleges, and making all
curricular content available online.