* 1304956
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Fossil Insect Collaborative: A Deep-Time Approach to Studying Diversification and Response to Environmental Change
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Alton Dooley, Virginia Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2017
* USD 105,219.00

Fossil insects provide a unique deep-time record of ecological and evolutionary
response to past environmental changes and therefore are invaluable for
understanding the impacts of climate change on the current biodiversity crisis.
Given current models of future climate change and the important role that
insects play in human society (biodiversity, pests, pollination, vectors of
disease) the ability to access these data and make predictions about future
insect populations becomes even more urgent. The Fossil Insect Collaborative
will make available all the major collections of fossil insect specimens in the
United States by creating electronic specimen records consisting of digital
images and associated collection data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The digitized
fossil insect collections will be made broadly accessible to the research
community, K-16 education, government and industry, the general public, and the
media through the project website and a central site integrating all the
paleobiological Thematic Collections Networks called iDigPaleo. Mobile apps and
activities that allow a wide variety of users to experience and interact
directly with the collections data will be developed. This award is made as part
of the National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the
Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting
from this award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).