* 1304977
* Diametric Extremes in the Ionic Conductivity of Mixed Glass Former Solid Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Steve Martin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 756,532.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The sun, a very large source of untapped
energy, has a cyclic pattern of night and day. Therefore, energy storage systems
are required and batteries are promising technologies being considered if
problems of safety, high cost, and low efficiency can be resolved. Given the
size of energy storage systems required, very low cost and earth abundant sodium
batteries are being actively researched. Sodium batteries today, however, must
operate at 300 C because the battery separator, a solid electrolyte, has a low
Na+ ion conductivity and this causes such batteries to be inefficient, unsafe,
and expensive. For these reasons, it is important to better understand Na+ ion
motion in the solid state so that newer better conducting solid electrolytes can
be developed. In this project, new glassy solid electrolytes are being studied
that can be made very inexpensively with high Na+ ion conductivities. In
particular, Martin's group is examining new ternary glasses based upon two
network formers (e.g., silicon, boron, or germanium) that form a highly cross-
linked arrangement of chemical bonds. These particular glasses are being studied
because it has been found that in some combinations of two glass formers the Na+
ion conduction increases dramatically whereas for other combinations the Na+ ion
motion decreases significantly. By studying these two different systems and
their opposite behaviors, it will be possible to learn more about how Na+ ions
conduct through solids and help develop new sodium batteries based upon better
solid electrolytes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;Na+ ions
doped into a glass former can have very high conductivities when the chemistry
is optimized. A rare coincidence of high ionic conductivity and improved
physical and electrochemical properties of glassy solid electrolytes can be
obtained by mixing two glass formers, B and P, for example, at a constant
fraction of Na+. Such optimized mixed glass former glassy solid electrolytes
based upon earth abundant Na may be candidates from which next generation
cheaper, safer, and more efficient large grid-scale batteries can be made. While
the Na B P O mixed glass former system exhibits a positive effect, new research
has also discovered systems that show never before seen negative effects. This
dual behavior of the effects is also observed in sulfide glasses. Here, B
additions to a Na P S glass exponentially increase the ionic conductivity,
whereas Ge additions to the same glass decrease its ionic conductivity. While
progress has been made in understanding ionic conduction in solid electrolytes,
significant knowledge gaps still exist. In undertaking this research, two
doctoral graduate students and one undergraduate student will prepare and
characterize new mixed glass former glasses that exhibit these opposite mixed
glass former effects. Through this research, they will develop advanced
laboratory-based research skills in materials science, glass research, and solid
state electrochemistry. They will also develop computational skills and
knowledge through an international collaboration with a leading glass theory and
simulation research group in Germany where they will spend a 10-week summer
research experience learning molecular dynamics and reverse Monte Carlo
simulation techniques.