* 1304262
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Recent Northeastern United States Temperature Records in the Context of the Late Holocene
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Kevin Anchukaitis, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 447,183.00

Over the last century, the northeastern United States has experienced
significant warming (~1.1°C), and a number of record high temperatures have been
set around the region in recent years. Despite the massive impacts given the
dense populations in this region, we do not fully understand the extent to which
the trends reflect radiative forcing versus natural decadal-scale variability.
Paleoclimate data provide opportunities to observe the climate system at decadal
time scales that are not available from instrumental data alone, but there are
currently no long-timescale, high-resolution proxy temperature data from this
region that might help discern the relative influence of these factors in
determining decadal temperature trends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research-- a
collaborative effort between scientists from the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University--
will develop annually-resolved reconstructions of late Holocene temperature from
the northeastern United States using living and subfossil Atlantic White Cedar
trees. This species is temperature-sensitive, long-lived, and well-preserved in
wetland environments. The resulting reconstructions will be used to characterize
variability in regional temperatures at time scales from interannual to
millennial, to evaluate climate model simulations over the last millennium, and
identify the signature of internal, remote, and global forcing on the climate of
the northeastern United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides long-
term context for recent seasonal temperature extremes in the northeastern United
States, and in particular along the coast and the very urbanized Boston-to-New
York corridor, where high temperatures have important public health and
ecosystem impacts. Funding supports student research at the doctoral and
undergraduate level, as well as public outreach to regional citizen scientists
and professionals focused on the environment.