* 1304892
* Pathways to Computerized Manufacturing Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Brent Chapman, South Puget Sound Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This project is focusing on computerized manufacturing technology (CMT) and
engineering applications designed to enrich technician education for students;
to improve workforce outcomes in CMT-related industries, including aerospace;
and to create educational pathways for technician training and pre-engineering
students. Specific activities include: (1) achieving accreditation from the
National Institute for Metalworking Skills (NIMS) for the program; (2) providing
professional development to lead faculty to ensure NIMS accreditation and a
high-quality program; and (3) creating a flexible entry/exit system through a
fully integrated CMT pathway for students with different educational and
experiential backgrounds so they can achieve national certification in CMT-
related areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is
providing a sound model through which accreditation and intensive industry input
can help resolve workforce shortages in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) related technical and professional positions throughout the
United States. It is addressing this at the local and state level through the
strategic deployment of activities to streamline educational links with
workforce outcomes. Of particular note are (1) the CMT pathway that is allowing
students to individualize their education with distinct workforce outcomes that
lead to jobs and (2) updated curricula to help ensure that what the college
teaches is what employers need. The college has been actively involved in
augmenting its CMT program over the past two years and is leveraging past work
for short-term CMT training, building on new educational programs, and providing
a programmatic and learning enrichment that is helping the state meet the demand
for CMT careers in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Because
the project is advancing community college-level computerized manufacturing
technology, computer numerical control, and pre-engineering programs, it has
significance beyond local and statewide impact in the aerospace industry.
Through its flexible pathway structure, the project is providing an innovative
approach that allows the college to address educational and workforce needs of
high school students, community college students, students returning to school,
dislocated workers, and veterans. Accreditation is serving as a unifying force
by assuring that all students are prepared for the increasingly demanding
workplace CMT qualifications demanded by industry. Industry and other community
partners are helping to broaden dissemination of CMT opportunities and ensuring
that the program meets current industry expectations while faculty and others
directly involved in the project are disseminating the effectiveness of the
project through conferences and statewide meetings. The project represents a
thoughtful, coordinated approach to benefit the entire State of Washington,
including the Pacific/Mountain region, as the state works to rebuild its
aerospace industry.