* 1304555
* The Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring Network-CALM IV(2014-2018): Long-term Observations on the Climate-Active Layer-Permafrost System
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2021
* Dmitry Streletskiy, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,293,497.00

This award will support the continuation of the Circumpolar Active Layer
Monitoring (CALM) program as an integral part of the Arctic Observing Network
(AON) and the Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH). The active-layer
network of more than 200 sites represents the only coordinated and standardized
program of observations using standard measurement protocols designed to observe
and detect decadal changes in the dynamics of seasonal thawing and freezing in
high-latitude soils. The 'Intellectual Merit' of this study lies in the need for
long-term time series of active layer thickness, ground temperature, and thaw
settlement measurements at the same locations and across diverse terrain types
and regions in order to identify scales of spatial variation, establish trends,
and validate models. The data will also contribute to detailed process studies,
and validating and developing climate change, ecology, hydrology and geocryology
models. Education and outreach are essential components of the 'Broader Impacts'
of CALM. The project will provide opportunities for field experience and
educational participation at levels ranging from elementary school through
postdoctoral. Local, predominantly indigenous people, will assist with the
observations at remote sites. CALM will continue to incorporate data into its
Web-based database.