* 1304835
* South Central College: iMEC
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Suzanne Nordblom, South Central College
* Continuing Grant
* Heather Watson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 896,261.00

Mechatronics engineers and technicians play a critical role in advanced
manufacturing, and there is a growing need for skilled workers in this field
regionally and nationally. In response, South Central College (SCC) is creating
a distance learning education program (iMEC) that builds on its existing
Mechatronics Engineering Technology (MET) face-to-face program. The MET program
at SCC is a direct result of strong partnerships with regional industry members,
which provide industrial expertise and resources to support this project. To
achieve this, the objectives are to 1) develop and implement the online remote
access degree program, 2) create a regional system with educational and industry
partners and through outreach, and 3) build the institutional capacity of SCC's
MET program.

This project utilizes online and simulation tools and remote access methods to
adapt its existing MET lectures and laboratories to students across the state of
Minnesota. Through the remote access of laboratory systems distance learning
students develop troubleshooting skills that are necessary for mechatronics
engineering technicians. The iMEC program is leveraging the state-of-the-art
mechatronics resources at SCC to provide access to broad groups of students. The
iMEC program is integrating best practices for both distance and face-to-face
learning from partners at Moultrie Technical College and the Florida Advanced
Technological Education Center (FLATE). The project evaluation includes a
comparison of the student success and student perception between the face-to-
face and distance learners and an evaluation process to improve the iMEC
program.

The iMEC program provides advanced manufacturing distance education as well as
educational and career pathways into MET for traditional and non-traditional
students and broadens the participation of students from underrepresented
groups, including women, minorities, and veterans, and geographically dispersed
students. The innovative methods for distance learning used in the iMEC program
can be adapted by other engineering and technology programs and addresses the
demands of future engineering education. The iMEC program serves as an education
model that integrates continuous quality improvement and best practices and
adapts curricula and instructional delivery models through innovative methods to
bring distance education to students.