* 1304480
* Collaborative Research:  Southern Hemisphere Processes and Global Climate Change:  The Evolution of Late Miocene to Present Surface Ocean Conditions in the Southern Hemisphere
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Laura Cleaveland Peterson, Luther College
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2018
* USD 135,235.00

Researchers from Lafayette and Luther Colleges, together with their
undergraduate students, will investigate southern hemisphere climate change over
the last six million years in order to better understand key linkages and
feedbacks within the Earth's climate system. This research focuses on a region
of the world -- the southern hemisphere -- whose climate history has been
largely unexplored previously, but that is known to play a critical role in
important climate and oceanic processes related to carbon cycling, deep ocean
ventilation, and tropical heat exchange dynamics. Additionally, this project
will include a detailed investigation of climate dynamics during an interval in
Earth's history when global temperatures were a few degrees warmer than today's
and the size of the Greenland ice sheet was much reduced. Thus, this study will
provide a clearer understanding of climate conditions during an interval that
represents a potential analog for future climate conditions given current
patterns of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. Specifically, the
researchers will examine the symmetry of climate evolution between the northern
and southern hemispheres and the evolving response of the climate system to
changes in climate forcing due to cyclic changes in the position and orientation
of the Earth in its orbit relative to the Sun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the
scientific questions addressed in this research, this project will also advance
the early preparation of future Earth scientists who will have the skills to
face both the scientific and societal challenges presented by climate change.
Undergraduate student researchers involved with this project will gain hands-on
experience in the nature and process of scientific research, direct training in
the field of paleoclimatology, critical thinking skills related to scientific
research and a deeper introduction to the systems thinking skills that
distinguish the Earth scientist's approach to understanding the world. In
addition, outreach to local K-12 students and educators by the principle
investigators and their research students will further disseminate the results
of this work as well as the broader contributions of paleoclimatic research and
climate science.