* 1304173
* PRAISE- Partnering Regional Academia with Industry to Strengthen Education in Secure Internet Application Development
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Ravinder Kang, Highline Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2017
* USD 199,864.00

This project is creating a regional partnership of industry, academia, and high
schools to more effectively recruit and prepare a skilled and diverse workforce
of web and mobile programmers who can design and create secure, data-driven web
and mobile software applications to fill unmet job demand in the Puget Sound
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project is partnering with:
&lt;br/&gt;1. local high schools to increase the number and diversity of
students training to become web and mobile programmers through summer camps and
Career Start, a program through which students may earn a professional-technical
degree in web/mobile programming while still in high school. &lt;br/&gt;2.
industry to improve student job preparation, mentoring, and placement through
networking events and the Industry Fellows program, where a faculty member and
an industry professional are paired in the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;3. a four-year
university to develop a Reverse Transfer program, providing opportunities for
university students to earn certificates in web/mobile programming while gaining
relevant real world experience and hands-on job skills or complete two-year
degrees after transferring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of these initiatives
is to increase the number of students entering the workforce as web/mobile
programmers by reaching out to underrepresented groups and strengthening job
skills and preparation for the job market for program graduates. The college is
working closely with Seattle Central Community College (SCCC) and the University
of Washington Tacoma (UWT) to accomplish these goals. The primary audiences for
these efforts are high school and two-year college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is using several
innovative techniques that serve as a model for other programs in a wide range
of fields. The first is the Industry Fellows program, which integrates a working
professional into key courses. The second is a unique Reverse Transfer program,
which allows students to freely move from a four-year university to the
community college to meet their personal educational goals. The Reverse Transfer
program is improving articulation between the community college and the
university and contributing to life-long learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This program is supplying a cadre of diverse and well-trained
technicians in an area of large unmet need through targeted recruitment,
particularly outreach to local high schools with diverse student populations.
The project is strengthening partnerships between high schools and the community
college, between the college and industry, and between the college and
university. In order to provide a model for other institutions, results and
curricular products from this project are being broadly disseminated.