* 1304964
* Thinking Like an Engineer to Address Complex Problems Within the Education Enterprise
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Leigh Abts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 02/28/2015
* USD 49,967.00

This engineering education research project supports a workshop to explore how
to apply the design and system thinking approaches engineers use to understand
and improve educational systems. The goal of the workshop will be to explore how
to develop meaningful synergies between education and engineering, as well as
explore pathways to develop future leaders, policy makers, and administrators
with competencies that span both disciplines. During the workshop an
interdisciplinary group of 20 participants will develop a definition of the
education system, define core competencies for understanding education at the
enterprise level, and explore career pathways for future
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of
this project will be to explore how new academic, research and practice
communities can be created that support the large and diverse education
ecosystem. The creation of these communities has the potential to build bridges
across professions in which there is currently little overlap, and potentially
impact the quality of education offered all US citizens. This project overlaps
with NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through preparation of
an engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise. Additionally NSF's
goal of innovating for society is enabled by creating results and research that
are useful for society by informing educational policy and practices.