* 1304531
* The Geospatial Technology Advantage: Preparing GST Technicians and GST-enabled Graduates for Southern Illinois Business and Industry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mike Rudibaugh, Kaskaskia College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2017
* USD 196,342.00

The Geospatial Technology (GST) Advantage project is preparing GST technicians
and GST-enabled graduates for opportunities with southern Illinois businesses,
industries and government entities. GST is a growing area of study that provides
the skills needed for success in an ever expanding array of occupations. In
conjunction with regional employers and educators, the project is: (1)
establishing certificate and degree programs in GST while utilizing pilot-
testing and evaluating a nationally recognized curriculum based on the
Geospatial Technology Competency Model (GTCM) developed by the GeoTech Center;
(2) providing GST field internship opportunities for Kaskaskia College students;
(3) incorporating GST into STEM classes at the college and regional high
schools; (4) conducting outreach events targeting students and teachers as well
as leaders of business, industries and communities to share information about
geospatial technology including educational opportunities and potential uses;
and (5) utilizing a GST Regional Advisory Board to help guide the project,
provide assistance and enhance partnerships and career pathways. The curriculum
being pilot-tested in the project is furthering the knowledge and understanding
of geospatial technology within the GST community as well as in broader fields.
This is leading to an educational approach that can be adopted by other
institutions nationwide and one that provides pathways for inclusion of GST into
STEM disciplines.