* 1304387
* I-Corps Node: DC, Maryland, Virginia Region
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Darryll Pines, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2019
* USD 4,489,762.00

Project Description:&lt;br/&gt;This effort involves the creation and
implementation of an I-Corps Regional Node in DC/MD/VA (DMV) region through a
partnership involving the University of Maryland College Park (UMD), the George
Washington University (GWU), and Virginia Tech (VT). The proximity of the DMV
node to the Washington, DC area's vibrant entrepreneurial R&amp;D ecosystem is
providing a valuable set of resources to the national I-Corps network. The node
is leveraging the respective strengths of the three institutions to help guide
the transition of scientific discoveries into technologies and products that
benefit society. It is implementing two initiatives that are specifically
designed to increase the success rate of participating teams: (1) establishing a
formal DMV I-Corps Mentor Network designed to attract, train, and retain top-
notch mentors and (2) offering a post I-Corps Support program to help teams with
a series of follow-on activities (e.g., continued customer development, minimum
viable product prototyping, technology transfer and licensing, fundraising,
legal services, and hiring executive talent). The node is implementing an Online
Nodal Network (ONN) that ties together and augments existing tools (e.g.,
LinkedIn, YouTube, Google Docs, Quora, LaunchPad Central); addressing the needs
that are particularly valuable to the nature of I-Corps teams. The ONN
aggregates rich content and makes it more readily accessible to the I-Corps user
community. It further enables the mentor network to pool and share their
expertise with multiple I-Corps teams. In addition, the node is studying the
effect of I-Corps training on: (1) any adjustments in orientation toward firm
creation, (2) the proportion of teams that reach initial profitability, (3) the
time required to reach initial profitability, and (4) the resources expended
(time, money) in the start-up process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Significance:&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing training to NSF team cohorts,
the DMV node is managing a Regional DMV I-Corps program that is designed to
train an additional 150 teams over a three-year period. Thirty-five of the top
two hundred U.S. universities in R&amp;D expenditures are within a 4-hour drive
of the DMV node. The node is focusing on attracting teams from these top
regional academic institutions, as well as from the many federal and state
research labs that are unique to the DMV region (e.g., NASA, NIH, ARPA-E). The
node is also engaging underrepresented minority participation and HBCUs through
cooperation with the Graduate Degrees for Minorities in Engineering and Science,
Inc. (GEM) consortium. It is implementing a GEM-endorsed initiative to increase
the awareness of research commercialization opportunities. Small grants are
being directed to promising HBCUs' teams in order to provide innovation
training. The node is additionally leveraging the DMV's mentor network to
support the HBCU teams.