* 1304228
* Extreme summer melt:   Assessing the habitability and physical structure of rotting first-year Arctic sea ice
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Bonnie Light, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,336,034.00

This proposal has two main objectives: 1) determination of the physical and
microbial characteristics and microstructural evolution of sea ice exposed to
severe melt; and 2) exploration of the influence of biogenic particles such as
sea ice algae, bacteria and polymer gels on the melting behavior of sea ice.
This research will develop and apply state-of-the-art microbiological,
molecular, biogeochemical and geophysical techniques to examine the character
and evolution of natural Arctic sea ice at the end of the melt season at field
sites near Barrow, Alaska. This project will assess: (1) ice physical
characteristics (ice density, salinity, permeability, albedo, and
microstructure) using standard and novel microscopy and X-ray computed
tomography techniques; (2) ice algal and bacterial characteristics (abundance,
activity, biomass, productivity and diversity) using epifluorescence and
confocal microscopy, flow cytometry and massively parallel taq sequencing
techniques; (3) polymer gel characteristics (abundance, composition, gel carbon
biomass, and size) using in situ microscopy, flow cytometry and confocal
microscopy techniques; and (4) the relationship between biogenic particles and
ice physical characteristics, in particular microstructural properties for
melted and intact ice samples using image analysis and correlative statistical
methods. This proposed project will carry out educational outreach by offering
research experience to an undergraduate student, mentoring a postdoctoral
research associate, and entrainment of relevant scientific results into both
academic curricula and public outreach.