* 1304101
* Fundamental mechanisms of removal of stacking fault tetrahedra by mobile low energy boundaries
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Xinghang Zhang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2016
* USD 333,355.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to
understand the fundamental mechanisms through which mobile twin boundaries (TBs)
actively engage and rapidly remove stacking fault tetrahedra (SFTs). The
ultimate goal is to design advanced metallic materials that can effectively
remove SFTs at low-to-intermediate temperatures. SFTs are detrimental defects in
neutron or proton irradiated structural metallic materials with face-centered-
cubic structures as they can induce significant hardening and swelling. The PI
will use a combination of in situ radiation and in situ nanoindentation
technique to investigate the interaction of SFTs with TBs. These studies can
explain the annihilation of SFTs by TBs and provide crucial information to
validate annihilation mechanisms predicted by MD simulations. Also significant
mobility of TBs may make them attractive candidates to remove radiation induced
immobile defects, such as SFTs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this
research will include discovery of important criteria for the design of swelling
resistant structural materials for next generation nuclear reactors, and offer
the basis for further exploration of physics of radiation induced twin boundary
migrations. This project will provide research training to graduate and
undergraduate students at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU). Special effort will
be made to recruit female and other minority students through the "Pathway to
Ph.D program" funded by TAMU. The project will also enhance the materials
science and nanoengineering curricula by incorporating relevant results into
classes when introducing advanced nanomaterials, and benefit the new formed
Department of Materials Science and Engineering. The PI will disseminate results
to a much broader audience by involving high school teachers in the research
project through NSF-RET program, and attending international conferences.
Collaborations with McMaster University and several DOE National Laboratories
will offer graduate students summer research experience.