* 1304397
* Collaborative Research: Climate and Glacier change in Bhutan: the last millennia, present and future
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Summer Rupper, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 11/30/2015
* USD 219,805.00

This proposal will provide robust information about past, present and future
glacier and climate change in the Kingdom of Bhutan, in the southeastern
monsoonal Himalayas, and contribute to a more robust scientific platform for
decision makers and mitigation strategists. Knowing the rate of glacier retreat
in response to climate change is fundamental for any prediction of future
behavior and in turn to design adaption and mitigation strategies for societies.
However, this rate remains poorly constrained. Bhutan's welfare is linked to
glacier dynamics because hydropower generation and agricultural irrigation are
fueled by glacier melt. Melting glaciers and the steep relief have made glacial
lake outburst floods a prime hazard for the societies of Bhutan and its
Himalayan neighbors, and the hazard potential critically depends on current and
future glacier melt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an integrated research and
education project, combining geomorphology, geochronology, paleo-thermometry,
glaciology, and glacier modeling to reconstruct glacier and climate change over
the last millennia, and to predict Himalayan glacier change over the next
century. This is a multi-disciplinary team of experts with broad experience in
Himalayan glacier and climate problems, including a female junior faculty at a
primarily undergraduate institution and a special-needs MS student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a US-Bhutan bilateral research and educational
proposal, with the Department of Hydromet Services/Ministry of Economic Affairs
(DHMS) as the official Bhutanese collaborator, and with the Ugyen Wangchuck
Institute for Conservation and Environment (UWICE) as the educational partner.
Bhutanese students will train in geomorphic mapping (remote and field based) and
tree-ring techniques. Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory will host UWICE students
and DHMS and Columbia University's Earth Institute will host UWICE scientists.