* 1304346
* Geophysical constraints on the crust and upper-mantle structure of Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Meredith Nettles, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 545,360.00

This proposal requests support for an integrated geophysical study of the crust
and upper mantle of Greenland. The study aims to characterize the seismic
velocity structure of Greenland's crust and upper mantle in three dimensions;
and to integrate these results with gravity and heat-flow data, laboratory
estimates of material properties, and petrological data to map variations in
temperature, composition, and heat flux. The project would make use of seismic
data from the NSF- and internationally funded GLISN seismic network,
supplemented by targeted collection of data at a limited number of temporary
PASSCAL stations. The proposed research will lead to a greatly improved
understanding of the crust and mantle structure of Greenland, the way this
structure has evolved with time, and its influence on modern-day geophysical
processes in the cryosphere and solid Earth. The results of this study will
provide important inputs for ice-sheet models and models of glacial isostatic
adjustment. The accuracy of both types of models is critical for accurate
predictions of sea-level rise. The findings of this study will be relevant for
understanding continental assembly and preservation worldwide. The seismological
models derived in this project will also allow improved estimates of source
parameters for tectonic and glacial earthquakes. Raw data and derived data
products will be publicly available through the IRIS and UNAVCO archives. The
educational materials produced through this project will be available for
general use, and project outreach efforts will support U.S.-Greenland
partnership in education. The project will train one graduate student and 2 to 3
undergraduate students.