* 1304577
* Kokes Awards for the 23rd North American Catalysis Society Meeting, June 2-7, 2013 in Louisville, Kentucky
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Gary Jacobs, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2014
* USD 25,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The North American Catalysis Society (NACS) meeting is the
most prestigious meeting for the catalysis community outside of the
International Congress on Catalysis. The NACS meeting is held each 2 years and
is organized in turn by each of the Local US Catalysis Societies. The 23rd NACS
meeting is being held in Louisville, KY. The meeting topics typically cover many
aspects of catalysis utilizing both oral and poster presentations. Attendees can
be immersed in various areas of catalysis, whether they are currently working in
the area or wish to gain an understanding of catalysis work in a completely
different arena. Some participants come from outside the US, thereby allowing
initial contact with the global catalysis community. Prof. Gary Jacobs from the
University of Kentucky is the chairman of the Kokes Award Committee which seeks
funds to partially offset the costs for graduate students to participate in the
NACS meeting. The support of graduate student attendees is an excellent way to
allow them to begin the understanding of the diversity of work in the catalysis
field.

Broader Impacts: The entire meeting is an educational event for those workers in
the field. This award would enable partial support of approximately 100 graduate
students to attend the meeting. Many will be giving poster or even oral
presentations. There will be ample contact with existing and new colleagues in
catalysis. The work presented is current research at academic, industrial and
national laboratories. The support of graduate student attendance has been a
customary and well-placed investment from the Catalysis & Biocatalysis Program
of CBET/ENG in NSF.