* 1304939
* III: EAGER: Automatically Building Test Collections Using Implicit Relevance Signals from the Web
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Eduard Hovy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 103,233.00

Helping users find relevant information is undeniably an important problem vital
to the functioning of today's information-based societies. It is therefore no
surprise that millions of people worldwide make use of search engine
technologies each and every day. Although existing search technologies work
well, there is still considerable room for improvement. Search engine innovation
is driven by the ability to rapidly, and repeatedly, measure the quality of the
results produced by a given system. This type of measurement typically requires
some form of human input. For example, a human expert may be hired to assess the
relevance of search results, or the search engine may log user interactions,
such as the queries entered and the results clicked. After a sufficiently large
amount of data has been collected, it can then be used to accurately measure
search engine quality. It can also be used to improve the quality of existing
search engines via a process known as "tuning" or "training". However, gathering
large amounts of this information typically requires a significant amount of
human effort or computational resources. Therefore, sustained innovation is only
possible at a very steep cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques for constructing
large information retrieval test collections that require no human effort are
the primary focus of this research study. Rather than relying on human-curated
information, implicit relevance signals from the Web are mined to automatically
construct large, reusable test collections for a variety of search tasks,
including Web search, news search, and enterprise search. The observation that
the Web contains a large number of implicit relevance signals is the starting
point of the research. The simplest example of an implicit relevance signal is
the hyperlink, which can be interpreted as a signal acknowledging the relevance
of the target page by the source author. The hypothesis that such implicit
relevance signals can be effectively mined and aggregated in a completely
unsupervised manner to create test collections without any human effort is
investigated in this research. Automatically generated test collections are
evaluated in two different ways. First, the test collections are evaluated
according to their ability to accurately measure the quality of search systems
compared to human-generated test collections. Second, the quality of search
engines tuned using the automated test collections are compared against engines
tuned using manual test collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this project is derived from automatically constructed test collections that are
freely distributed to the broader research community. Advances in search engine
technologies are expected as the result of increased availability of training
data to systematically evaluate and tune search engines, both in industrial and
academic settings. Additional broader impact is expected from the integration of
research and education at both the graduate and undergraduate levels and from
engaging women and underrepresented students through various outreach programs.