* 1304612
* A Comparative Study of the Medical Ethnobotany of the Chukchi and Naukan Yupik of Siberia and the Central Alaskan Yup'ik
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2022
* Kevin Jernigan, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2022
* USD 579,627.00

This award supports research comparing the ethnomedical knowledge and language
of the Chukchi and Naukan Yupik in eastern Siberia and the Central Alaskan
Yup'ik in Alaska. The basic research project is to test basic anthropological
epistemologies about the relationship between culture and language, and seeks to
understand the relationship between language and culture under conditions of
linguistic and social change. The researcher will test this idea by examining
whether there are more similarities in medical beliefs between two societies
speaking similar languages and sharing a deep historical root (Naukan Yupik and
Central Alaskan Yup'ik), or between two societies speaking unrelated languages,
but sharing the more recent influence of the dominant Russian culture (Naukan
and Chukchi).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The comparison will focus on beliefs about
the effects that plants have on the body, including species believed to have
medicinal, nutritional and toxic properties. The research will be based on
standard anthropological methods, including semi-structured interviews in each
region regarding uses of plants that affect health and explanatory models of
health conditions, as well as field collection of relevant botanical species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher has built strong relationships with the
Yup'ik community and will include many Yup'ik students in the research through
his position at the Kuskokwim Campus of the University of Alaska where Alaska
Native students make up the majority of the student population. This project
will contribute much to our understanding of linguistic and cultural change,
document ethnobotanical language and conceptualization and will contribute much
to our understanding of the medicinal properties of Arctic plants that has
potential global application.