* 1304910
* Understanding changing ENSO flavors in the mid-Holocene laboratory.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Pedro Di Nezio, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2017
* USD 439,605.00

El Ni単o/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events can have profound impacts on regional
climate in many parts of the world. Recent studies have shown that two primary
"flavors" of El Ni単o exist, with distinct intensities and sea-surface
temperature (SST) patterns: the Eastern Pacific El Ni単o, which is more intense,
with warmer SSTs concentrated in the eastern Pacific; and the Central Pacific El
Ni単o, which is more moderate, with warmer SSTs concentrated in the central
Pacific. Neither models nor observations conclusively indicate which of these
ENSO flavors will be dominant as greenhouse gas warming progresses, creating
uncertainty in projections of regional climate change throughout the Pacific
basin. To help address this uncertainty, a team of scientists from the
University of Hawaii will undertake a paleoclimate reconstruction study focusing
on understanding the response of ENSO flavors to climate conditions in the mid-
Holocene (approximately 5000-7000 years before present). Through a synthesis of
climate model results and paleoclimate proxies, the project will investigate the
origin of ENSO flavors and their sensitivity to changes in tropical climate. In
addition, modeling experiments will be performed to examine the role of
stochastic noise in ENSO response to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will advance the understanding of ENSO behavior under past climate
conditions, leading to better-constrained models of future climate change in the
tropics. The project will support two early-career scientists.