* 1305809
* Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics (TASI), held at the University of Colorado, Boulder, CO; June 2013 - 2017
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2018
* K Mahanthappa, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2018
* USD 340,000.00

This renewal grant provides continued funding for TASI, the annual Theoretical
Advanced Study Institutes in Elementary Particle Physics, currently under the
direction of Professors K.T. Mahanthappa and T. deGrand at the University of
Colorado, Boulder. The four-week long TASI summer programs have been held every
year since 1984. The aim of TASI is to introduce advanced graduate students to a
much broader range of ideas and topics than they normally experience in their
home institutions while working on their dissertation topics. TASI has been
highly successful in achieving this by providing a series of lectures and
seminars on topics of current research in theoretical particle physics and
related experimental subjects. Indeed, during their nearly 30-year history, the
TASI summer programs have become a major educational experience and indeed an
eagerly anticipated "rite of passage" for literally generations of high-energy
theory graduate students. Moreover, since 2007, the TASI lectures have been
video-recorded and are accessible online. These video tapes form an important
"broader impacts" outreach component of TASI, and have become increasingly
valuable to the entire high-energy physics research community. Students
attending TASI also have the opportunity to present seminars on their current
research to their peers.