* 1305863
* Low Noise Suspensions and Readout Systems for Improving Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Stanley Whitcomb, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 470,000.00

This is a collaborative research program between Vladimir Braginsky's Moscow
State University (MSU) group and the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave
Observatory (LIGO) Laboratory. It focuses on two types of enhancements under
consideration for Advanced LIGO: the use of crystalline silicon for the
interferometer mirrors to reduce thermal noise, and quantum measurement
techniques that can give sensitivities beyond the current limits due to quantum
(shot) noise. Crystalline silicon is known to have excellent mechanical
properties and has a minimum in its thermal expansion near 120 K. Operation at
this point would minimize thermal noise. However, many aspects are not yet well
enough understood for large scale application. Under this grant, we explore
techniques for fabricating silicon ribbons for a silicon test mass suspension
operating at 120 K, measure dissipation in silicon ribbon suspensions, and to
find ways of minimization dissipation and thermal noise in the silicon
suspensions. We investigate optical losses and other poorly measured thermal,
mechanical and optical properties of pure high-ohmic crystalline silicon and
other possible candidate materials for test masses from room to liquid nitrogen
temperatures. Finally we analyze sources of noise in crystalline coatings
applied to silicon test masses. The other main limitation to the sensitivity of
Advanced LIGO will be quantum (shot) noise. We also continue the investigation
of new topologies and measurement schemes for laser gravitational wave
detectors, relevant to both Enhanced Advanced LIGO and beyond, and allowing us
to suppress quantum noise and to relax requirements for the circulating optical
power. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work have a number of impacts.
The most direct is that the techniques developed can be used to make
gravitational wave detectors more sensitive, and thus help derive more
information about the astrophysical phenomena that cause gravitational waves.
Understanding the unusual conditions that create gravitational waves improves
our understanding of violent processes that shape our universe exciting and
inspiring students and the public. More broadly, the same techniques which are
developed under this research can be used in a number of precision measurement
applications in science and engineering. These include reducing noise in
precison frequency reference standards to produce more accurate clocks, making
quantum cryptography and quantum computing more feasible, improved tests of
fundamental assumptions about space and matter, and ... finally, a major goal of
this work is to foster closer collaboration on peaceful research between Russian
and US scientists. This promotes better understanding between the scientific
communities in these two super-powers.