* 1305730
* Modeling Extreme Astrophysical Black Hole Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Joshua Faber, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 546,675.00

Gravitational Wave (GW) Astronomy promises to provide a revolutionary new view
of the universe that can probe previously unexplorable regions, including the
interiors of neutron stars, collisions of black holes, which emit energy at
luminosities exceeding the entire visible universe, and even remnants of the big
bang. However, the challenges are significant because the GW signals will be
hidden in orders of magnitude larger noise. To gain new insight into the
dynamics of the universe, GW astronomers need to be able to infer the nature of
the sources from the observed signals. However, the physical parameters of these
sources can only be extracted from the observed signals if the dependence of the
waveform on source parameters is known to high-accuracy. The success of the GW
astronomy efforts therefore depends critically on advancements in Numerical
Relativity (NR). This award funds the well-established research program at the
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) to model merging black hole binaries in
the highly-nonlinear regime, which are among the loudest sources for
aLIGO/AdVirgo. We focus on binaries in the technically difficult small-mass-
ratio, highly-spinning, and highly-precessing regimes, which requires new
developments in code optimization, new gauge conditions (especially gauge
conditions adapted for the high-spin regime), non-conformally flat initial data
for high spins and linear momentum, as well as hybrid numerical/perturbative
techniques that will allow us to model a large range of binaries using
relatively few numerical simulations. Our principle goals will be to produce
waveforms from these extreme binaries of sufficient accuracy for aLIGO/AdVirgo
GW data analysis, and to model the gravitational radiation recoil (as well as
remnant mass and spins) from highly-precessing binaries in order to elucidate
the distributions of these recoils and how they affect the distribution and
growth of supermassive black holes. This research is very timely now that aLIGO
is scheduled to come online in 2015. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research will
directly benefit the aLIGO/AdVirgo project, the NINJA and NRAR projects, and an
emerging new field in astrophysics: The search for the observational
consequences of merging and recoiling black holes. The research proposed here
will complement other ongoing projects of our NR group to include matter and
magnetic fields in our vacuum general relativistic code in order to study EM
counterparts to compact-object mergers and to model accretion disk dynamics near
supermassive black holes. This award will not only enable the PIs to enhance
their research program, but it will also be used to greatly enhance the research
effort at RIT as a whole. The award supports graduate student research in RIT's
PhD Astronomy program and a proposed new PhD program in 'Modeling and
Computation'. Importantly, our research will be the focus of our new partnership
with RIT's National Technical Institute for the Deaf on an NSF-funded project
that combines innovative dance and theater performances to promote science to
the deaf and hard-of-hearing communities. Visualizations will also be a vehicle
for public outreach events on science, mathematics, and computing through site
visits and annual community-wide public exhibits like 'ImagineRIT'.