* 1305655
* Chemical Signatures for the Discovery of Protein Function
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 318,000.00

With this award the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Drs. Mary Jo Ondrechen and Penny J. Beuning from Northeastern
University to develop, implement, and verify a novel method for predicting the
biochemical function of proteins. This project utilizes computational chemistry
tools in an innovative chemical-properties-based method to discover the
biochemical function of protein structures. It begins with the premise that
local structural features at the active site constitute better predictors of
biochemical function than does the overall fold. First it is shown that sets of
structurally similar proteins may be sorted into subgroups according to
biochemical function, using the active site residues predicted from computed
chemical properties, structurally aligning them, and scoring them according to
chemical similarity. Thus for each functional subgroup, a characteristic
chemical signature are defined. Next, structural genomics proteins are analyzed
and annotated, using their calculated chemical signatures and seeking matches
with the chemical signatures of the previously characterized proteins, and
misannotated structural genomics proteins are identified. For selected cases of
structural genomics proteins that have been determined to be misannotated, or
for which biochemical function is newly predicted, the predicted functions are
verified experimentally by kinetics assays and binding studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome sequencing and structural genomics efforts over the
past 15 years have provided a wealth of new information about thousands of
proteins. While genome research holds tremendous promise for major future
benefits to society, a key step toward the realization of this potential is the
ability to determine the function of the thousands of protein structures whose
biochemical functions are currently unknown or uncertain; this project addresses
that current challenge. Greater understanding of protein function has many
potential benefits in fields outside of chemistry, including agriculture,
biotechnology, medicine, biofuels, and "green" industrial processes. A better
understanding of the local structural, electrostatic, and chemical patterns that
govern how proteins work so selectively and efficiently will open the door to
novel commercial applications. Such basic knowledge to drive novel high-tech
commercial application is important to the future growth of our regional and
national economies. This project also will develop a knowledge base and tools
that will enable other discoveries and applications. In this project a racially
diverse group of both undergraduate and doctoral students are trained in methods
of computational chemistry, computational biology, and biochemistry. Experience
in these areas is a vital ingredient for United States competitiveness in the
global economy. Individuals with such knowledge and training are in high demand
in both academia and industry.