* 1305111
* Mossbauer and EPR Studies of Biological Oxygen Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Eckard Munck, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Dr. Eckard Munck from Carnegie Mellon University to conduct
spectroscopic and theoretical studies of iron-containing enzymes and synthetic
complexes that activate molecular oxygen. The studies involve characterization
of reaction intermediates of the enzymes 2,3 homoprotocatechuate dioxygenase,
1,2 benzoate dioxygenase and methane monooxygenase; each of these proteins is a
representative of a large class of enzymes that carry out catalytic reactions of
fundamental importance. The studies focus on trapping short-lived (milliseconds)
intermediates in high oxidations states such as iron(IV) and iron(V and involve
low temperature Mossbauer and Electron Paramagnetic Resonance experiments,
complemented by density functional theory calculations. Further studies are
aimed at trapping putative iron(V) intermediates in water oxidation reactions,
one of the great challenges in inorganic chemistry. Information gained from
these investigations is expected to provide crucial insights into the mechanisms
of high oxidation state chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many catalytic reactions
carried out by iron-containing enzymes in mammalian and bacterial organisms pass
through states that contain as reactive species short-lived intermediates for
which the iron atom is in an iron(IV) or iron(V) state bound to an oxo group
derived from atmospheric oxygen. Mossbauer spectroscopy is a powerful tool to
characterize these states in unprecedented detail. The spectra can be analyzed
to yield a large number of parameters that characterize the oxidation state and
the electronic structure of the iron. These parameters can be evaluated by
quantum chemical methods to yield insights into the reactivity of these
entities. Information gleaned from studies of the enzymes can be used by
chemists to design synthetic complexes that either mimic the biological systems
or perform functions that extend the range of the latter. The projects are
carried out as collaborations between physicists, chemists and biochemists,
providing training for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows of four
collaborating groups as they acquire a broad perspective of an integrative
approach to biological research. The research will be the basis of tutorial
presentations to graduate students at Carnegie Mellon University, seven groups
at the University of Minnesota as well to 70-80 graduate students at the 2014
Penn State Bioinorganic Workshop.