* 1305254
* Nonequilibrium Physics of Spindle Assembly: Understanding the Response of the Spindle to Perturbations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Daniel Needleman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2016
* USD 480,000.00

This award funds a research project under the direction of Professor Daniel
Needleman at Harvard University.

When a cell divides, each of its daughter cells must receive a complete copy of
its DNA. First the DNA is duplicated, and then the two copies of DNA are
segregated into the daughter cells by a highly complex, self-organizing
structure called the spindle. While many of the components of the spindle have
been studied in detail, there is still very little known about how the spindle
assembles and carries out its function. Understanding self-organizing structures
such as the spindle is not only crucial for biology, but also poses a
fundamental challenge for physics, since these systems are living materials that
behave drastically differently from the inert matter that has been traditionally
studied in condensed matter physics. In this project, Professor Needleman will
employ approaches from physics, including quantitative experiments and
mathematical theories, to understand the spindle. The goal of this research is
to develop and test theories that might explain the responses of the spindle to
drugs and to biochemical and physical perturbations.

This project is envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Understanding
the response of the spindle to perturbations may have medical benefits, as
errors in spindle function are believed to cause some cancers and birth defects,
and many chemotherapy agents work by interfering with the spindle. Studying the
spindle from a quantitative perspective may also provide fundamental insights
into nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, improve our understanding of living
matter, and lead to the ability to design new materials. Undergraduate and
graduate students working on this project will receive highly interdisciplinary
training. The results obtained through this research project will also be
disseminated in research journals and on the lab web site. Course material for
students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels will be
developed and used to promote interdisciplinary training for a wider audience.
Professor Needleman will also take an active role in outreach to high school
teachers and in encouraging high school students to pursue STEM careers.