* 1305583
* Electronic and Atomistic Effects in Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Tai Chiang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2017
* USD 615,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project is a study of the atomic-scale
structure and behavior of composite systems that are prepared by atomic
deposition, artificial layering, and thermal processing of metals on the most
important electronic substrate materials, including silicon, germanium, and
silicon carbide, that are flat, stepped, or decorated by atomic wires. The
deposited metals, amounting to few atomic layers thick, tend to self-organize
into nanoscale features, such as atomic wires, stripes, mesas, pyramids, or even
ultrasmooth films, because of quantum confinement and boundary effects. These
nanostructures often exhibit unusual properties that are not intuitively
connected to the behavior of the metals in the bulk form. The underlying
nanoscale science is a key basis for developing new material and device
configurations relevant to technological and industrial advances. The research
will focus on the connections between the stability, shapes, and sizes of the
nanostructures and the electronic structure and chemical properties of the
system, with the intent to derive a general understanding and design rules for
guiding system fabrication and functionalization. The experimental tools will
include angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and x-ray diffraction, and
much of the work will be performed at national synchrotron-radiation facilities.
This research bridges basic science and applications, and provides opportunities
for education and training of students, postdoctoral research associates, and
visiting scholars in the use of modern tools for materials synthesis and
characterization. The experiences will position them well for careers in
scientific research, education, technology, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a study of the atomic-scale structure and behavior of composite
systems prepared by atomic deposition, artificial layering, and controlled heat
treatment of metals on the most common electronic substrate materials including
silicon, germanium, and silicon carbide. The deposited metals, amounting to few
atomic layers thick, tend to naturally develop nanoscale features such as atomic
wires, stripes, mesas, pyramids, or even ultrasmooth films. These nanostructures
often exhibit unusual properties that are not observed in the bulk form of these
materials. The underlying nanoscale science is a key basis for developing new
materials and device configurations for industry. The research will focus on the
connections between the stability, shapes, and sizes of the nanostructures and
the electronic structure and chemical properties of the system, with the intent
to derive a general understanding and design rules to guide the development of
new functional materials. The experiments will be performed at national
synchrotron radiation facilities, which provide intense x-rays for probing the
systems of interest. This research bridges basic science and applications, and
provides opportunities for education and training of students, postdoctoral
research associates, and visiting scholars in the use of modern tools for
materials synthesis and characterization. The experiences will position them
well for careers in scientific research, education, technology, and industry.