* 1305509
* Packing and Unpacking the Genome: Single-Molecule Manipulation of Chromatin
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Simon Mochrie, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2016
* USD 420,000.00

In this project, the PIs will use single-molecule optical tweezers to elucidate
the structural, mechanical and thermodynamic consequences of biologically-
relevant post-translational modifications (PTMs) on the behavior of individual
nucleosomes and on chromatin condensation. The fundamental biological
significance of the proposed research is that the packaging of DNA into
nucleosomes and chromatin, and its modulation by histone modifications and
histone H1, are essential aspects of gene regulation in all eukaryotes. Specific
objectives of this project include: (1) assemble nucleosomes and chromatin,
using histone H4 with prescribed single and multiple site-specific acetylation;
(2) compare the behavior of chromatin in the presence of magnesium ions or
magnesium ions and linker histone H1, which are key factors regulating
condensation, to the behavior of chromatin without these factors; (3) determine
accurate free energy differences between the different molecular states
encountered, using an intelligent force-stepping protocol; (4) compare the
behavior of nucleosomes containing histone H4 with acetylated tails to those
containing H4 with mutated tails, that mimic acetylation, revealing the role of
charge. Thus, this project will provide observations and measurements needed to
create and validate physical models of eukaryotic gene expression.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include: (1) these
studies have potential human health benefits, because several diseases,
including asthma and a number of cancers, are linked to histone PTMs; (2) by
following Yale's Integrated Graduate Program in Physical and Engineering Biology
(IGPPEB) and serving as teaching fellows in a novel introductory physics
sequence, that seeks to engage life-science undergraduates, the graduate
students involved in this project will join a new generation of
researcher/teachers, who excel at quantitative approaches, have the biological
sophistication to identify and apply their skills to cutting-edge biological
problems, and are excited to educate future generations; (3) to encourage an
interest in science in the next generation, the PIs will work with Breakthrough
New Haven, a high school preparation program for socio-economically
disadvantaged students in Grades 7 and 8, to implement hands-on science modules
for Breakthrough's summer program, and will host high-school students for summer
research projects in their laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division
of Physics and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.