* 1305794
* SusChEM:  Polyesters from Sustainable C1 Feedstocks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Stephen Miller, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Stephen A. Miller of the University of
Florida will synthesize and characterize a new class of biorenewable polyesters,
targeting thermoplastic packaging applications. The desired polymers resemble
the aliphatic polyester polyglycolic acid (PGA) and are termed PGA beta.
However, the proposed approach avoids the multistep production of glycolic acid
currently necessary for PGA synthesis and it avoids fermentation technology upon
which polylactic acid (PLA) production depends. The cationic alternating
copolymerization of formaldehyde and carbon monoxide is readily adapted to the
incorporation of comonomers, allowing for the facile modulation of the
thermomechanical properties. Typical comonomers are inexpensive epoxides, which
serve to disrupt the structural regularity of the polymeric main-chain, and thus
will decrease crystallinity, modulus, and brittleness. Structure-property
analyses will provide guidance and predict the best comonomer targets for
mimicking the properties of fossil fuel-based plastics. Also, transition metal
catalysts will be surveyed for their capacity to moderate the reaction
conditions, and a battery of polymer degradation experiments will be conducted
to assess the timescale and conditions for safely returning the PGA beta back
into the environment.

Traditional commodity plastics are made via well-established routes and have
proven material properties. However, the vast majority derives from finite
resources, such as petroleum and natural gas, and contributes greatly to the
accumulation of waste because of slow degradation behavior. This research
addresses these drawbacks in developing a new, sustainable class of plastics.
The efficiently designed synthesis relies on feedstocks that can be sourced from
biomass, such as forest byproducts and inedible agricultural waste. The
properties of the plastics can be finely tuned in order to mimic and replace
existing fossil fuel-based plastics. Instead of accumulating in waste disposal
sites and in the environment, these plastics will degrade benignly back into the
environmentally friendly chemical components.