* 1305731
* Microwave Impedance Microscopy Study of Topological Structures of Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Zhi-Xun Shen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 860,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this program is to study local
structures of quantum materials with electrical contrast. Because of its
scientific as well as technological importance, the electronic properties of
complex quantum materials have been an important area of research. As model
material systems, their understanding often leads to revelations well beyond
these materials themselves, as well as to important technology. A recent
development of the field is the emerging importance of local organizations in
these materials, such as edge channels, domain walls, glassy patterns and
interface structures. As a result, it is highly desirable to probe the local
electrical response to external excitations and gain insight on electronic
organization in these materials. The experimental tool to carry out this study
is a novel scanning near-field microwave impedance microscopy (sMIM). With
optimized sensitivity, the minute local dielectric response to electromagnetic
waves can be detected by RF electronics to form microwave images, with a spatial
resolution determined by the tip diameter which can be one million times smaller
than radiation wavelength. The combined strength of high resolution microwave
imaging and temperature/field environment in the experimental system will allow
the team to spatially visualize many interesting physical processes. This
project will support the education of a PhD student and postdoc in these highly
sophisticated experiments, which have historically been excellent training for
many scientific careers from academia to the most advanced technology
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this program is to study electrical properties of materials that are
candidates to continue the Si revolution. This understanding often leads to
revelations well beyond these materials themselves, as well as to important new
technology. A recent development of the field is the emerging importance of
local organizations in these materials. As a result, it is highly desirable to
probe the local electrical response to external excitations and gain insight on
electronic organization in these materials, thus optimizing the opportunity to
tailor their properties for application. The experimental tool to carry out this
study is a novel scanning near-field microwave impedance microscopy (sMIM). This
project will support the education of a PhD student and postdoc in these highly
sophisticated experiments, which have historically been excellent training for
many scientific careers from academia to the most advanced technology
industries. Because of the relative ease of operation of RF electronics, a
first-order understanding of the technique and its contrast mechanism are easily
understood with a simple lumped-element circuit models, which can be taught in
high school physics classes. Further, the dual nature of both science and
instrumentation development is an excellent platform to engage college students
for research. This technology is also of industrial interest, for example in
semiconductor metrology.