* 1305472
* Topics in the Spectral Theory of Random Operators and in Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Alexander Sodin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2016
* USD 186,000.00

This research focusses on two groups of topics in mathematical physics: the
spectral theory of random operators, and statistical mechanics models, with
special focus on two and quasi-one-dimensional systems. A wide range of methods
from mathematical physics, classical analysis, probability theory, and convex
geometry will be applied to study some of the open problems in these areas. In
addition, the connections between the two areas will be investigated. Several
major problems pertaining to random band operators remain open after many years
of research. Perturbative series (such as resolvent expansions) typically
diverge in the physically interesting regimes, whereas the non-perturbative
methods (supersymmetric formalism, transfer operators) have been only partially
developed. The PI will develop perturbative and non-perturbative methods to
improve the rigorous understanding of the spectral properties of random band
operators. In two- and higher dimensional statistical mechanics, the PI will
investigate the large scale properties of gradient models, as well as discrete
models. A better understanding of the former will also shed light on the latter
(for example, on two-dimensional height models). The PI will strive to combine
the well-developed multi-scale and convexity methods with techniques from
analysis and high-dimensional convex geometry. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the connections between mathematical
physics and other fields of mathematics, especially, probability theory,
classical analysis and convex geometry. These connections may lead to
developments in all these fields. The PI has delivered numerous talks at
seminars, colloquia, and international conferences in mathematical physics,
analysis, probability, high-dimensional geometry, and the interactions between
these areas.