* 1305682
* Dynamical, Strong-Field Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Frans Pretorius, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 480,000.00

The research goals of the project are focused on understanding the strong-field
regime of Einstein's theory of general relativity. This encompasses both
astrophysical and theoretical aspects of general relativity. On the
astrophysical side, the main effort is an ongoing study of sources of
gravitational waves in our universe, in particular binary black hole, black
hole-neutron star and binary neutron star collisions. When neutron stars are
involved in the collision, further questions involving potentially observable
electromagnetic counterpart emission and production of r-process elements in
ejected material will be pursued. The theoretical work includes studies of
gravitational collapse and corresponding critical phenomena, the
ultrarelativistic regime of particle collisions where gravity dominates the
interaction, and the nature of gravity in higher dimensional spacetimes. Of
particular interest for the latter subject are asymptotically Anti de-Sitter
(AdS) spacetimes, where the gravitational dynamics can be related to the physics
of strongly coupled conformal field theories (CFTs) via the AdS/CFT
correspondence of string theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
contribute crucial information to our understanding of sources of gravitational
waves in the universe and so form an integral part of the burgeoning field of
gravitational wave astronomy. It will further provide a deeper understanding of
the dynamical strong-field regime of general relativity, and help expand our
knowledge of the interrelations between general relativity, high energy physics,
and quantum gravity. The pursuit of these projects will involve graduate
students, undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows. They will thus be trained to
do leading scientific research, become knowledgeable in corresponding areas of
physics, and adept in high-performance computing and numerical methods. These
skills are invaluable to many professions, and would thus also benefit and
further the development of those students and postdocs that subsequently wish to
pursue careers outside academia.