* 1305647
* Emergent Physics in Correlated, Spin-orbit Coupled Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Vidya Madhavan, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 396,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on spin-orbit coupled
systems where correlations are relevant. While there have been many recent
theoretical studies describing novel phases in such materials, none of the
intriguing predictions such as the Weyl semi-metal state or axion insulators has
as yet been experimentally observed. Low temperature scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) is one of the best methods to probe the electronic structure of
complex materials, which often exhibit nanoscale inhomogeneities. STM will be
used to study correlated spin-orbit materials such as the pyrochlore and
Ruddlesden-Popper series of iridates, or the Heusler compounds. Progress in
understanding fundamental properties of these systems may lead to new paradigms
in spin-orbit coupled complex systems. With close feedback from theory
collaborators and quick turn around in obtaining single crystal and thin film
samples, the group will rapidly be able to explore a variety of materials in
search of novel phases. The integrated education activities include a new
structured department-wide mentoring plan for post-docs, and involvement of
undergraduates in research, which will help train the next generation of
scientists, as well as an ongoing outreach program through the School of
Education, which will have a measurable impact on the numbers of trained science
teachers in middle- and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;A new and exciting frontier in the exploring the physics
of electrons and atoms in solids is the exploration of materials where there is
more than one dominating interaction. Spin-orbit coupling is an interaction
between the quantum mechanical spin of an electron and its orbital properties.
When spin-orbit interaction is strong, materials are known to show novel
effects. However, adding electron-electron interactions to these systems can
vastly expand the range of novel properties. While there have been many recent
theoretical studies on the possible new states in such materials, very few
experimental studies have been carried out so far. Moreover, none of the
intriguing predicted phases has as yet been experimentally observed. This
project focuses on the fundamental physics of materials where with multiple
interactions, which can either compete or aid one another. To study these
materials we will use the tool of scanning tunneling microscopy, which has the
power to not only image single atoms but also to move individual atoms to build
artificial atomic scale structures. Any discoveries of novel states and
understanding their properties will be vital to advancing our knowledge in this
new field. This project will support graduate students and post-docs who will
learn experimental techniques and the physics of materials at the cutting edge
of current research.