* 1305450
* Bacterial Photosynthetic Pathways Probed by Two-Dimensional Electronic Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Jennifer Ogilvie, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

With this award the PI will employ two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy
(2DES) to investigate the underlying physical mechanisms governing the
directional ultrafast transfer of energy between the antennae and reaction
centers of photosynthetic purple bacteria. The program of research will both
push the capabilities of 2DES as a powerful and quantitative method for studying
natural photosynthetic systems, and use 2DES to address open questions about
photosynthesis in purple bacteria. Specifically, this research aims to answer
the following questions: 1) What are the roles of vibrational and electronic
coherence in energy transfer and charge separation in purple bacteria? 2) How do
purple bacteria remodel their energy-landscape to regulate energy transfer under
high and low light conditions? This research aims to extend the capabilities of
2DES spectroscopy to perform the first 2DES experiments on single crystals of
photosynthetic complexes as well as the first 2DES experiments on whole cells.
Improvements in the capabilities of 2DES, and its ability to provide feedback to
theoretical modeling of energy transfer and charge separation in purple bacteria
as a model system will ultimately pave the way for a better understanding of the
more complex plant photosystems. Understanding the role of coherence in
photosynthetic energy transfer and charge separation may drive the development
of new theoretical models of these processes. The award also aims to promote a
positive image of science through public education, and in particular to
encourage women and minorities to enter careers in science through outreach
activities and mentored undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in
the Division of Physics and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.