* 1305913
* Ceramics Science of New Solid-State Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Nitin Padture, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 550,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project lays the scientific foundation for a new
type of high-efficiency solid-state solar cells that can be fabricated using
relatively inexpensive materials and processes. These solar cells have the
potential to advance the field of photovoltaics significantly, and to have an
impact on reducing the cost of renewable energy to make it more competitive.
This project is timely and highly relevant as there is an urgent need for
efficient, low-cost, and durable way to generate electricity from renewable
sources, such as the sun, in these times of global energy/environment crisis.
New energy materials used in these solar cells and their properties, the complex
nanoscale architectures needed, and the novel ceramics synthesis/processing
methods used to achieve those architectures are being investigated. The effects
of the materials and the nanoscale architectures on the solar cells performance
are also elucidated to gain a better understanding of fundamental phenomena. The
ceramics synthesis/processing science studies conducted here also impact the
creation of novel nano-composites for applications beyond solar cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project addresses key ceramics
science issues pertaining to the new high-efficiency solid-state dye-sensitized
solar cells (SSDSCs). Solution-processed, hole-conducting cesium tin iodide
perovskite semiconductors are used within continuous nanopores of electron-
conducting titania films in SSDSCs in place of the conventionally used liquid
electrolytes and platinum. The key issues that are being addressed include
understanding the new ingredient in the SSDSCs -- the cesium tin iodide
perovskites themselves, the way the perovskites are incorporated into the SSDSCs
nanoscale architecture through ceramics synthesis/processing, and the nature of
the titania-sensitizer-perovskite nanoscale architecture and interfaces. The
effect of the nanoscale architecture on photovoltaic properties/performance are
also elucidated, contributing to the advancement of the science and engineering
of the new SSDSCs. Considering the recent interest in halide perovskites in
general for application in fields of photovoltaics and topological insulators,
the basic studies conducted in this project on these materials are timely and
highly relevant. As part of this project two undergraduates, one graduate
student and one post-doctoral researcher are being educated and trained in the
broad area of energy materials. Outreach to K-12 students is also underway using
solar cells demonstrations to get them excited about STEM (science-technology-
engineering-math) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is funded jointly by
the Ceramics (CER) and Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Programs.