* 1305879
* Noise, inelastic processes, and coherence in atomic-scale and molecular junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Douglas Natelson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** The fate of quantum coherence and the mechanisms of
dissipation at the nanoscale are of fundamental scientific interest and have
potential relevance to nanoelectronic technologies. This project will use radio
frequency noise measurements and sensitive electronic transport techniques to
examine atomic and molecular-scale junctions driven out of equilibrium. The
scaling of nonequilibrium noise with bias and device temperature allows
determination of the effective temperature of the driven electrons. In junctions
containing unpaired localized spins, noise measurements will probe Kondo
physics, a consequence of quantum entanglement between the local spin and those
of the conduction electrons. Measurements of the bias and temperature dependence
of conductance fluctuations will allow the estimation of the quantum coherence
time for electrons in these nanostructures even near room temperature. These
experiments will provide outstanding research training in advanced fabrication
and measurement skills (relevant for high technology industry) for two PhD
students. Results will be disseminated to the general public and K12 students
through blogging and interactions with local museums.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Familiar to anyone who has ever used a toaster,
when electric current flows through a macroscopic wire, energy carried by the
moving electrons ends up in the form of heat, and the counterintuitive physics
of quantum mechanics does not seem relevant. However, when the current passes
through a single atom or molecule, the way that heat gets generated and the role
of quantum effects (that govern chemistry and physics at such scales) are much
less transparent. In this project two doctoral students will make atomic-scale
junctions and use sensitive measurements of the current and its fluctuations as
a function of time and voltage to "take the temperature" of the electrons, and
to see the consequences of quantum mechanics on electrical conduction.
Understanding heating and quantum effects at these scales is relevant to the
development of next-generation nanoelectronics technologies. Students educated
and trained in this area will be well positioned for jobs in high tech industry
or research, and the PI will disseminate results to the general public and K12
students through blogging and interactions with local museums.