* 1305723
* Heterogeneous Chemistry and Photochemistry in the Troposphere:  Reactions of Mineral Dust and Other Metal-Containing Particle Surfaces at the Gas-Solid and Liquid-Solid Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Vicki Grassian, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/2016
* USD 420,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professor Vicki H. Grassian
at the University Iowa that will focus on the chemistry and photochemistry of
mineral dust and metal-containing particles with trace atmospheric gases at the
gas-solid and liquid-solid interface. The chemistry that occurs on these
surfaces can alter gas phase concentrations of key atmospheric constituents as
well as significantly change the physicochemical properties of the particles. In
the environment, these interfaces are present as both aerosol and stationary
surfaces. In the proposed studies, reactions of atmospheric gases with
components of mineral dust and metal-containing particles are investigated to
better understand the chemistry of the troposphere and the impact that these
reactions have on the environment. Several different aspects will be
investigated and include the heterogeneous chemistry of organic acids with
mineral dust particles, the heterogeneous chemistry of atmospheric gases on
photoactive components of mineral dust aerosol and surface reactions of
anthropogenic metal-containing oxide particles, which are components of
atmospheric aerosol as well as stationary surfaces. These reactions take place
under different regimes of water activity and, therefore, different phases of
water including adsorbed water at the gas-solid interface and liquid water at
the liquid-solid interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities focus
on better understanding the fundamental chemistry that occurs at aerosol and
stationary particle surfaces. Without these types of fundamental studies, there
would be little information to incorporate into atmospheric and environmental
model simulations and there would be little understanding of this potentially
important reaction chemistry that may impact the environment. Besides broader
impacts related to better understanding the natural and human-impacted
environment, another important component of this research is in the educational
and outreach activities that are proposed. These include training of
undergraduate and graduate students. The PI has a research program that attracts
a diverse group of students including many women and underrepresented
minorities. Outreach activities include the development of hands-on activities
for the broader public that spans K-12 students and their parents. The PI is
leading efforts to expand and enhance the effectiveness of STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) outreach and education in departments
and centers within the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of
Iowa.