* 1305280
* RUI:  Studies of Relativistic Heavy Ions Collisions in ALICE at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Edmundo Garcia-Solis, Chicago State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 230,000.00

At the core of a successful undergraduate education in STEM disciplines is the
capacity to offer students the opportunity to practice scientific inquiry that
connects the use of modern technology to captivating areas of research. This
grant supports a research program to study Heavy Ion Collisions at the European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) with the ALICE experiment. The focus of
the Heavy Ion program at CERN is to understand the behavior of matter at very
high density, corresponding to conditions a fraction of a second after the Big
Bang, when a hot, dense medium of quarks and gluons existed. The goal is to
recreate these conditions via colliding nuclei at very high energies.

Chicago State University (CSU) will contribute to the ALICE effort by working on
two areas of interest: the jet physics capabilities brought to ALICE by the
electromagnetic calorimeter (EMCal), and R&D for the upgrade of ALICE's central
barrel tracking and trigger detectors. The physics analysis of J/Psi jets
detected in the EMCal that is included in the project constitutes a unique
program of measurements to investigate the production mechanism of quarkonia in
proton-proton collisions and the response of quark gluon medium to jet energy
deposition in lead-lead collisions. On the other hand the group's R&D
contribution to the upgrade of ALICE will provide opportunities for the
involvement of undergraduate students in hardware projects.

Recruiting, retaining, and educating science, technology, engineering and
mathematics students and teachers has been identified as the cornerstone in the
effort to improve scientific literacy, maintain economic growth, and to provide
the platform for relevant scientific discoveries. This project addresses these
issues by consolidating a high-energy experimental nuclear physics program at
CSU: (1) The use of cutting-edge technology for high-energy nuclear physics
experiments provides an attractive opportunity to captivate and prepare
students, (2) A collaborative program at an international laboratory exposes
students to research experiences they could not otherwise obtain at an
undergraduate university. Because of the make-up of the student population, the
location of the university and the current outreach programs of the department,
this program has the potential to promote inner-city underrepresented students
into STEM education.