* 1305101
* Computer Modeling of Proton Conduction in Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Francesco Paesani, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 351,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry Division and the Division
of Materials Research contribute funds to this award. It supports theoretical
research and education with the objective to model proton conduction in metal-
organic frameworks through the development and application of a novel simulation
methodology. Proton conduction in solids and porous materials is a process of
fundamental importance for fuel cell technologies. Much of current research on
fuel cells focuses on proton exchange membranes where the electrolytes are
Nafion or some other sulfonated polymers. Since high proton conductivity is only
obtained at high levels of hydration, the maximum operation temperature of
current fuel cells is limited by the condensation point of water. Metal-organic
frameworks are conceptually different separator materials that can transport
protons at high temperatures and in low-humidity environments. One of the main
advantages of metal-organic frameworks is the possibility to modify the inner
surface of their pores with respect to hydrophilicity and acidity via suitable
organic ligands, which can be used to control proton conduction at the molecular
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on the molecular-
level modeling of proton conduction in several chemically and structurally
different metal-organic frameworks, all of which are of considerable interest
for possible applications in fuel cell technologies. The specific foci are: 1)
Proton conduction via water molecules adsorbed in the nanochannels, 2) Proton
conduction via nitrogen-containing molecules adsorbed in the nanochannels, 3)
Proton conduction in functionalized metal-organic frameworks. Proton conduction
presents a challenge for current computational methodologies due to the
dynamically changing bonding topologies of numerous molecular structures and
complexity of the surrounding chemical environment. A precise characterization
of proton conduction requires a physically complete representation of the
underlying many-body interactions as well as an extensive sampling of the
relevant phase space. The rigorous combination of these two components
ultimately leads to the correct description of the free-energy landscape that
governs the thermodynamics and kinetics of proton transport. A novel
computational approach will be developed that meets this challenge by combining
an ab initio-based representation of proton hopping with an accurate description
of the framework-framework and framework-guests interactions. This will provide
molecular-level insights into the mechanisms that govern proton transport in
metal-organic frameworks, which is the first, necessary step toward the rational
design of new conducting metal-organic framework structures that can function at
higher temperatures and lower relative humidity for application in next
generation fuel cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students
as well as postdoctoral fellows will be involved in the research and will
acquire a solid foundation in theoretical, physical, and materials chemistry.
The computational approach developed within this project will be integrated in
Amber, a popular molecular dynamics simulation package. The outreach component
also includes the PI's continuing involvement with the Research Scholars
Program, which provides high-school students from across the country with the
opportunity to carry out summer research at UC San
Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry Division and the Division of
Materials Research contribute funds to this award. It supports an integrated
theoretical and computational research and education program related to fuel
cell technologies as alternative energy sources. The increasing energy demands
and associated effects on the environment pose strict constraints on future use
of natural resources such as oil and gas. Considerable effort has recently been
devoted to the development of alternative energy sources such as fuel cells that
convert chemical energy into directly usable forms. For example, hydrogen fuel
cells exploit a fundamental chemical reaction in which the electrons are first
drawn from hydrogen molecules to produce protons at the anode, and then are
transferred to the cathode through an external circuit that produces direct
current. At the same time, the protons are transported across a permeable
membrane from the anode to the cathode where they are reunited with the
electrons to form molecular hydrogen that subsequently reacts with oxygen to
form water. The net result is thus the conversion of chemical energy into
electrical energy. Since the overall products are water and heat, hydrogen fuel
cells are clean technologies with regard to environmental issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the reasons why fuel cells have not yet found wider
application is related to their efficiency, which strongly depends on the
ability of protons to quickly travel across the membrane from the anode to the
cathode. The particular nature of the membranes that are currently used
represent the major obstacle to the development of more efficient fuel cells.
The primary goal of this project is to use computer simulation to characterize
the molecular mechanisms that determine proton conduction in a new class of
materials known as metal-organic frameworks. Metal-organic frameworks contain
organic molecules that act as bridges between inorganic clusters to form highly
porous three-dimensional structures. Due to the presence of microscopic pores
and channels, metal-organic frameworks can thus be used as effective separators
in fuel cell technologies in which protons can be shuttled from the anode to the
cathode through intervening carrier molecules or through the framework
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on the molecular-level
modeling of proton conduction in several chemically and structurally different
metal-organic frameworks, all of which are of considerable interest for possible
applications in future fuel cell technologies. In general terms, proton
conduction presents an enormous challenge for current computational approaches
due to its intrinsic complexity. A new methodology will be developed that meets
this challenge by combining state-of-the-art simulation techniques with accurate
descriptions of the molecular interactions. The resulting computational approach
will be integrated into Amber, which is one of the most popular software
packages for molecular dynamics simulations. Graduate and undergraduate students
as well as postdoctoral fellows will be involved in the research and will
acquire a solid foundation in theoretical, physical, and materials chemistry.
The outreach component of the proposed project also includes the PI continuing
involvement with the Research Scholars Program, which provides high-school
students from across the country with the opportunity to carry out summer
research at UC San Diego.