* 1305548
* RUI: Chemical Investigations into the Bioactivity of the DNA Lesion 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Michelle Hamm, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 255,000.00

With this RUI Award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is supporting
Professor Michelle Hamm of the University of Richmond to better understand the
steric and/or electronic properties that dictate the bioactivity of
8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (OdG) and its 5'-triphosphate derivative, OdGTP. The
oxidatively damaged 2'-deoxyguanosine derivative OdG is one of the most
prominent DNA lesions and has been linked to aging as well as several diseases
including cancer. Unlike 2'-deoxyguanosine (dG) which base pairs only with
2'-deoxycytidine (dC) in DNA, OdG can pair with both dC and 2'-deoxyadenosine
(dA), thus allowing for mutations during replication. The Hamm group synthesizes
nucleotide analogues on the spectrum between dG/dGTP and OdG/OdGTP, and uses
these in biochemical experiments focused on the replication and repair of these
harmful nucleotides. By comparing the enzymatic activities of the synthesized
analogues to dG/dGTP, OdG/OdGTP, and each other,one can put forth commensurate
hypotheses with the ultimate goal of establishing the molecular basis for the
bioactivity of OdG and OdGTP. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Reactive oxygen
species are created by chemical carcinogens, radiation from the sun, and normal
metabolic processes. They can damage DNA and alter the information it carries,
possibly leading to aging and diseases such as cancer. While the general effects
of this damage are well understood, the exact chemical properties that lead to
the observed effects have been more elusive. It is the goal of this work to
better understand the chemistry behind one of the most prominent types of
oxidative DNA damage. This pursuit will involve undergraduate students at a
primarily undergraduate institution and provide specialized training in the
synthetic and biochemical techniques used in the proposed studies. The
researchers will also learn important skills including time management, critical
thinking, experimental design, and verbal and written communication. These
activities will prepare them for further study at an advanced level and for
research in an academic or industrial setting.