* 1305783
* Physics near the metal-insulator transition in magnetic thin-films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Arthur Hebard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 704,999.00

****Technical Abstract**** For the traditional transition-metal band
ferromagnets (Fe, Co and Ni) where the aligned moments are successfully
described by unequally populated majority (spin-up) and minority (spin-down)
bands, the ultimate fate of magnetism, when the itinerancy is compromised by
disorder to such an extent that the conductivity drops to zero at critical
disorder, is unknown. This project addresses the consequences of systematically
reducing the thickness of two-dimensional (2D) magnetic thin films (thereby
increasing disorder strength) until the insulating magnetic state is attained. A
custom high-vacuum deposition system with in situ electronic/magnetic
characterization capability prevents sample deterioration due to air exposure
and is essential for this work. The project's focus on tuning a variety of
magnetic systems through critical disorder is expected to provide valuable
insight into the properties of thin-film magnetic insulators and help answer
questions about (1) the disorder induced high rate of inelastic scattering of
electrons off of spin waves, (2) the ordering of local moments, (3) the role of
granularity, and (4) the emergence of new phases. This project will support the
education of PhD students in advanced vacuum deposition and electronic/magnetic
characterization techniques, which have already proven to be excellent training
for productive scientific careers in academic and technology settings. Pursuit
of these studies will improve prediction of the magnetic properties of ultrathin
magnetic materials and extend knowledge of the behavior of bulk magnetism in the
very different environments experienced at surfaces and interfaces.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Magnetism in the transition metal elements such
as iron is not fully understood. In the itinerant (traveling) electron scenario
there are more spin-up (north pole up) than spin down (north pole down)
electrons and the net difference gives rise to the magnetic properties that, for
example, cause an iron compass needle to align with the earth's magnetic field.
The situation rapidly becomes more complicated when the itinerant electrons
scatter off impurities and/or defects, losing their itinerancy and eventually
becoming localized (fixed in place) when the disorder strength, as characterized
by the density of scattering sites, is at a critical value. This project will
pursue experimental studies of magnetic thin films in which disorder can be
systematically increased and the effect on magnetism studied. At critical
disorder, itinerancy is lost and the magnetic metal becomes an insulator with
localized electrons accompanied by the likely appearance of new magnetic phases
with unusual spin alignments. This project will support the education of PhD
students in advanced vacuum deposition and electronic/magnetic characterization
techniques, which have already proven to be excellent training for productive
scientific careers in academic and technology settings. The expected increased
physical understanding of magnetism in thin films from these studies will be
relevant to technological applications which incorporate ultrathin magnetic
films into multilayer configurations for magnetic recording, spin generation,
spin manipulation and/or spin detection.