* 1305085
* RUI: The Interaction of Radiation with Free and Confined Quantum Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Valeriy Dolmatov, University of North Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 10/31/2016
* USD 97,513.00

The response of a physical system to incoming electromagnetic radiation or
charged particles is one of the most basic properties of nature of utter
importance to both fundamental and applied sciences along with a wide variety of
technological applications. Despite numerous studies of these processes
performed to date, the current understanding of them is far from complete. This
is because the processes are multifaceted in the richness of phenomena that
might occur, and are extremely difficult for theory to embrace all of them, or
even some of them. In this project, the understanding of the structure and
spectra of free and confined atoms and their interactions with incoming
electromagnetic radiation or charged particles will be advanced. In the project,
confined atoms of interest are defined as atoms which are embedded into hollow
interiors of various gas-phase fullerenes Cn or other types of penetrable and
impenetrable confinements with varying heights and widths, as well as positioned
near planar or non-planar graphitic nano-structures. New trends in the cross
sections of corresponding processes of photon absorption and collision of the
incoming electrons with confined and free atoms will be unveiled. For free
atoms, this will be achieved by accounting for the interactions mixing a 'pure'
vacancy state (such, e.g., as 5s in Ba) or 'pure' incoming particle state with
dominant (to be determined in the project) higher order continuous state
excitations in a number of atoms, in the first hand in Ba and Mn; so far, the
needed understanding is lacking. For confined atoms, new trends in their spectra
will be unraveled by accounting for individual and combined effects brought
about by the above specified confinements of different properties and geometry,
by varying positions of the confined atom inside a confinement, and by
accounting for multielectron interactions (electron correlation) in the atom
itself. Hartree-Fock approximation, random phase approximation with exchange,
methods of many-body perturbation theory, etc., will be employed in, or adjusted
to, the stated studies. The intellectual merit of activities to be performed is
determined by the fact that to date there is little knowledge on how the
individual and combined effects of nano-scaled confinements of different
symmetries (spherical, non-spherical, homogeneous, inhomogeneous, planar, non-
planar, etc.) may alter the structure and spectra of confined in, or positioned
near them atoms. Also, to date, there remains a lack of understanding of the
interactions mixing pure vacancy/particle states in an atom with its higher
order excitations. Moreover, results of the project will identify some of the
most interesting and/or useful future measurements/calculations which could be
performed, both for free and confined atoms, thereby contributing synergy to
advancement of the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a broader impact scale, the
involvement and active participation of undergraduate students in this project
will strengthen integration of research and education at the University.
Furthermore, the project will enhance the research infrastructure in the
University. Results of research will be disseminated broadly to scientific
community and general public for a broader awareness of science. Society will
benefit from the performed activities by gaining new fundamental knowledge on
phenomena of nature with important applications, and by the training of students
who, early in their careers, will have acquired a unique professional experience
for entry into graduate study in physics or scientific and engineering careers.
All of the above will significantly contribute to the benefit, health, vitality
of science and engineering, and the prosperity of society.