* 1305196
* II-EN: Acquisition of Sensors and Displays for Research on Motion Synthesis and Rehabilitation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Teenie Matlock, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 302,869.00

Real-time motion-capture and interactive 3D computer-generated environments are
rapidly emerging as an integrated and powerful human-computer interaction
context with the ability to revolutionize applications in many areas. Recent
advances in sensor and display technologies can now be seen in both low-cost
consumer-oriented and in high-end industrial-oriented human-centered computer
systems. This proposal aims to support and enhance research and educational
activities in new research and application areas by strengthening and expanding
the available research infrastructure at the University of California - Merced,
specifically by enhancing an existing visualization and motion capture facility
with the acquisition of (a) a high-end data glove, (b) an occlusion-free motion
capture suit, and (c) portable interactive displays integrated with Kinect
sensors. The proposed equipment enhancement will allow the development of new
research projects on the following topics: (a) gesture synthesis models with
coordinated hand-arm motions, (b) remote virtual collaborative sessions for
upper body motion rehabilitation assessment and remote therapy delivery, (c)
automated progress monitoring of hand motor rehabilitation in respect to given
motion protocols, and (d) human-like full-body motion planning in tight spaces
for training applications. The projects will target interactive training and
therapy applications that can benefit from new human-computer interfaces that
are situated in virtual environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary team from computer science and
cognitive science will explore novel human-centered computing research with a
focus on the channels of communication that are used in parallel during physical
training and therapy. The proposed portable and occlusion-free high-end motion
sensing equipment will allow the development of human-like motion models for
synthesis of gestures as well as full-body task-oriented motions. These models
will enable, during immersive remote interactions, the discovery of new
interaction paradigms, which will involve autonomously synthesized human-like
motions and human motions that will be captured and streamed back to the system.
A gesture analysis tool will be developed to provide algorithmic infrastructure
to automatically analyze and extract the components of the gestures. The
infrastructure will permit rehabilitation and therapy to be evaluated in actual
practice. The scientific and practical research projects will advance the
effectiveness of virtual humans in diverse educational, training, and
therapeutic applications, and will help make such 3D computer-generated
environments more accessible to the common user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure will support research projects
that relate to motion rehabilitation, which has the potential to benefit the
many Americans who are in need of physical therapy such as for ailments in the
back, neck, and shoulders. The research will advance an understanding of a
principled approach for using virtual humans for a broad range of practical
training and therapy applications. The instrumentation and research will provide
unique learning opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The
research outcomes will be disseminated broadly in cognitive science, computer
science, and rehabilitation therapy publications. The infrastructure and
research will be demonstrated to local high school and community college
students to motivate interest in science and engineering.