* 1305358
* Collaborative Research: CI-ADDO-EN: Research Repository for Model-Driven Software Development (REMODD)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Betty Cheng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2019
* USD 433,473.00

Model-Driven Development (MDD) is an approach to software development that is
gaining traction world-wide. The Repository for Model-Driven Development
(ReMoDD) is a resource that has been developed to facilitate and accelerate
research and education in MDD through the sharing of high quality modeling
experiences. ReMoDD provides facilities for curating, querying, and operating on
models. The first version was developed under a prior NSF grant and currently
supports a broad and growing community of Software Engineering researchers,
practitioners, educators, and students. New requirements emerging from the
community of developers and users are the basis for this new grant. The project
will significantly improve ReMoDD as follows: (1) To help attract more artifacts
from industry, we will provide facilities that can be used to sanitize models so
that valuable proprietary information is obfuscated; (2) to help attract
artifacts that demonstrate the application of MDD methods on industrial software
development problems, we will provide facilities for industry/academia
collaborations on industry-relevant challenge problems; (3) to extend the scope
of relevant artifacts that can be accessed via ReMoDD, we will work with
developers of related repositories (e.g., the European Open Models Initiative)
so that searches in ReMoDD will yield artifacts stored in collaborating
repositories; and (4) we will extend ReMoDD with social networking features that
support, for example, crowd sourcing challenging modeling problems. The
enhancement of ReMoDD will be a collaborative effort involving teams from
Colorado State University (CSU) and Michigan State University (MSU). ReMoDD has
an Advisory Board of leading MDD researchers and industry representatives that
are committed to ensuring that ReMoDD continues to be a useful and sustainable
community resource.

By providing ReMoDD as MDD community infrastructure, groups performing MDD
research will advance the overarching objective of Model Driven software
Development (MDD), which is to reduce the cost and effort of developing complex
software systems through the use of software models. The problems tackled by MDD
researchers are challenging and good solutions typically evolve through a
community process driven by feedback from the use of solutions in research and
industrial settings. The project will strengthen engagement with the
international research community, who will contribute new ideas, share tools,
and share in the project effort. To support the international collaboration,
this award is being co-funded by NSF?s Office of International and Integrative
Activities.