* 1305135
* Density Functional Theory of Electronic Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* John Perdew, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 389,999.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Chemistry Division and Division of Materials Research contribute funds to
this award. It supports theoretical and computational research and education to
advance first principles electronic structure theory. To calculate the ground-
state nuclear framework, energy, and electron spin densities of an atom,
molecule, biomolecule, solid, surface, or nanostructure within Kohn-Sham density
functional theory, it is only necessary to solve self-consistent quantum
mechanical one-electron equations. The results would be exact if the employed
exchange-correlation energy as a functional of the electron density were exact.

The exact functional is not computable in practice, but practical approximations
to it are improvable by adding additional semilocal or nonlocal ingredients to
the exchange-correlation energy density to satisfy more exact constraints. Meta-
generalized gradient approximations can enable accurate calculation of the
properties of many material systems at or near equilibrium. However, they can
surprisingly fail to predict accurate structural energy differences and
transition pressures for solids as simple as silicon and silicon dioxide. The PI
will develop a new meta-generalized gradient approximation which satisfies all
possible exact constraints while recovering more of the intermediate-range van
der Waals interaction, and test it for these and other problems.

For the description of stretched bonds over which electrons are shared, and thus
of the 'strongly correlated' transition-metal oxides and lanthanides, hybrid
functionals that employ a nonlocal exact-exchange ingredient have been
surprisingly successful. However, these functionals typically rely on one or
more empirical parameters, and can fail to satisfy basic exact constraints that
even semilocal functionals satisfy. The PI will use a conjectured long-range
limit to develop a nonempirical hybrid model for the correlation hole, for use
with exact exchange. A byproduct will be a needed nonlocal correction to the
random phase approximation.

An early self-interaction correction to the local spin density approximation has
had some success for strongly-correlated systems, although its description of
the equilibrium properties of more normal molecules and solids is disappointing
and does not much improve with improvement of the underlying semilocal
functional. The PI aims to fix these problems by eliminating the nodes of the
self-interaction correction orbital densities through the use of complex
orbitals, and by applying the self-interaction correction to the PI's improved
new meta-generalized gradient approximation, which will have an improved
description of compact one-electron densities.

A major recent development is the incorporation of long-range van der Waals
interaction which is important for soft and biological matter, into density
functional theory. The PI plans two different ways to add these effects to the
best semi-local and nonlocal functionals that omit them. One involves the
accurate calculation of van der Waals coefficients of all orders, with a
summation of the infinite series and a short-range cutoff, and the other
involves the extraction of the long-range part of a nonlocal van der Waals
correlation energy functional.

Kohn-Sham density functional theory is widely used in chemistry and materials,
and is increasingly used in engineering and geophysics. The improved functionals
that result from this research will facilitate the computer design of new
molecules and materials with desired properties. This award also supports
educating postdoctoral fellows and students at all levels from high-school
through graduate school.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The Chemistry Division and Division of Materials Research contribute funds to
this award. It supports theoretical and computational research and education to
advance the ability to compute the properties of materials accurately. Ordinary
matter (atoms, molecules, and solids) is made up of electrons and nuclei. To
predict its properties on the computer, and to design new materials with desired
properties, we need to find the energy and spatially varying density of the
electrons, including the effects of quantum mechanics and electrostatic
repulsion.

Kohn-Sham density functional theory is a widely used method to calculate these
properties. The energy and density can be found by minimizing a functional or
rule for the energy in terms of the density. Reasonable approximations to this
functional are known, and usefully describe the formation of atoms and the
binding of atoms to form molecules and solids. The aim of this project is to use
the knowledge we have about the exact functional to construct approximations
that are more accurate but still computationally efficient. Better
approximations for "nature's glue" that binds atoms to form molecules and solids
leads to more accurate predictions of materials properties from the identity of
the constituent atoms and the potential to design materials with desired
properties.

New functionals that result from this research could be applied with good
results in chemistry, biochemistry, nanoscience, materials science, condensed
matter physics, and other fields. This award also supports education for
postdoctoral fellows and students at all levels from high-school through
graduate school.