* 1305171
* CI-ADDO-NEW: Collaborative Research: WiSER Dynamic Spectrum Access Platform and Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Dipankar Raychaudhuri, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2015
* USD 288,000.00

This award is aimed at the development and community release of a Wideband
Software Extensible Radio (WiSER) platform along with a reference implementation
for small outdoor deployment of a multi-node dynamic spectrum network. Dynamic
spectrum technologies are strategically important to the wireless community
because of the urgent need to alleviate spectrum congestion resulting from
ongoing exponential growth in mobile data usage. While a great deal of
theoretical work has already been done on dynamic spectrum techniques,
definitive experimental evaluations of potential gains have yet to be conducted.
The lack of experimental research is mainly due to the fact that available open
platforms suitable for academic experimentation with software defined radio
(SDR) are limited to first-generation technologies that operate at low bandwidth
and can only handle a limited amount of MAC/PHY customization due to inherent
processing constraints. The proposed WiSER platform is a second generation
wideband open-source SDR platform that will enable new experimental research in
the fields of dynamic spectrum and cognitive radio networking. The WiSER radio?s
target release is timed to coincide with significant new national research and
policy initiatives in dynamic spectrum involving the NSF, FCC, PCAST, NIST,
DARPA and other agencies. This platform enables a richer range of experimental
dynamic spectrum research than is currently possible because of its key
technical features: operation across 400MHz-4000MHz in 125MHz increments,
hardware acceleration for real-world PHY waveforms at speeds of 100 Mbps and
higher, hardware virtualization capable of supporting multiple radios on the
same platform, and an open-source software toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a community resource supported by currently available
radios along with an open-source software framework and reference system
implementation. Such a resource will allow for research into a very scarce and
important public resource ? radio spectrum. By improving reliable access to
spectrum, our society benefits in terms of enhancing mobile broadband, improving
public safety communications, and ensuring that radar and other spectrum uses
are not degraded as the spectrum becomes more densely used. The WiSER team will
work closely with experimental research groups nationally to help develop
relevant and timely experimental deployments of dynamic spectrum technology.
Dynamic spectrum access technology has the potential for order-of-magnitude
improvement in spectrum efficiency necessary to cope with the recent explosion
of mobile data traffic. Cognitive radio systems will also provide improved
connectivity to end users, and enable new applications such as emergency
response systems and automotive networks. This project will directly inform
these important societal needs by enabling the research community to build
state-of-the-art experimental systems for conclusive evaluation of these
emerging technologies. Lastly, this platform will offer a powerful educational
tool for students wanting to better understand modern digital and software-based
radio communications.