* 1305217
* CI-ADDO-EN: Collaborative Research: Enhancing the srcML Infrastructure: A Mixed-Language Exploration, Analysis, and Manipulation Framework to Support Software Evolution
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Michael Collard, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 216,123.00

The project is aimed at enhancing an existing infrastructure that supports
software engineering research on very large bodies of source code. The srcML
infrastructure currently includes a generic XML representation for a variety of
programming languages, a robust and efficient parser for C/C++, and a limited
set of tools to support analysis and manipulation of large bodies of source
code. The infrastructure is currently being used by a wide number of researchers
in the fields of software engineering and programming languages. It is also
being directly applied to practical problems in a variety of industrial
settings. The srcML infrastructure is open source and freely available to the
public via a GPL license. Documentation for the infrastructure is available
online and a number of other resources, including online tutorials, are under
development. Additionally, tutorials on how to use the infrastructure to support
various research efforts are planned for a number of software engineering
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to extend the current efficient
and robust parsing and markup to a broader variety of widely used programming
languages (namely Java and C#) and allows for the addition of new languages via
a plugin grammar architecture. The current toolkit is being greatly expanded to
support the exploration, analysis, and manipulation of very large code bases.
The tools include such things as a static slicer, metrics computation, various
static analysis tools, a fact extractor, a call graph generator, syntactic
querying tools, and a syntactic differencing tool. Additionally, a set of tools
to support the construction and application of transformation rules is being
developed. Extending the infrastructure to a broader set of widely used
languages enables researchers to investigate more production and commercial
software. &lt;br/&gt;The enhancements to the srcML infrastructure can
drastically reduce the entry cost for individuals to conduct research by
enabling them to explore, analyze, and manipulate software in an extremely easy
and flexible manner, thus allowing them more time to pursue novel and
transformative research on software, software engineering, and software
languages. The addition of analysis, transformation, and syntactic differencing
tools enable unproblematic and flexible exploration of large code bases written
in widely used programming languages.