* 1305470
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical/Computational Studies of Low Energy Electron Collisions with Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Vincent McKoy, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2016
* USD 0.00

This project will concern the investigation of reactions of slow electrons with
biomolecules. Such slow electrons are typically found in human tissue after
irradiation with deep ultra-violet photons and X-rays. The processes concerned
will be in the excitation of electron states in the biomolecule, a process which
is complicated by the size of such molecules, and involves close collaboration
between two established and advanced theoretical (Caltech) and experimental (Cal
State Fullerton) groups. Recent success in work with water has provided impetus
for this collaboration to look at more complex molecules - methanol and ethanol
and has provided a good foundation for this direction of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this collaboration is its
involvement of international experimental (U. Juiz de Fora) and theoretical
groups (USP, U. Parana in Curitiba, Unicamp) in Brazil. It also provides
involvement of US undergraduate students at Cal State Fullerton to go to Brazil
to carry out summer research to do experimental work in developing projects
there as well as taking electron-biomolecule collisions data to transfer US
technology to Brazil and to foster scientific relations between the two
countries. This also provides impetus for Brazilian faculty and students from
these universities to come to the USA to CIT/CSUF and collaborate. The students
who participate get international experience and are very likely to pursue
graduate studies in physics or physical chemistry. This award is being co-funded
by NSF's Office of International and Integrative Activities.