* 1305574
* Collaborative Research: Microwave Auto-Oscillators Driven by Pure Spin Currents
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Andrei Slavin, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2016
* USD 129,999.00

The objective of this program is to develop and study the characteristics of
microwave magnetic auto-oscillators driven by pure spin currents. The
intellectual merit is a deeper understanding of phenomena induced in nanoscale
magnetic systems by spin currents, which will be facilitated by the new,
previously inaccessible structures and geometries of devices driven by spin
currents, by the development of advanced magnetic characterization techniques -
micro-focus Brillouin Light Spectroscopy and x-ray dichroism microscopy, and by
the advances in theoretical understanding of nanoscale magnetic systems. The
broader impacts are enhanced competitiveness of US science/technology, training
of specialists for the electronics industry, and general public education.
Namely, a new class of microwave auto-oscillators developed in this program will
help maintain US leadership in microwave electronics. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be exposed to the modern methods of fabrication and
characterization of spintronic nanostructures, and will interact with the
leading scientists. Outreach activities including lectures and demonstrations on
nanoscience and nanotechnology tailored for K-12 teachers and students will
scientifically inform the general public. Student education will be enhanced
through the incorporation of theoretical and experimental methods of
nanotechnology and spintronics into the graduate and undergraduate curricula.
The main transformative aspect of the proposal will be the development of a
qualitatively new type of active spin-based devices where spin currents will be
used directly, without being accompanied by charge currents, opening the
possibilities for using new types of materials and device geometries.