* 1305401
* II-NEW: Virtual Reality Infrastructure and Technology Development to Support Architectural Education and Basic Research in Immersive Design, Embodied Interaction, Spatial Cognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Lee Anderson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2016
* USD 164,490.00

Immersive virtual environments offer tremendous potential for fundamental and
transformative advances in education, training, rehabilitation, architectural
design, as well as a wide range of other application areas. The technology has
special potential to enhance the process of architectural design by enabling
designers to work with their ideas at full scale from the earliest stages of the
design process, and to experience the interior spaces of their designed
structures from a firsthand egocentric perspective before they are built. The
research and educational opportunities made possible by the requested equipment
will enable designers and their clients to experience a virtual environment as
if the designers and their clients were truly standing in the physical
environment that is represented by the virtual environment, and to make
decisions based on their experience in the virtual world that are equivalent to
the decisions that they would have made as a result of a similar experience in
the physical world. The project will teach students of architectural design the
value of developing their design ideas from an egocentric as well as allocentric
perspective. Through this work, architects, and their clients, will be able to
make reliable design decisions that can enhance the livability of a planned
space based on their first-person experience of the 3D spatial layout. The
project will enable archaeologists, historians, city planners, tourists, and
others to gain an intrinsic, egocentric understanding of the spatial layout of
large, remote sites through virtual
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary team consisting of an associate professor of computer science
in the college of science and engineering and an associate professor of
architecture in the college of design requested funding for three pieces of
major equipment and related supplies that will enable them to (a) pursue a
multi-faceted research agenda in the development of groundbreaking methods to
enhance the cognitive and perceptual realism of immersive virtual experiences,
leveraging fundamental insights from visual perception and cognition, and (b)
maximize the potential of virtual reality technology to fundamentally enhance
the process of design education, emphasizing the importance of integrating an
experiential understanding of planned spaces into the earliest stages of the
design process. The proposal requests funding for the purchase of (a) a wide
field of view head mounted display with an embedded stereo eye tracking system
that the researchers will augment with lightweight, close-range depth sensors
and a custom-built dual camera and mirror system to achieve a convergence-
adaptable stereoscopic video-see-through augmented reality capability, (b) a set
of cameras that will enable real time tracking throughout the full extent of the
space available in a virtual reality design lab, and (c) an untethered, moderate
field of view head-mounted display with optional optical see through
capabilities that will, in conjunction with a backpack-worn laptop computer,
allow unencumbered free physical movement through large virtual spaces and, in
conjunction with the other head-mounted display, enable the project to pursue
research in self-embodied multi-person interaction in immersive virtual
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
requested equipment will benefit society by permitting research that will
advance an understanding of how people can have experiences in immersive virtual
environments that are equivalent to experiences in real world environments. This
equipment will support significant advances in design education by enabling the
broader effective use of virtual environments technology in teaching fundamental
concepts of visual imagination and will support closer interdisciplinary
collaboration between faculty and students in computer science, architecture and
design. The project will promote science and engineering to the general public
through community outreach such as through frequent lab tours for local K-12
students, and will promote participation in science through mentoring and summer
programs for middle and high school students.