* 1305000
* The Dynamics of Quantum Gravity: Symmetry Reduced Models
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Jorge Pullin, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

We study the dynamics of canonical quantum gravity in a variety of 1+1
dimensional model systems including spherically symmetric gravity coupled to
fields in four dimensions and the Callan-Giddings-Harvey-Strominger black holes.
Among the techniques used are recently developed local gauge fixings, loop
quantum gravity treatments, and a new paradigm for dealing with the dynamics of
totally constrained theories that we have been developing over the last few
years. The paradigm consists in constructing discrete theories such that the
continuum theory of interest arises as a well defined limit. It has points in
common with that of lattice gauge theory, where discrete theories are used in a
limiting procedure to define a continuum theory of interest. This approach has
already been applied successfully in some situations where the space-time has
some spatial dependence (i.e. more complicated than homogeneous cosmologies) but
without genuine degrees of freedom, most notably providing a characterization of
the complete space-time of a non-singular loop quantum gravity black hole. We
propose here to extend it to richer models with dependence on one spatial
coordinate. The models include complex phenomena like the one discussed by
Choptuik in gravitational collapse and at the quantum level can accommodate
Hawking radiation. We also continue our investigation on the role of using
physical clocks and rods in describing quantum mechanics, to apply high
performance computing techniques to loop quantum cosmology and to explore
astrophysical implications of loop quantum gravity effects in the evaporation of
primordial black holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research fits within
fundamental physics, the area of research that concerns itself with how the laws
of physics fit together. In this case the laws of gravity that rule the large
scales of the universe with the laws of quantum mechanics that describe the
microscopic world. Sometimes by understanding how the laws of physics fit
together remarkable insights can be achieved that lead to practical applications
far beyond what anyone could have envisioned. Apart from the intrinsic research
aspects, broader impacts of this proposal are aiding in the creation of human
resources in US physics through the training of a postdoctoral researcher and
the possibility that the techniques introduced here may have applicability in
other areas of science and engineering as well. In addition to that, various
outreach activities for the general public are planned that will help not only
disseminate the results of this proposal but those of the community of
physicists working on the subfield of loop quantum gravity as a whole.