* 1305284
* Microfluidic Printing of Interspersed and Interpenetrating Multicomponent Ceramic Architectures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Jennifer Lewis, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 620,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Three-dimensional (3D) printing offers the potential
to digitally specify the form and function of materials. This project focuses on
patterning 3D ceramic architectures by designing and implementing microfluidic
printheads for use with model colloidal suspensions - i.e. concentrated fluids,
gels, and biphasic mixtures - whose flow behavior can be directly imaged within
microfluidic core-shell and multinozzle printheads. Advances from this research
effort are expediting the transformation of 3D printing from rapid prototyping
to a true manufacturing platform. The fundamental knowledge gained from this
program of research will enable low-cost, high-throughput printing of designer
ceramics that may find application as 3D ceramic composites, membranes, and
battery electrodes. In addition, new scientific understanding of the flow and
mixing of concentrated colloidal suspensions within confined microfluidic
geometries is emerging from this effort.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: This project focuses on 3D printing of concentrated colloidal inks in
interspersed and interpenetrating motifs using microfluidic core-shell and
multinozzle printheads. Fundamental relationships between ink rheology,
printhead designs, and printing behavior are being systematically investigated.
The resulting 3D ceramic architectures may offer significant performance
advantages in a broad range of applications, including lightweight composites,
membranes, and batteries. The project integrates multiple education and outreach
activities aimed at expanding the number of underrepresented groups in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) through public lectures and
hands-on activities as well as by creating scientific videos of our research
targeted for the DIY (do-it-yourself) and maker communities.