* 1305516
* Revealing the Physical Principles Underlying Epigenetic Regulation Using Theory, Simulation, and Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrew Spakowitz, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2017
* USD 381,027.00

In this project, the PIs will reveal the physical principles underlying
epigenetic regulation. Historically, the central dogma of genetics asserted that
DNA sequence holds all of the information that orchestrates cellular function.
However, histone and DNA modifications alter the physical packaging of genomic
DNA, resulting in dramatic changes in the expression of the packaged genetic
material. This notion of epigenetic regulation represents a paradigm change in
how we think about genetic traits. In Thrust 1, the PI will develop a
theoretical model to address the segregation of chromatin into transcriptionally
active heterochromatin and transcriptionally silent euchromatin. In Thrust 2,
the PI will perform experimental measurements and theoretical modeling of the
reorganization dynamics of chromosomal DNA within Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. In Thrust 3, the PI will establish a kinetic model
that captures the function of the proteins that maintain and amplify the
epigenetic code based on cooperative interactions with the proteins that control
chromosomal organization. By combining theoretical and computational modeling
with experimental measurements, the PI will establish an unprecedented level of
physical understanding of the mechanisms of epigenetic regulation. The PI's
outreach efforts include the establishment of the LABScI program, which develops
and implements teaching modules for the education of high school students that
are being treated for childhood cancer. Future outreach efforts aim to further
expand the program nationwide as a general laboratory science curriculum for
hospital-school education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics
and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.