* 1305427
* CCI Center for Aerosol Impacts on Climate and the Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Kimberly Prather, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lin He
* 09/30/2018
* USD 20,000,000.00

The Center for Aerosol Impacts on Climate and the Environment (CAICE) will
tackle the grand challenge of elucidating the chemical complexity and reactivity
of atmospheric aerosol particles. The primary objective of CAICE is to better
understand how chemical heterogeneity, morphology, phase, and molecular
composition, at the individual aerosol particle level, control the properties
and reactivity of atmospheric aerosols. Detailed chemical knowledge is needed to
predict how aerosol chemistry influences reactivity, light absorption and
scattering behavior, and cloud droplet and ice crystal formation. A globally
important type of aerosol, sea spray, has tremendous chemical variability that
depends on ocean chemistry, biology, and physical conditions such as waves,
wind, and solar radiation. CAICE utilizes a unique experimental ocean-atmosphere
facility to bring the real-world, complex chemistry of the ocean and atmosphere
directly into the laboratory to replicate natural sea spray aerosol
transformations in a controlled setting. An interdisciplinary team composed of
chemists from all fields, as well as marine biologists, and oceanographic and
atmospheric scientists will provide diverse perspectives and approaches to gain
fundamental chemical insights into how aerosols form and subsequently behave in
the atmosphere. New experimental tools for spatially-resolved chemical analysis
along with new theoretical methodologies for molecular-level and coarse-grained
simulations will be developed to explore the complex, heterogeneous, and dynamic
aspects of aerosol particles bridging a broad range of length and time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAICE will advance a wide range of scientific disciplines,
including interfacial chemistry, air quality and atmospheric chemistry,
nucleation, climate science, multiphase and heterogeneous reaction processes,
nanoparticle properties, and ocean biogeochemistry. The important societal
benefits include: 1) improved ability to predict regional climate, atmospheric
chemistry, and water resources via advanced models that incorporate aerosol
impacts on clouds and precipitation processes, and 2) the interdisciplinary
training and education of the next generation of scientific leaders who will
develop solutions for large scale environmental systems. CAICE students will be
at the forefront of fundamental chemistry while addressing global perspectives
related to the ocean, atmosphere, and climate. All CAICE participants will
receive training in effectively conveying their scientific findings to the
public, entrepreneurship, and play active roles in the Center's education and
outreach programs. The research will be communicated to the public in close
collaboration with the UC San Diego's Birch Aquarium and other public
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Aerosol Impacts on Climate and the
Environment is funded as part of the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI)
program.