* 1305375
* II-NEW: An Experimental Platform for Investigating Energy-Performance Tradeoffs for Systems with Deep Memory Hierarchies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Manish Parashar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

As the scale and complexity of computing and data infrastructures supporting
science and engineering grow, power costs are becoming important concerns in
terms of costs, reliability and overall sustainability. As a result, it is
becoming increasingly important to understand power/performance behaviors and
tradeoffs from an application perspective for emerging system configuration,
i.e., those with multiple cores, deep memory hierarchies and accelerators. This
project builds an instrumented experimental platform that supports such an
understanding, and enables research and training activities in this area.
Specifically, the proposed experimental platform is composed of nodes with a
deep memory architecture that contains four different levels: DRAM, PCIe-based
non-volatile memory, solid-state drive and spinning hard disk, in addition to
accelerators. Power metering is deployed as part of the
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental platform enables the
experimental exploration of the power/performance behaviors of large scale
computing systems and datacenters as well as compute and data intensive
application they support, and uniquely supports research toward understanding
the management and optimization of these systems and applications. It also
enables research in multiple areas, including: application-aware cross-layer
management, power-performance tradeoffs for data-intensive scientific workflows
and thermal implications of deep memory hierarchies in virtualized Cloud
environments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Data and compute intensive applications are
becoming increasingly critical to a wide range of domains, and the ability to
develop large-scale and sustainable platforms and software infrastructure to
support these applications will have significant impact in driving research and
innovations in these domains. The developed experimental platform enables key
research activities to support this. It provides important insights that will
impact the realization and sustainability of very large-scale infrastructures
necessary for current and emerging data and compute intensive applications. The
infrastructure also provides an important infrastructure for education and
training in different areas related to power management, energy efficiency, data
management, memory management, and virtualization.