* 1305231
* II-NEW: Living Lab for Asynchronous and Synchronous Investigation of Virtual and Real Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Nicholas Polys, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2016
* USD 585,510.00

This project develops a computing research infrastructure in The Institute for
Creativity, Arts, and Technology at Virginia Tech that will support research and
exploration at the boundaries of science, engineering, art, and design. The
infrastructure will enable novel research in the areas of ambient environments,
ubiquitous computing, and mirror worlds. The infrastructure will create a
environment for researchers, educators, students, and the general public to
interact both physically and virtually with other people, live performances, and
interactive exhibitions within the same venue and also remote venues. The
project will incorporate real-time physical interaction with ambient sensor data
acquisition and processing, and provide a unique research environment for
investigating the relationship between a real environment and a corresponding
virtual representation. This infrastructure will enable research across many
domains including the study of security, crowd modeling, human-computer
interaction, gaming environments, and behavioral modeling including models of
affect change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the participation of researchers from Computer Science, Communications, the
Arts, and Technology, the proposed infrastructure will be used to investigate
five research domains: (1) Parallels between behavior in real spaces and virtual
spaces. (2) The effects of fidelity in virtual environments on performance in
physical environments, such as to examine navigation in a real building after
training at different levels of rendering and styles of navigation through a
virtual space. (3) Crowd model evaluation, especially the evaluation of
socially-aware crowd behavior, social interaction, and sub-group behavior in a
complex social setting such as before a musical performance or during an art
exhibition. (4) The relationship between behavior and affect in a public venue,
which will be studied using a combination of data pre-processing, visualization,
and clustering. (5) Computational models of energy-efficient buildings, to
reduce the variance and uncertainly associated with a building?s occupancy to
meet the challenges in designing an effective and efficient HVAC control system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure
will enhance education by creating a novel computational research platform for
investigating human behavior, emotions, and activities in a university
environment. The project will advance science while promoting teaching,
training, and learning by providing unique cross-disciplinary learning
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. The project brings
together computer scientists, architects, and humanities researchers to address
the interaction of between real and virtual worlds. The project will increase
opportunities for a diverse study body to participate in, learn about, and be
recruited into science and engineering by integrating topics from many different
fields including the visual and performing arts, architecture, and the
humanities. The project will have lasting benefits to society through its
exploration of distance learning, human experience, and social interaction.