* 1305994
* Persistence after failure: Understanding neural and behavioral responses to negative outcomes
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Mauricio Delgado, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2017
* USD 193,472.00

Progress rarely comes without the experience of a failure along the way, but
some failures can undermine progress entirely. Students in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) fields face a difficult choice when they encounter
an academic failure: persist or give up. In the best case, a student will
persist after interpreting a failed test as feedback to change studying habits.
In the worst case, a student may give up after interpreting a failed test as a
reason to switch to a less challenging major. Institutions can improve the
participation and success of underrepresented groups in STEM by better
understanding the factors that determine a student's response to failure and the
interventions that may promote academic persistence rather than giving up.
Negative outcomes, such as failed tests, can change behavior in two distinct
manners that have disparate consequences for a student. In one manner, a student
persists when a failed test spurs behavioral change to better pursue an original
learning goal. In another manner, a student gives up when a failed test spurs a
change in the learning goal itself (e.g., switch to a non-STEM field or drop
out).

Intellectual Merit:

Research on the neural basis of incentive processing provides a foundation for
understanding how the brain responds to negative outcomes and how those
responses may be linked to behavioral changes. However, research has yet to
address how the brain processes negative outcomes in ways that lead to different
manners of behavior change: persistence versus giving up. The current research
builds from the foundations of incentive processing research to understand how
the brain responds to failure in ways that lead to persistence versus giving up.
This research then examines how certain aspects of learning environments may
alter a student?s response to failure. In particular, does stress harmfully
influence neural and behavioral responses to failure? This proposal addresses
two specific aims towards understanding neural responses to failure and their
relation to decisions to persist or give up on a goal. The first aim understands
the neural responses that underlie two distinct roles that negative outcomes can
play in learning. The current research examines neural responses to negative
outcomes that lead to (a) change in behavior to reach an original goal
(persistence), or (b) change in choice of the goal (giving up). This research
forms the foundation for understanding neural responses to failure that promote
persistence versus giving up. The second aim understands the impact of stress on
responses to failure. Specifically, the research examines how acute stress may
influence decisions to persist or give up on a goal by altering neural responses
to failure. More specifically, the proposed aims set up future examinations of
how different cognitive interpretations of failure can beneficially influence
neural responses and decisions to persist with a goal.

This project's research takes a novel approach to understand how people change
their behavior in response to failure. In particular, this research examines two
distinct manners in which negative outcomes can change behavior to (a) promote
persistence or (b) give up on a goal. These different roles of negative outcomes
in learning can be the difference between graduation and dropping out in an
academic learning context. Furthermore, the research promises insight into
relationships between acute stress, neural responses, and the decisions students
make after failure. The research program lays a foundation to translate
neuroscience research on incentive processing into a model of academic
persistence that includes a more complete understanding of conditions that may
impair or promote academic success.

Broader Impacts:

This project bridges a gap between research on the mechanisms of basic learning
and research on factors contributing to academic diversity and the success of
underrepresented students. This research promotes teaching, training, and
learning by providing a better understanding of academic feedback and the ways
that it can influence student behaviors and eventual success. The research
program contributes to broadening participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM by examining the influence of acute stress on responses to failure. This
research examines a specific biological mechanism by which stress may impair the
likelihood of achieving academic goals and sets up future examinations of
cognitive interventions targeted to ameliorate undesirable effects of stress.
The increased understanding of relationships between acute stress, neural
responses, and decisions after failure helps to refine the strategies that
educational institutions can implement to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM.