* 1305801
* Investigating Nuclear Structure with Fast Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Marcus McEllistrem, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2017
* USD 840,000.00

The research program at the University of Kentucky Accelerator Laboratory
focuses on timely topics in nuclear spectroscopy and neutron-induced reactions.
Much of this work utilizes nearly monoenergetic fast neutrons and is reliant on
the radiation detection capabilities we have developed. Our broad-based research
includes selected studies in several forefront areas: nuclear structure relevant
to double-beta decay and the mass of the neutrino, nuclei undergoing shape
transitions, the decays of collective nuclear excitations, deformed nuclear
structures and shape coexistence, nuclear structure contributions in support of
searches for fundamental symmetries. The determination of nuclear level
lifetimes in the femtosecond regime provides crucial information in many of
these investigations. Additional projects that are particularly appropriate to
the capabilities available in our laboratory are pursued, and collaborative
research with colleagues from other institutions is a vital component of our
program.

Education at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate levels continues as
the nexus of all activities in our laboratory, and graduates are trained nuclear
scientists who are capable of making important contributions in meeting our
national needs. Providing a supportive professional experience for students is
an ongoing, vital component of our program, and students enthusiastically
participate in experiments at other facilities, scientific conferences, and the
activities of professional societies. Research at a small accelerator
laboratory, such as ours, permits hands-on experience for students, and these
young scientists are mentored on a daily basis. For many years, the research
facilities of our laboratory have been made available to students and faculty
from non-doctoral-granting institutions, as well as scientists from other
research universities, national laboratories, and nuclear-related industry.
Research performed in our laboratory has contributed directly to addressing
areas of national need, such as homeland security and the design of advanced
nuclear reactors, and will continue to do so. These applications are well
represented by the activities of government and industrial partners who utilize
our accelerator and research equipment. For example, collaborative studies with
colleagues from industry have led to improved neutron-detection-based methods
for the inspection of luggage for explosives and illegal drugs, and data
obtained in our laboratory has been used to evaluate direct energy-storage
devices. In each case, the unique capabilities of our laboratory were important
considerations in the selection of our facility for this work.