* 1305864
* RUI: Multi-Messenger Astronomy and Detector Characterization in LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Brennan Hughey, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2016
* USD 126,027.00

Gravitational waves have the potential to expand astronomy into an entirely new
regime, providing information about the dynamics and central engines of
astrophysical events that are not available by any other means. Combining
gravitational waves with electromagnetic observations through multi-messenger
astronomy will maximize the information available and allow scientific
discoveries that would not be possible with either alone. Our research focuses
on three specific projects. The first of these involves searches for
gravitational waves in coincidence with short duration radio pulses. Radio
signals are a potentially crucial component of a full program of multi-messenger
astronomy in the advanced detector era. In some cases, radio emission may be the
only observable signal in the direction of the Earth aside from gravitational
waves. Using pulses from currently existing Green Bank Telescope pulsar surveys
as external triggers in LIGO/Virgo searches will allow us to probe deeper into
our current data and set the stage for future coincident analyses between radio
signals and gravitational waves. The other direction in which multi-messenger
astronomy can be performed, and our second area of focus, entails the follow-up
of potential gravitational wave triggers with instruments looking for other
astronomical messengers. Regardless of the method employed to detect a signal,
having the best data possible to work with will be critical in successfully
detecting gravitational waves. Thus, the third area of focus is in detector
characterization, the understanding and mitigation of transient disturbances in
the detector that may be confused with astrophysical signals, including
developmental studies, as well as well as work maintaining software and
validating the calibration of the instruments.

Direct confirmation of Einstein's general theory of relativity through the
observation of gravitational waves would be a major accomplishment of 21st
century physics, with consequences in gravitational theory as well as astronomy
and astrophysics. Validating this observation with coincident emission of
photons from the same event would increase our confidence in such an
observation. Additionally, a multi-messenger approach to astronomy, "hearing the
universe" through gravitational waves as well as seeing it through optical,
x-ray or radio astronomy, will allow us to gain a more complete scientific
picture of the sky around us, potentially including such phenomena as gamma-ray
bursts and supernovae. Since the research is carried out at a primarily
undergraduate institution and fully integrates undergraduate researchers, this
grant also facilitates the critical task of preparing the next generation of
physicists.