* 1305826
* Development of Sequence-Specific Bioorthogonal Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Qing Lin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 410,118.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Qing Lin from State University of New York at Buffalo to
use a phage-based method to evolve the alkyne-containing peptides for sequence-
specific palladium-mediated cross-coupling reactions with aryl iodide reagents,
as well as the cysteine-containing peptides for condensation reactions with
nitrile-containing small-molecule probes. By exploiting biological techniques
such as phage display, the reactivity of up to 600 billion peptide substrates
containing unique chemical functional groups can be interrogated. The effect of
the sequence of amino acids on the reactivity of the aforementioned peptides
will be studied. The structural basis and mechanism of the two bioorthogonal
reactions will be probed using kinetic and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to bring new chemical
tools to the study of important biological problems. This project addresses
important challenges in the development of organic reactions for applications
inside living systems, namely the modest reaction rates and specificity of
reactions at specific amino acids within peptides and proteins. The research
will enhance our fundamental understanding of chemical reactivity in the
biological environment, particularly as a function of the sequence of the
peptides. The results of the research will be incorporated in courses taught by
Dr. Lin. The project will provide interdisciplinary research opportunities to
the undergraduate students at State University of New York at Buffalo, including
some from the groups underrepresented in STEM careers, through a long-standing
collaboration with the New York State Collegiate Science and Technology Entry
Program.