* 1305124
* CCI Solar Fuels
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Harry Gray, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2019
* USD 20,000,000.00

Research in the Phase II Center for Chemical Innovation on Solar Fuels focuses
on discovery and development of the chemical components required to use solar
photons to drive water splitting to H2 and O2. Major scientific achievements of
the CCI Solar Fuels Phase II project include: synthesis of Si microwire arrays;
construction of functional silicon microwires-polymer assemblies; elucidation of
the mechanism of Co-catalyzed hydrogen evolution; construction of NiMo/Si
photocathodes with ultrahigh efficiencies; discovery of highly active earth-
abundant metal-based (Co, Ni) oxygen evolution catalysts; integration of oxygen
evolution catalysts onto metal-oxide semiconductors; band gap tuning of tungsten
oxide; and development of new theoretical methods applicable to complex systems.
Research during the Phase II renewal builds on these electronic structural and
mechanistic foundations in targeting the discovery of new molecules and
materials with improved performance. CCI Solar Fuels researchers are developing
the enabling science required to integrate light absorption, charge transport,
and multielectron redox catalysis for efficient solar water splitting.
Scalability and economic viability require materials composed of earth-abundant
elements. Elucidation and control of fundamental interfacial properties are
essential for the integration of semiconductors, catalysts, and membranes into
functional assemblies. Collaborative research efforts in CCI Solar Fuels focus
on new semiconductors with optimum light-absorption and charge-separation
properties. High priorities include discovering new catalysts that split water
into H2 and O2 with maximum rates and minimum overpotentials; nanostructuring
materials to optimize performance; elucidating catalytic mechanisms to identify
bottlenecks and inform designs for their removal; integrating catalysts and
semiconductors to produce functional photoelectrodes; developing ion-conductive
membrane separators; and constructing photoanode-membrane-photocathode
assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the other academic and government
laboratories engaged in solar fuels research, CCI Solar Fuels distinguishes
itself by its precise alignment with the vision and goals of the National
Science Foundation. CCI Solar Fuels research advances discovery, innovation, and
education beyond the frontiers of current knowledge, and recruits future
generations of scientists and engineers. CCI Solar Fuels activities directly
impact thousands of students, postdoctoral scholars, and members of the public
at large. A vigorous outreach program delivers Juice-from-Juice solar science
activity kits to elementary, middle, and high school students. Solar Energy
Activity Lab kits involve high school and undergraduate students in research
through a combinatorial search for solar materials. An Informal Science
Education program brings these activities to new and younger audiences. CCI
Solar Fuels graduate students and postdoctoral scholars acquire experience as
mentors in these outreach programs. Involving underrepresented groups is a
particular point of emphasis: seven of eighteen senior investigators are members
of underrepresented groups; two investigators focus exclusively on outreach
activities; and two investigators are faculty members at universities with large
underrepresented student populations. CCI Solar Fuels researchers deliver the
message of clean renewable solar fuels in television, radio, and online
programs; public lectures, scientific research conferences; and consultations
with local, state, and federal government officials. The technological,
environmental, economic, and social benefits of renewable solar fuels impact
every human being on Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center on Solar Fuels is
funded as part of the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) program.