* 1305052
* Collaborative Research: Digitization TCN: Developing a Centralized Digital Archive of Vouchered Animal Communication Signals
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Daniel Lane, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 117,384.00

An award is made to establish a thematic collection network that will digitize
and make accessible media recordings associated with physical voucher specimens,
broadly organized around the research theme of understanding the evolution and
ecology of communication signals. Research on these questions has been
challenged by the relative inaccessibility of the signal recordings and their
associated physical specimens. This project will meet this challenge by
partnering together multiple biological research collections and the Macaulay
Library of Natural Sounds, the world's largest scientific archive of animal
signal recordings. Collectively, these institutions will co-curate and make
accessible digitized and vouchered recordings of the communication signals of
birds, frogs, fish and insects, and will establish direct and transparent links
across collections between physical voucher specimens and their digitized
recordings. This project will make accessible digital audio recordings of animal
signals that can be used to address a host of scientific questions, including
the responses of animals to anthropogenic noise and other human activities. By
providing a useful co-curation system and encouraging collection of recordings
along with physical specimens, this project will have a transformative influence
on the way that researchers collect and use biological specimens in the future,
and will serve as a useful model for collections facing similar co-curation
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also provide materials for
extensive educational outreach at all age levels, and will have significant
conservation impacts because the digitized material will contribute directly to
our ability to assess and monitor biodiversity. Finally, this project will
expand biological collection methods and help train the "next generation" of
museum curators, collectors, and researchers. This award is made as part of the
National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the
Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting
from this award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).