* 1305705
* Analytic Problems in the Physics of Fluids, Gravitation and Conformal Geometry
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Marcelo Disconzi, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2017
* USD 93,424.00

This award will address important questions regarding the mathematical
foundations of physical theories: solutions to the Euler equations in Fluid
Dynamics; the Cauchy problem for relativistic dissipative fluids; the Penrose
inequality in General Relativity; and effective potentials in String Theory. It
also addresses the issue of compactness of solutions to the Yamabe problem on
manifolds with non-umbilic boundary. Understanding the convergence of solutions
of the free boundary Euler equations to solutions of the standard Euler
equations in a fixed domain will provide mathematical justification to several
approximating schemes used in the Applied Sciences. It may also give useful
hints on how to improve such schemes. There have been important developments in
Astrophysics and Cosmology which deal with relativistic viscous fluids. It is
therefore paramount to give a proper mathematical treatment of the Cauchy
problem describing these situations. The Penrose inequality is a longstanding
open problem in the physics of gravitation. Proving it in different situations
is an important step towards establishing the Cosmic Censorship Conjecture,
which in turn can be viewed as a test for the consistency of General Relativity.
Effective potentials are among the most promising approaches to construct
realistic models in String Theory. Finally, the study of compactness of
solutions to the Yamabe problem on manifolds with non-umbilic boundary is an
important extension of the results known so far. All these problems are
extensions of previous work done by the PI and collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: All problems described in this project will certainly lead to new
interactions between Physics and Mathematics, as well as the development of new
techniques which will undoubtedly have applications to other problems in
Physics, Analysis and Geometry. The techniques developed to study the Cauchy
problem in relativistic dissipative fluids will likely be applicable to other
problems in the field of Partial Differential Equations. The proof of
compactness of solutions to the Yamabe problem for manifolds with non-umbilic
boundary will require an analogue of the Weyl Vanishing Theorem for the
umbilicity tensor. A recent proof of the charged Penrose inequality given by the
PI and M. A. Khuri relies on the introduction of a new quasi-local mass tailored
to electrically charged initial data sets. Its generalization can potentially
bring new insights to the broader issue of mass in General Relativity. The last
decades have seen an extremely fruitful exchange between Geometry and String
Theory, and the study of effective potentials is certain to provide new avenues
for this interaction. The ideas of this project will also reach an audience
outside the PI immediate field of expertise through their dissemination via
topics courses, seminars etc. Finally, one hopes that some of the outcomes of
this project will eventually help the task of building an ever more
scientifically educated society. In the age of the Large Hadron Collider, where
popular books and TV shows present the general public with concepts like black
holes, giant stars and extra dimensions, keeping track of the mathematical and
logical solidity of our physical theories can help citizens to decide what to
take as well-established science versus ideas which have yet to meet the
standards of academic rigor.