* 1305368
* CI-P: Developing the Next Generation of Community Financial CyberInfrastructure for Monitoring  and Modeling Financial Eco-Systems and  for Managing Systemic Risk
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* James French
* 05/31/2015
* USD 99,826.00

There is an urgent need for models of financial ecosystems that are driven and
informed by data. Unfortunately, current financial cyberinfrastructures severely
restrict the availability of data to market participants, regulators and
researchers. There are constraints on the data collection authority of
regulators that are exacerbated by the lack of ontologies and standards. Beyond
these limitations is the inherent challenge of dealing with the complexity of
financial information and meeting the diverse and sophisticated analyses
required to model heterogeneous ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For computer
scientists to get engaged, a central requirement is the availability of data --
as exemplar and for testing and benchmarking. While some types of data are
easily available, many other important types of financial data are proprietary
and generally unavailable to the computing research community. The creation of a
community infrastructure can go a long way toward meeting this need and hence
enabling computer science research in a new domain of data science for
finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the next generation of community
financial cyberinfrastructure and a framework of data science for finance will
be significant. There will be increasing synergy from applying computational
technology, BIGDATA and Linked Data, and social media, to address difficult
modeling and monitoring problems. This may result in improved tools for
regulators, as well as fundamentally new designs of market mechanisms,
recommendations, ratings, etc. On the educational frontier, data science for
finance should nurture a new generation of multi-disciplinary scholars who will
blend computational solutions with theories, models and methodologies from
finance, economics, mathematics and statistics.