* 1305725
* Regression trees for some problems with multi-dimensional data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Wei-Yin Loh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 130,000.00

The investigator develops regression tree solutions for some important problems
with complex and high-dimensional data. Complexity includes missingness,
censoring, mixed variable types, and correlated measurements taken at random
time points. One specific problem is identification of subgroups for
differential treatment effects in comparative trials involving time-varying
covariates. A second problem is importance scoring and thresholding of variables
and a third is detection of differential test item functioning in testing and
evaluation. The main approach relies on adapting and extending the GUIDE
decision tree algorithm to these problems. Expected difficulties and challenges
include minimizing error rates and computational cost as well as ensuring
unbiased selection of the variables used to split the nodes of the trees.

The ability to collect and generate greater amounts of data at faster speeds
creates new difficulties to data analysis and interpretation. For example, the
health industry is looking into using genetic information and repeated
observations over time to find personalized treatments for diseases. The
proposed research will extend a statistical approach based on decision trees to
solve problems such as: (i) identifying subpopulations of patients who benefit
more from a one treatment over another, based on repeated observations on health
and other outcomes over time, (ii) identifying and ranking genetic and other
variables with respect to their importance in prediction of illness and their
interactions with treatments, and (iii) identifying test items in testing and
evaluation that discriminates against people due to their gender, race, or
socio-economic and cultural background. A decision tree model has the unique
advantage that it is easy to apply and intuitive to interpret. The latter
property is crucially important to understanding and advancing the science.