* 1305184
* Self-organization of dense active matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Cristina Marchetti, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Division of Materials Research contribute funds to this
award. It supports theoretical research and education in active matter. Active
matter is composed of many interacting self-driven units, active particles, that
individually consume energy and collectively generate motion or mechanical
stress. Realizations range from bacterial swarms to epithelial cell colonies to
suspensions of artificial colloidal swimmers. The PI will build on her expertise
and track record at the interface of soft matter and nonequilibrium statistical
physics to investigate three classes of systems:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
Bacterial suspensions as model active systems that can self-organize in fluid
and solid-like phases, as well as a rich variety of emergent patterns. Using
bacterial suspension as prototype systems, the PI will classify the self-
sustained dynamical phases of active matter and elucidate their properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Self-propelled colloids - Ingenious synthetic analogues
of living systems have been engineered that consist of colloidal particles
propelled by self-catalytic reactions. These systems provide an ideal
quantitative testing ground for active matter theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*
Cell colonies and tissues, with the goal to understand the interplay of cell-
cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions in controlling force generation
and transmission, collective migration, and the emergence of the materials
properties of living tissues. &lt;br/&gt;This project will have a broad,
potentially transformative impact across several fields, from physics to biology
and biomedical, chemical and tissue engineering. The collaboration with
experimental groups will provide focus to the theoretical research on phenomena
of direct interest and relevance in this rapidly growing field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award will include
opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. Its highly interdisciplinary nature will provide broad training at
the interface between science and bioengineering, opening up a broad spectrum of
employment opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and the Division of Materials Research contribute funds to this award. It
supports theoretical research and education in active matter. The name "active
matter" refers to a class of nonequilibrium systems composed of many interacting
units or particles that individually consume energy and collectively generate
coherent motion at large scales. An example is a suspension of swimming
bacteria. Each individual bacterium is an active particle that propels itself
through a fluid or other medium by consuming nutrients. A dense swarm of
bacteria behaves collectively as a living fluid and can self-organize in complex
regular patterns, exhibit turbulent motion, or "freeze" into a solid-like
biofilm. This type of "emergent behavior", where a collection of many
interacting entities shows large-scale spatial or temporal organization in a
state with novel macroscopic properties, occurs of course also in inanimate
matter (for instance, the transition from water to ice as one lowers the
temperature), but acquires a new unexplored richness in active systems that are
tuned not by an external knob (the temperature), but by energy generated
internally by each unit. Active systems span an enormous range of length scales,
from the cytoskeleton of living cells, to bacterial suspensions, tissues and
organisms, to animal groups such as bird flocks, fish schools and insect swarms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to turn energy injected at the molecular scale
into organized and complex motion and specific functions at the macroscopic
scale is a unique mechanical property of the living state. The research
supported by this award aims at understanding and harnessing this defining
property by answering several questions: Are there "universal" properties in the
behavior of living matter, such as the "freezing" of a dense bacterial swarm
into a solid-like biofilm or the glassy dynamics of confluent cell layers, that
can be described using the tools and ideas of condensed matter physics? Can some
of the defining properties of living systems, such as motility or the ability to
adapt their response to external stimuli, be reproduced in synthetic constructs?
How does the emergent behavior of tissues, such as their mechanical properties,
arise from that of individual cells?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have
a broad, potentially transformative impact across several fields, from physics
to biology and biomedical, chemical and tissue engineering, and benefit society
in several ways. For instance, understanding collective behavior of cells during
wound healing and biofilm formation will aid in the characterization of how
alterations and mutations in individual cells affect collective mechanical
properties and may lead to pathologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
supported by this award will include opportunities for undergraduates, graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers. Its highly interdisciplinary nature will
provide broad training at the interface between science and bioengineering,
opening up a broad spectrum of employment opportunities.