* 1305199
* Jamming transitions and kinetic phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2019
* Douglas Durian, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 04/30/2019
* USD 690,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The main goal is to develop an
understanding of the kinetics of jamming in granular systems, through
measurement of jamming fronts and of grain-scale dynamics across the fronts. The
simplest situation is the stationary upward propagation of a jamming front
during sedimentary deposition, where the grain concentration profile will be
measured by medical x-ray imaging, and the granular temperature profile (Tg)
will be measured by Speckle-Visibility Spectroscopy (SVS). Key interest is in
the deviations from step-function profiles, the vanishing of Tg, and
spatiotemporally correlated fluctuations of dynamics akin to dynamical
heterogeneities but now in presence of gradients and time evolution. Another
situation is the clogging behavior for various grain types discharged from tall
hoppers. Macroscopically, the clogging transition will be studied by the
divergence of average discharge mass as hole size increases. Microscopically, it
will be studied by spatially-correlated fluctuations of Tg around the
hydrodynamic time-average flow field; unsteadiness of Tg is hypothesized to
increase on approach to the clogging transition. This will be studied by
particle tracking and by SVS through the sidewall. A separate thrust is planned
for the dynamics of 2d air-fluidized grains within an array of pinned grains.
These projects will bring modern physics and measurement techniques into the
educational experience of graduate and undergraduate students. And the knowledge
to be created will be helpful for understanding and controlling jamming
phenomena in industrial and natural settings, where there is often a moving
boundary between jammed and unjammed regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-
Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The flow of almost anything other than a fluid
has an annoying tendency to "jam" and come to rest in spite of applied forces.
Familiar examples include traffic on a highway, coal in a chute, and sand in an
hourglass. Such problems confound the processing of diverse granular materials
like foods, seeds, minerals, ores, building materials, and pharmaceutical pills
&amp; powders. In the natural world, jamming phenomena underlie horrific events
such as mudslides and earthquakes. In none of these cases can the behavior yet
be truly controlled. But thanks to recent theoretical and experimental science,
there is now a reasonable understanding of the jamming transition for uniform
systems, where all the grains are subjected to the same conditions and are all
either jammed or unjammed. This award will support groundbreaking research on
how jams develop in situations where there is an interface or "jamming front"
that separates jammed and unjammed regions and that changes with time. Think of
what happens when a clog forms over the outlet of an hourglass, or when grains
settle out of from a fluid. Though the materials may seem mundane, the science
and the experimental methods are sophisticated. This will be ideal for the
educational experience of graduate and undergraduate students. The knowledge to
be created will be of interest to physicists, engineers, and geologists, and
will help industry avoid inefficiencies and process failures due to jamming. It
may ultimately even help save lives and property through control of mudslides
and erosion.