* 1305536
* Studies of Hadronic Structure
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Nikolaos Sparveris, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 12/31/2016
* USD 265,000.00

This project focuses on a fundamental research challenge of modern nuclear
physics, namely to understand the structure and interactions of the basic
building blocks of the visible matter, protons and neutrons known collectively
as nucleons, in terms of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the theory of the strong
forces in nature. Nucleons, are composed of a variety of quarks confined by the
quanta of the strong nuclear fields known as gluons. In order to explore the
nucleon structure we perform electron scattering experiments where sophisticated
particle detectors are utilized as powerful microscopes in order to determine
the detailed dynamics of quark constituents. This in turn provides an important
input for testing and understanding QCD.

This project involves four experimental activities, three of which will take
place at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (TJNAF) while the
fourth one will occur at the MAMI Microtron in Mainz, Germany. At TJNAF, first,
a high precision measurement of the nucleon excitation to the Delta resonance
will shed light on the mechanisms responsible for the presence of non-spherical
components in the nucleon wave-function, with an emphasis on the role of the
pion cloud to the nucleon dynamics. Second, in a separate experiment we will
explore deep inelastic electron scattering off triton (2 neutrons + 1 proton)
and helium-3 (1 neutron + 2 protons) mirror nuclei to determine the ratio of the
up over down valence quark momentum distributions in a free proton, and advance
our understanding of the effect of the nuclear medium on these momentum
distributions. Third, a measurement of the J/Psi meson electroproduction cross
section near threshold off a proton will enable us to explore the non-
perturbative gluonic interaction between the J/Psi and the proton. This
measurement might reveal an enhancement of the cross section just above
threshold which could be indicative of the important role conformal anomaly
contribution plays in QCD.

At the MAMI Microtron, the first high precision measurement of the Virtual
Compton Scattering reaction on the nucleon resonance will allow the
investigation of the electric generalized polarizability of the proton, meaning
how stiffly the nucleon responds to an external electric field. The experiment
will also allow for the first exploration of the nucleon excitation through a
purely electromagnetic photon channel.

The project will enhance the infrastructure for research by building
instrumentation for nuclear physics experiments, primarily at TJNAF, and by
supporting international collaborative research efforts. The research activities
will also contribute to science education by providing topics for PhD theses in
nuclear physics, thus training a new generation of nuclear scientists.
Furthermore, the opportunities for training students at the undergraduate level
with hands on hardware experience will advance nuclear science education, which
is essential to ensure a broad, basic knowledge of nuclear science in society.