* 1305854
* 2013 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (German-American, China-America, US, and EU-US)
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/28/2014
* USD 110,000.00

This award partially supports a series of four national and international
Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) Symposia, to be held in 2013, organized by the
National Academy of Engineering for early career researchers: German-American
FOE (April 26-28 in Irvine, California), China-America FOE (May 15-17 in
Beijing, China), U.S. FOE (September 19-21 in Wilmington, Delaware), and
European Union-U.S. FOE (November 21-23 in Chantilly, France). Each symposium
focuses on four topical areas. The topics for the 2013 symposia are the
following: social media, flexible electronics, renewable energy, smart
manufacturing, biomass conversion, materiomics, transport in complex systems,
additive manufacturing, nanomaterials, solar energy, bio-MEMS, future of the
Internet, nanosensors, big data, future of transportation, and wireless
broadband. About 100 outstanding young engineers for the U.S. symposium and 30
from each country for the bilateral symposia will participate. Each two and one-
half day symposium includes four formal sessions, technical tours, break-out
sessions, and opportunities for developing collaborative research partnerships.
Sessions consist of presentations on cutting-edge research, innovations, and
emerging research opportunities in engineering fields relevant to the symposium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FOE symposia provide early career scientists and
engineers the opportunity for sharing research insights and techniques to foster
new collaborations and, in the case of the bilateral meetings, deepen technical
and cultural understanding between the countries' participants. The symposia
foster interdisciplinary and international collaborations and serve as a
reference point for many of the emerging frontiers in research and innovation in
the United States. American innovative capacity is strengthened through these
exchanges. Papers from the U.S. FOE symposium will be published in a volume
available on the National Academies Press website at http://www.nap.edu.