* 1305489
* Brazil's New Green Revolution: Capital, Investment, and Agricultural Expansion
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Leah VanWey, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 255,028.00

The Brazilian Amazon, long viewed as vital to the maintenance of global
environmental balances, has now also become one of the world's most rapidly
growing agricultural frontiers. Since 1990, broad-acre agricultural systems, led
by favorable conditions for soybean production, have expanded by more than
80,000kmÂ² in the emerging production frontiers in Brazil's Center-West and
Northern regions. The growth of soybean production in these areas has come with
both economic benefits and environmental costs; and this region is poised to
continue growing as a production center. Where and to what extent this expansion
takes place will have enormous consequences not only for broader scale questions
of environmental sustainability and food supplies, but also locally, as rapidly
developing agricultural counties attempt to balance the potential returns from
agriculture with maintaining a healthy and sustainable environment.

Intellectual Merit:

This research considers a key aspect of Brazil's agricultural transformation.
The focus is on the role of capital generation and credit scarcity in
constraining and shaping the location and extent of Brazil's agricultural
growth. Specifically, how people and capital are redistributed from sources of
capital generation to capital scarce, marginal regions and how land managers'
investments are constrained to self-financing on past returns or peer to peer
exchanges based on agricultural futures. The question how land managers choose
between multiple investment pathways as capital becomes available or,
specifically, whether they seek to (1) intensify on already productive parcels
through double (or even triple) cropping systems, or (2)seek out and convert
existing pastures or forests in new locations to cropland is also addressed. The
work is approached by conceptualizing the issue at hand within an
interdisciplinary model built on theories from geography, economics, and
migration studies. The research plan includes the collection of quantifiable
survey data and qualitative interviews conducted in three, strategically-located
study agricultural frontier regions. Whereas the survey work aims at
establishing quantitative, population-level relationships, the qualitative work
attempts to gather more specific information on the processes that underlie this
relationship. To set the responses with a spatial and physical structure, the
projects links field information to location-specific data through a GIS. In
summary, the main intellectual merits of this work include (1) an innovative,
interdisciplinary conceptual approach to understanding the movement of people
and their resources, and (2) the integration of socioeconomic survey of broad-
acre farmers with MODIS satellite image based data products indicating land use
intensity with GIS data.

Broader Impacts:

The BROADER IMPACTS of this proposal comprise (1) a policy oriented evaluation
of area specific constraints on land intensification across three critical
agricultural frontiers; (2) Professional growth of the Fellow (Richards), which
includes administering and developing the research project and new training in
migration studies and survey methods; and (3) the continued development of a
research network that that includes scientists at multiple US and Brazilian
institutions.

This project is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).