* 1305874
* Ensemble Docking Interrogates Structural Determinants of Ligand-Protein Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jens Meiler, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division at NSF is supporting the work of Dr. Jens Meiler of Vanderbilt
university on an international collaborative effort to develop a new and
potentially generally useful ensemble docking method for the RosettaLigand
molecular modeling program. The German team inthis collaboration will be led by
Drs. Annette Beck-Sickinger and Torsten Schoenefeld at U. Leipzig and will be
supported by the DFG (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft), and represents the
experimental side of the collaboration. The ensemble docking approach to be
taken involves simultaneous docking of multiple ligands while considering
experimental SAR (Structure-Activity Relationships) as part of the scoring
function. The collaborative team has selected the family of G-protein-coupled
7-(helix) transmembrane receptors (GPCRs) and ligand candidates as a platform
upon which to develop this methodology. The German partnering team will take a
natural product-inspired approach to ligand development/binding assessment for
these receptors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the importance of protein-membrane
receptor interactions across chemical biology, the proposed research aims at
developing in silico methodology with potentially broad applicability to the
community. Indeed success here and the possibility for disseminating the
envisioned RosettaEnsembleDock module to the community would constitute arguably
the most important scientific broader impact of this collaborative effort. The
importance of GPCRs in signal transduction in biology cannot be overstated and
therefore the model system upon which this computational algorithm is being
built is also of considerable significance. The project will provide for
interdisciplinary and international student training and exchange, and for the
synergistic interaction of experimental protein-ligand binding team in Germany
with a computational modeling/algorithm development team in the United States.