* 1305728
* WORKSHOP: Computer Supported Cooperative Work 2013 Doctoral Research Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2013
* David McDonald, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2013
* USD 24,148.00

This is funding to support next year's CSCW doctoral research consortium
(workshop) of approximately 10 promising doctoral students from the United
States and abroad, along with about 5 distinguished research faculty. The event
will take place in conjunction with the 16th ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW 2013), to be held in San
Antonio, Texas, on February 23-27, 2013, and which is sponsored by ACM's Special
Interest Group on Human Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). The CSCW conferences, now
an annual event, are the premier venue for presenting research in the design and
use of technologies that affect groups, organizations, communities, and
networks. CSCW 2012 was attended by approximately 650 professionals from around
the world. The development and application of new technologies continues to
enable new ways of working together and coordinating activities. Although work
is an important area of focus for CSCW, technology is increasingly supporting a
wide range of recreational and social activities. CSCW has also embraced an
increasing range of devices, as we collaborate from different contexts and
situations. The conference brings together top researchers and practitioners
from academia and industry who are interested in both the technical and social
challenges encountered when supporting collaboration. Research reports published
in the CSCW Conference Proceedings are heavily refereed and widely cited. More
information about the conference may be found at http://cscw.acm.org/.

The Doctoral Colloquium at CSCW 2013 will take place on Saturday evening,
February 23 and all day Sunday, February 24, with follow-up activities
(including poster sessions) during the conference's main technical program.
Goals of the doctoral consortium include building a cohort group of new
researchers who will then have a network of colleagues spread out across the
world, guiding the work of new researchers by having experts in the research
field mentor them and provide constructive advice, and making it possible for
promising new entrants to the field to attend their research conference. Student
participants, who are chosen by a review committee based on materials submitted
by applicants in response to the CSCW Call for Participation, will make formal
presentations of their work during the workshop, and will receive feedback from
the faculty panel. The feedback is geared to helping students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to other CSCW research, whether
their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Extended abstracts of the students'
presentations will be published in the CSCW supplemental proceedings, which will
be available to conference attendees. The organizing committee will take
proactive steps to ensure and increase participation from institutions and
ethnic groups that have been traditionally underrepresented at CSCW.

Broader Impacts: The CSCW doctoral consortia have been highly successful in
providing a forum for the initial socialization into the field of young doctoral
scholars, and many of today?s leading CSCW researchers participated as students
in earlier consortia. These workshops traditionally bring together the best of
the next generation of CSCW researchers, allowing them both to sharpen the
research skills and to create a social network among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development. Maintaining
and fostering research dialog among the diverse disciplines that are present in
the CSCW community results in synergistic and transformative research
collaborations. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group
across a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific
discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field.