* 1305237
* II-NEW: One Cloud Does Not Fit All: Minnesota Integrated Cloud Systems Research Testbed (MiST)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Jon Weissman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2017
* USD 350,000.00

The past few years have seen a tremendous growth of massive computing resources
and storage capacities in large data centers enabling new Internet applications
and services. At the same time, there has been a rapid growth and widespread
adoption of smart phones, tablets, and e-readers, through which users access
these applications and services on the move. The confluence of these
complementary trends has given rise to the emerging notions of mobile services
and cloud computing. However, current mobile services and cloud computing
offerings pose many difficult challenges to realize their full potential. These
challenges include lack of user control over computing resources, poor
performance and lack of context due to the separation between user devices and
cloud resources, and limited privacy provided by centralized clouds. These
challenges raise important questions such as: Can we build large-scale,
?community-based?, customizable cloud computing infrastructures by leveraging
computing and storage resources contributed by a large number of small players?
Can we develop personalized and collaborative Internet cloud services and mobile
apps that enable user control, while tapping into existing cloud computing
infrastructures? What applications can be run effectively on each type of cloud,
and how could such clouds be coupled to yield a much more powerful platform? How
can we fully realize the potential of mobile and cloud computing while
minimizing its carbon footprint?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs at the University
of Minnesota (UMN) are conducting a wide range of research on addressing these
challenges, by building an integrated cloud system that is diverse and dispersed
across a wide area of locations; it not only utilizes the commercial large-scale
cloud infrastructures, but also leverages smaller-scale, local community
resources at the edge. A significant barrier to continued progress in these
research efforts is lack of a flexible and controllable computing, storage and
networking infrastructure for experimentation. This project seeks to overcome
this obstacle by building the Minnesota Integrated cloud Systems Testbed (MiST)
research infrastructure for advancing research on cloud computing
infrastructures and applications. This research facility is organized in three
interconnected logical tiers: i) core cloud systems consisting of two data
centers; ii) several distributed edge server clouds consisting of a few server
machines; and iii) swarms of stationary and mobile users, comprising a wide
array of different user devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of education,
this research infrastructure provides an ideal "hands-on" learning environment
to teach both graduate and undergraduate students important data analysis,
system building and experimental skills that are critical for today's IT
workforce. The PIs incorporate research conducted on the MiST research
infrastructure in their classroom teaching, both for class projects in the core
courses on networking, security, storage, and distributed systems, as well as in
undergraduate senior and directed research courses. The PIs have a strong track-
record of supporting undergraduate students, especially women and under-
represented students. The PIs plan to disseminate the research advances via
close interaction with their industrial collaborators, and through publications,
presentations and public release of research data, software tools and prototype
systems to the larger research community.