* 1305035
* Connecting and Coordinating a National Innovation Network
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* David Scott, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Continuing Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 10,789,100.00

Project Description

In 2011, the National Science Foundation (NSF) created the Innovation Corps
(I-Corps) program to train NSF-funded researchers to evaluate their scientific
discoveries for commercial potential. This project extends the reach of the
I-Corps program by establishing a National Innovation Network (NIN) that is
connected and coordinated by the National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators
Alliance (NCIIA). The NIN is comprised of the I-Corps regional Nodes and I-Corps
Sites, which work cooperatively to establish, utilize and sustain an innovation
ecosystem that enhances the development of technologies, products and processes
that benefit society. The I-Corps Nodes include a diverse set of research
agendas, resources, tools, capabilities, and geographic locations. NCIIA is
facilitating the sharing of knowledge and collaboration to maximize the impact
of the overall I-Corps program and helping to maintain the consistency and
quality of I-Corps training at the various Node regions. NCIIA is working in
collaboration with the I-Corps Nodes to create and implement tools that support
innovation, through monitoring, analyzing and utilizing data gathered from
I-Corps Team participants; while propagating effective innovation practices on a
national scale.

Broader Significance of the Project

The NIN leverages NCIIA's mission to support technology innovation and
entrepreneurship in higher education and to create experiential learning
opportunities for students and successful, socially beneficial innovations and
businesses. NCIIA is coordinating a geographically diverse network of I-Corps
Nodes and Sites to help enable innovators and entrepreneurs across the nation
bring their concepts to commercialization. NCIIA's NIN activities are
encouraging and enabling the dissemination of knowledge and expertise among the
I-Corps Nodes and Sites so they can more effectively accelerate the
commercialization of NSF-funded research, create new business opportunities and
create innovations that can lead to new economic opportunity and benefits for
U.S. citizens.