* 1305788
* Collaborative Research:  Dynamics and Predictability of Tropical Weather and Climate through Cloud-resolving Ensemble Assimilation of Sounding and Radar Observations from DYNAMO
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Shuguang Wang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2016
* USD 82,783.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), which is the dominant mode of the tropical
atmosphere at intraseasonal time scales, has significant impacts on many aspects
of weather and climate across the globe. While the basic features of the MJO
have been revealed by observations for many years, its underlying dynamics
remain poorly understood and current generation numerical weather and climate
models have low skills in simulating and predicting MJO events. The recently
completed NSF-sponsored Dynamics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (DYNAMO) field
campaign targeted processes critically related to MJO initiation in the Indian
Ocean.

This grant seeks to use ensemble-based data assimilation (EnDA) based on the
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model to explore the dynamics and
predictability of tropical weather and climate from convective to intraseasonal
scales by assimilating radar, sounding, and satellite observations collected
during DYNAMO. The DYNAMO observations of particular interest to the research
are those from three Doppler radars, and those from an enhanced mesoscale
sounding network.

Major objectives of the research include: (1) exploring the most reliable and
effective EnDA methods for tropical weather analysis and forecasts ranging from
convective to regional scales by comparing different variational, ensemble-based
and hybrid data assimilation approaches; (2) conducting convective- and
regional-scale reanalysis using the most accurate and affordable EnDA method
over the entire DYNAMO period, and verify with regular and field observations as
well as existing global analysis or reanalysis; and (3) examining the dynamics
and predictability of tropical weather and climate (including the MJO) from
convective to intraseasonal scales using convection-permitting (i.e., very high
temporal and spatial resolution) ensemble analysis and forecasting.

Intellectual merits: The combination of the EnDA technique with field
observations constitutes a potentially significant advance in data assimilation,
and our understanding of the dynamics, evolution, prediction, and predictability
of tropical weather and climate from convective to intraseasonal scales. The
analysis and forecasts also provide an efficient pathway to bridge the
understandings of tropical weather and climate from convective to intraseasonal
scales.

Broader impacts: The research efforts will provide educational benefits through
the extensive participation of a doctoral graduate student and a postdoctoral
scientist. Research findings will also be directly used in classroom teaching
and for directing undergraduate research projects. The findings on the
initialization, prediction, and predictability of MJO events will improve
operational forecasts of tropical weather and climate, providing a direct
benefit to the general public, whether they live in the tropics or in areas
around the world that are affected by MJO events. The EnDA systems developed
from this support, and the reanalysis of DYNAMO observations by WRF simulations,
will be made freely available online with ample documentation to benefit the
larger academic community.