* 1305679
* Racial Discrimination, Coping, and Underlying Processes in African American Young Adults
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Enrique Neblett, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2016
* USD 190,261.00

This project investigates how racial discrimination impacts African Americans'
physiological functioning and psychological adjustment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
consists of two studies. The primary research aim of the first study is to
combine experimental and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring approaches to
examine how African Americans emotionally and physiologically respond to actual
racial discrimination that occurs in the lab, over a 24-hour period.
Additionally, the study explicates the processes that account for these
relationships. The primary research aim of the second study is to examine
whether eating as a coping strategy mitigates the impact of racial
discrimination on emotional and physiological outcomes. This study also examines
whether physiological coping processes mitigate the relationship between racial
discrimination and emotional outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to: (1) greatly
enhance our understanding of how racial discrimination is psychologically
experienced and capture the variability in African Americans' experiences; (2)
identify the processes that explicate the link between racial discrimination and
psychological adjustment and physiological functioning; (3) elucidate how racial
discrimination is experienced over time; and (4) provide a conceptual framework
and methodological approach that can be employed as tools for future studies.
The studies provide an excellent opportunity to investigate causal attribution,
cognitive appraisal, and coping processes as potential pathways for
understanding the deleterious consequences of racial discrimination. In studying
racial discrimination, the studies contribute to the current research literature
by employing ecologically valid research designs in which African Americans
actually experience racial discrimination. The findings from the research will
help to determine whether racial discrimination is a distinct stressor with
emotional and physiological consequences that exceed those of nonracial
stressors and whether there is more to the experience of racial discrimination
than what is currently captured in generic models of stress and coping.
Additionally, the studies collectively elucidate the processes that underlie
racial discrimination and the ways in which racial discrimination unfolds both
within and beyond the laboratory context.