* 1305106
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Carbenes as Stabilizing and Activating Agents in Boron, Carbon and Phosphorus Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Guy Bertrand, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 15,161.00

This International Collaborations in Chemistry award funded by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program and the Office of
International Science and Engineering supports work by Professor Guy Bertrand of
the University of California at Riverside to carry out fundamental/basic studies
on the use of stable carbenes. These novel carbenes are used for stabilizing
highly reactive species and for activating stable molecules. The synthesis of
carbene-stabilized monoatomic and diatomic carbon(0) compounds is being
investigated. These compounds are of considerable importance in biology and in
synthetic chemistry. Synthetic cycles using carbenes to activate P4 and the
subsequent addition of organic fragments to the ensuing highly reactive mono-
and diatomic phosphorus species are being developed. Indeed, processes using
white phosphorus, but avoiding chlorine, are highly desirable to meet the
growing demand for phosphorus derivatives under increasingly stringent
environmental regulations. The carbene-induced de-oligomerization of BNH
containing polymers also under investigation. The greatest technical barrier for
a practical application of ammonia borane as a hydrogen-storage material for
fuel-cell-powered vehicles lies in the discovery of energy-efficient
regeneration routes from the polymers that are formed in the dehydrogenation
process. Calculations to accurately describe these novel compounds are being
performed by Professor Bertrand's German collaborator, Professor Gernot Frenking
of Phillipps-Universitaet Marburg. This German work is separatately supported by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
at the interfaces between organic, inorganic, and physical chemistry and is
well-suited for the multidisciplinary education of graduate coworkers. The
graduate students of the U.S. and German groups involved in this collaborative
effort have the opportunity to learn both computational and experimental
techniques through reciprocal visits of three months. This project addresses
several issues that are of critical importance for society, such as the study of
substances with potential biological applications (para-benzynes), the
environmentally friendly synthesis of bulk chemicals (phosphorus derivatives),
and the hydrogen economy (ammoniaborane).