* 1305099
* CSR:  Small:Collaborative Research: System Support for Green Homes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Nilanjan Banerjee, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 197,691.00

Encouraging broader adoption of renewable energy sources is key to minimizing
our dependence on the electric grid. Though installation of solar panels at
homes is increasingly common, the process of managing the energy they generate
is both manual and ad hoc. In this work, the PIs are building an infrastructure
for data collection and analysis of energy generation, energy consumption, and
user behavior in green homes; and an an integrated approach to green home energy
management validated using a novel recommendation-based evaluation platform.
Using a custom-built measurement infrastructure, the project conducts a broad
study of homes powered by a variety of renewable sources. The study examines
both energy generation by renewable sources as well as how and why energy is
consumed by a variety of devices. The results inform the design of a holistic
control system that matches predicted supply with demand of a distributed set of
devices in the home. Moreover, the system is being deployed in a few homes and
evaluated using a recommendation system implemented as a mobile application that
suggests when users should run devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
supports research critical to encouraging adoption of more environmentally
responsible practices in the home and enables a collaboration between PI
Banerjee, who teaches at an EPSCoR institution, and PI Rollins, who teaches at
an undergraduate institution. Further, the project is developing a CS1 course
that will increase awareness of green energy concepts by introducing computing
through collection and analysis of data on energy consumption practices.