* 1305218
* Collaborative Research: CI-ADDO-EN: Making Internet Routing Data Accessible To All
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* David Meyer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 04/30/2017
* USD 797,255.00

Abstract: RouteViews is a system for systematically collecting data on the
routes (the paths by which data gets from point A to point B) used by Internet
traffic. It has played a critical role in the study of significant events, such
as large scale outages, that have taken place in the Internet. The RouteViews
data archives are the most widely used source of Internet routing data for the
computer networking, network operations and network security communities. They
are also increasingly being used in studies of network topological growth and
network economics. However, access to the RouteViews data has been challenging
to new users since the data is current structured as flat binary files with no
simple interfaces for searching or accessing the data.

This project will design and implement database access to the RouteViews data,
and will develop simple interfaces and tools for accessing the data. The
resources used to acquire and store the data will also be expanded. The project
will open up the use of routing data to a broader community including
undergraduate education. It will work with the community to raise awareness
about the potential uses of routing data in research and education, and will
promote the use of the new access methods.

The project will expand routing data collection, will make it easier to access
the collected data and will benefit networking research, network operations and
network security.