* 1305253
* CI-ADDO-NEW: ASTERIX: A Community Software Platform for Big Data Research, Analysis, and Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Vassilis Tsotras, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Vast quantities of digital information are being generated today on a daily
basis through social networks, blogs, online communities, news sources, and
mobile applications as well as our increasingly sensed surroundings. Tremendous
insight can be gained by storing and making such ?Big Data? available for
exploration in a wide variety of domains. Likely beneficiaries include business,
social sciences, public health, national security, political science, public
safety, medicine, and government policy. Researchers exploring these benefits
need software to manage and analyze Big Data, and researchers investigating
algorithms and programming models for Big Data can benefit tremendously by being
provided with shared building blocks to use as a foundation for their
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 3.5 years we have developed an
initial version of AsterixDB, a powerful new Big Data Management System (BDMS)
for scalably storing, managing, searching, and analyzing collections of Big Data
using clusters of commodity computers. AsterixDB has a layered code base that
consists of a scalable runtime platform (Hyracks), a model-neutral framework for
parallel query compilation for Big Data (Algebricks), and the end-user-targeted
AsterixDB BDMS itself. This NSF project is turning AsterixDB and its internal
software stack into robust, supported, open-source resources for use by the Big
Data applications and technology research communities. AsterixDB and its
components will be helpful in training students in Computer Science and other
data-related sciences, at universities everywhere, about Big Data technologies.
This is critical for addressing the information explosion being brought to us
courtesy of social media and the mobile Web.&lt;br/&gt;