* 1305893
* Impact of Interfacial Contact Layers on Photon-to-Electron Conversion Loss in Organic Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Massimo Fischetti, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 08/31/2019
* USD 774,277.00

Technical Description: Interfacial contact layers (ICLs) have been shown to
improve organic solar cell performance and stability. However, how different ICL
materials function with different active layer materials is not well understood,
and the commonly used ICL materials today suffer from several limitations and
drawbacks. This project focuses on solution synthesis of metal-oxide
nanoparticles for interfacial contact layers in organic solar cells and on
experimental and simulation studies of their role in affecting charge
separation, transport, and collection. The synthesis component of the project
aims to understand and improve the physical and electronic properties of the
metal-oxide nanoparticles for specific active layer components in solution to
avoid the need of aggressive post processing. In addition to materials
characterization, the nanoparticles' effectiveness as ICL materials on the
photon-to-electron conversion process is studied through device testing and
frequency-domain spectroscopies, which probe the charge recombination and
transport dynamics. To understand the experimental results, realistic Monte
Carlo device modeling is employed to pinpoint the dominant charge carrier loss
mechanism(s). Additionally, currently available drift-diffusion transport model
assumes uniform generation, which is only applicable for weak absorbers. In this
project, two open-source simulation codes are integrated to model drift-
diffusion transport in multi-layer solar cells. The knowledge gained from this
interdisciplinary research is expected to improve our understanding of
photogenerated carrier dynamics in organic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: The project addresses the needs of energy harvesting and
other organic electronic technologies, including new materials, novel synthesis
approaches, and a combination of characterization techniques and state-of-art
modeling to improve our knowledge in energy harvesting process. The computer
programs developed in this project are to be available to the public. In
addition to graduate student education, the project enables hands-on
participation of the Dallas-area high-school and undergraduate students,
providing opportunities for US youngsters to approach Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics. The principal investigators also participate in
outreach activities to K-12 students, in recruitment and retention of women and
under-represented minority students, and in serving the broader scientific
communities through various professional societies.