* 1305694
* Li-Ion Battery Ceramics: Structural and Microstructural Evolution Mechanisms of Processing under an Electric Field
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Lia Stanciu, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project explores the fundamental hypothesis that
applying an electric field during processing of ceramics, in particular lithium-
ion battery relevant ceramics, has a significant effect on their porosity,
densification, and ultimately on the reliability of the battery itself. The
results will be used for the rational design of improved Li-ion battery relevant
materials with targeted properties that overcome the current hurdles in their
electrochemical and impedance performance. The fundamental knowledge acquired
will impact the ceramics processing field by shedding light on a controversial
topic (electric field effects on ceramics), and at the same time including
fundamental advancements in the Li-ion battery field. The project also
integrates education and training by incorporating both undergraduate research
experiences, and a cyber-enabled experimental and computational materials
science learning module. The learning module has a specific focus on integrated
experimental and computational learning within the context of ceramic materials
topics that are part of two courses offered at Purdue
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The goal of this research is
to reach an understanding, at a fundamental level, of the effect of the electric
field application on the controlled processing of Li-ion battery relevant
ceramic materials. The model materials of choice for this study are a sodium
superionic conductor (Nasicon) ceramic, Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAG) (an
electrolyte material with high ionic conductivity), and lithium vanadium
phosphate (Li3V2(PO4)3) (LVP) (a material that can serve both as a cathode and
as an anode). Battery performance and reliability are closely related to the
presence of inhomogeneities and microstructural defects in the component
materials. This project first focuses on the development and application of an
experimentally validated microstructural and porosity evolution spark plasma
sintering (SPS) phase field sintering model. Next, the experimental design is
using these modeling results to verify the influence of electric field in terms
of sintering, vacancy migration, tortuosity, microstructural inhomogeneity and
porosity evolution in the model systems (LVP, LAG, and LVP/LAG). The third step
of the research uses advanced simulation models to include thermal and electric
field contributions, as well as pressure and rapid heating regimes to the growth
phenomena during SPS processing of the model materials. Finally, the previous
results are used to set up an experimental model to include actual SPS sintering
regimes that contain the integrated SPS sintering experimental parameters
(electric field, temperature, heating rate, and pressure) towards processing of
samples with controlled porosity and minimal tortuosity.