* 1305078
* I-Corps Node: NSF Bay Area Regional I-Node Program
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Richard Lyons, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2018
* USD 4,414,947.00

Project Description: This project involves the creation of a Regional I-Corps
Node in the northern California Bay Area (Bay Area Node) through a partnership
of the University of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley), the University of
California, San Francisco (UCSF), and Stanford University. It is producing an
extensive entrepreneurship platform that is built on the scientific, technology,
and engineering strengths, business thought leadership, and external ecosystems
of the three universities. The Node is applying and disseminating the Lean
LaunchPad methodology through classes, focused training, and mentoring services
to help drive the creation of science and technology-based startups.

The partners are investigating how I-Corps Node training influences research
commercialization outcomes and exploring ways to better understand the early
stages of team formation and evolution, formation and evolution of advising
networks, timing and content of decisions, and real-time attention allocation.
The Node is also studying the formation of entrepreneurial teams and ways to
measure team evolution and effectiveness, in order to better understand how they
can be supported in their efforts to commercialize invention. Teams are being
monitored (post-training) to observe their outcomes and determine whether they
are optimizing activities for success. The LaunchPad Central website and online
mentoring platform is enabling the team to aggregate/analyze the data and
examine what makes technology commercialization efforts succeed or fail.

Broader Significance: The Node is producing both regional and national impact by
raising awareness of the value of entrepreneurship among science and engineering
faculty and students and enhancing the online availability of Lean LaunchPad
principles. By providing much of the education, team tracking, and mentoring
online, the Bay Area Node is creating a scalable startup ecosystem that allows
content and business processes to be readily updated. It offers a highly
instrumented ecosystem that is tracking progress and measuring program
effectiveness; thus creating a continuously improving program that is positively
impacting the production of science and technology-based startups both locally
and nationally. The data, resources and outcomes/results are being disseminated
using methods that allow others, outside of the Bay Area, to participate in the
training.

The Node is facilitating the inclusion of groups from diverse regions, economic
backgrounds, and ethnicities in developing effective entrepreneurship. It is
studying whether mentoring networks can provide the status and diversity
contributions that teams with demographic disadvantages often lack. The data and
results are made freely available via the website so that advancements can be
quickly implemented and globally shared. New curriculum modules are also
addressing a broader array of subjects including: mentor training, healthcare
and life sciences, energy and clean technology, as well as legal and finance
related issues.