* 1305808
* RUI: Modification and characterization of polymer surfaces with applications in microfluidic neural circuit development
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Brian Augustine, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 313,186.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research at Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) project will address developing a fundamental understanding
of how certain hydrohalocarbon solvents can be used to activate polymeric
surfaces to significantly improve the adhesion of vapor deposited noble metal
thin films such as Au and Pt which are technologically important in the
microfabrication of sensors and interconnects in polymer microdevices. Work on
this project will answer the following broad question: Which range of polymers,
solvents and metal interactions can be improved through the creation of a Lewis
acid-base adduct between the polymer surface, the organic solvent, and the
deposited metal? In order to address this question, a range of experimental and
theoretical tools will be used to predict, design and optimize experimental
conditions resulting in polymeric surfaces which promote improved metal
adhesion. Successful adhesion of Au and Pt thin films have been demonstrated
with poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) exposed to a variety of halogenated
solvents. Polymer surfaces with a range of similar backbone and side-chain
chemistries compared to PMMA will be explored, as will materials that have a
different chemical composition, but may exhibit similar Lewis base properties
compared to PMMA. The patterning of polymer surfaces will be studied to
determine if solvent activation methods can be used in conjunction with soft-
lithographic techniques to produce patterned features compatible with
microfluidic devices that can be used to simulate neural circuit development and
function on a polymer microchip. Materials properties will be studied using a
combination of surface analysis and microscopy techniques including X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), attenuated
total reflection infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) and spectroscopic and imaging
techniques such as optical and electron microscopy and spectroscopic
ellipsometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI)
project will study the adhesion of metal films onto polymeric surfaces with
applications in polymer microdevices. Researchers at James Madison University
and the University of Virginia will train undergraduate research students in a
highly interdisciplinary and collaborative environment. This project will
involve the training of up to fifteen undergraduate researchers over the
duration of the program. The students will be exposed to materials science
issues of the processing, modification and characterization of polymer thin
films, surfaces and interfaces. The students funded in this program will be
expected to participate in activities related to the NSF Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) site in chemistry at JMU to become part of a "community
of scholars" with up to sixty other summer undergraduate researchers each summer
in chemistry, physics, engineering and materials science at JMU. They will have
further opportunities to interact with graduate researchers in biology through
an exchange program with undergraduates from JMU going to UVa for one summer and
visa versa. Finally, this program will fund two high school teachers to work in
a research environment to learn how materials science can be applied to the
secondary school chemistry or physics curriculum. In summary, this program helps
serve to broadly impact the pipeline of future scientists from the high school
through graduate level with students trained in cutting-edge polymer materials
science topics with biological applications of polymer surfaces.