* 1305666
* Disorder Effects on Magnetism in Dilute Magnetic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Bruce Wessels, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 272,916.00

Technical Description: Group III-V compound dilute magnetic semiconductors (DMS)
offer the potential for manipulating both spin and charge and a class of
materials that exhibit magnetic, magneto-optical and semiconducting properties.
Their utilization, however, has been impeded due to their low magnetic
transition (Curie) temperatures. It was demonstrated that InMnSb alloys prepared
by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy exhibit a Curie temperature in excess of 400
K. Mn dopant atoms were imaged using cross-sectional scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM). No clustering of Mn was noted but positional disorder was
observed. The inhomogeneous distribution of magnetic ions on the atomic scale is
proposed to play a dominant role in the magnetic behavior.&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research project centers on determining the magnetic phase
diagram of DMS in the dilute concentration limit. The alloy system of interest
is the narrow-gap DMS InMnSb. The applicability of a theoretical model for
describing the magnetic properties of disordered DMS is investigated. The major
questions to be answered are (a) why these alloys have high Curie temperatures
and (b) what the role of disorder of Mn dopants is on the transition
temperature. In the project, epitaxial thin alloy films are deposited by
metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy. Alloys with Mn concentrations of less than 1%
and carrier concentrations of lower than 10^19 cm-3 are synthesized. The role of
disorder in stabilizing the ferromagnetic phase is investigated. It is proposed
that the ferromagnetic phase is stabilized at carrier concentrations &gt; 2 x
10^17 cm-3, which is above the metal-insulator transition carrier concentration.
Experimental characterization techniques used include: transmission electron
microscopy, temperature dependent magnetization measurements, Hall effect,
resistivity and magnetoresistance measurements. Low-temperature cross-sectional
STM and spin-tunneling STM at the Technical University at Eindhoven are used to
determine the nature of Mn substitution in InSb and its magnetic properties at
the atomic level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: As to broader
impact, alloy films prepared by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy are provided to
colleagues at universities in the US and abroad and Argonne National
Laboratories for characterizing their structural, magneto-optical and magnetic
properties. An extended collaboration is established between Northwestern
University and Technical University of Eindhoven on the imaging of single dopant
atom in dilute magnetic semiconductors. The project involves the training of
post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in the synthesis and property
measurements of ferromagnetic semiconductors. Graduate students are involved in
STEM outreach through the HANDS program at the Haven School in Evanston,
Illinois. The magnetic semiconductor materials have potential technological
importance for spintronic devices such as spin valves, bipolar magnetic junction
transistors, spin diode logic circuits and quantum computation devices.