* 1305609
* Collaborative Research: Geochemical Imaging of Post-Pangean Lithospheric Structure in the Southern Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 08/27/2012,07/31/2015
* Craig Grimes, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 123,917.00

The combined Alleghanian-Hercynian-Variscan orogeny (approximately 300 million
years ago) marks the culmination of Earth?s most recent example of the formation
and dispersal of a supercontinent (Pangea). The southern Appalachian Mountains
record a critical zone in the formation of Pangea because they mark the
collision of the precursors of three modern continents (North America, South
America, and Africa). Pangea's subsequent rupture produced these three
continents and continues with the expansion of the Atlantic Ocean. The research
team of faculty and students from the University of Florida and Mississippi
State University are conducting detailed geochemical investigations into the
spatial distribution, ages, and geochemical compositions of a suite of granitic
igneous bodies that intruded crystalline rocks that formed up to one billion
years earlier in the roots of the mountain belt and are now in Georgia, Florida,
Alabama, and South Carolina. These granitic bodies are the only known magmatic
manifestation of the destruction of two ancient oceans (Iapetus and Rheic).
Understanding the age and origin of the granitic bodies is critical to
understanding the growth of continents in general and, particularly, how
continental crust was exchanged during the Pangean supercontinent cycle. In
particular, they are focusing on identifying the boundary and the operative
tectonic and magmatic processes that characterized convergence of the continents
that ultimately formed Pangea. The convergent boundary has tentatively been
identified on the basis of geophysical data to occur in a zone known as the
Suwannee suture; the proposed suture lies sub-parallel to the Florida-Georgia
border. A new boundary was established after the rupture of Pangea, which
produced the modern Atlantic Ocean and the African, South American, and North
American continents. The location of this rupture is not known, but is being
further constrained by this project.

Faculty and students (graduate and undergraduate) involved in this project are
sampling the granitic rocks derived from melting of the lower continental crust
as part of an integrated geochronologic, thermochronologic, and geochemical
study of the spatial and temporal relationships between Alleghanian tectonism
and magmatism. These data will provide unique constraints on lithospheric
structure and evolution in the Pangean collision zone. The region chosen
contains numerous Alleghanian magmatic rocks that intrude a range of pre-
Alleghanian terranes typically considered part of ancient North America, as well
as some considered to be fundamentally Gondwanan or peri-Gondwanan (e.g.,
African or South American). The uranium-lead zircon geochronology and isotopic
composition of the granitic bodies are being used to geochemically image both
sides of the proposed Suwannee suture to better understand the juxtaposition of
the different continental fragments in 4-D. This "geochemical imaging" of
lithospheric structure is: 1) providing a critical complement to on-going
geophysical studies in this region that are integral to the mission of the
EarthScope Program in North America, 2) providing important insight into the
global tectonic enigma of largely amagmatic ocean closures, and 3) contributing
to our understanding of the basement architecture of the eastern Gulf of Mexico
petroleum province. The project supports an important regional scientific
collaboration between researchers at the University of Florida and Mississippi
State University. It is contributing to the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in a STEM discipline. Because of the demographics of the
student populations at both universities, it has the potential to contribute to
the broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in the geosciences.
The ongoing results of this research are being communicated in guidebooks,
professional meeting symposia, and refereed scientific publications.

This project is being supported by the NSF Tectonics and EarthScope Programs