* 1305741
* Novel phases of electronic Mott insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Senthil Todadri, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education to study novel Mott insulating states of electronic matter.
Specific phases of interest are quantum spin liquids, and phases of quantum
magnetism that are the spin analogs of interacting topological insulators. The
emphasis will be on the development of theoretical concepts and methods which
will be placed in the context of experiments and/or numerical work. The PI will
pursue three topics: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) the theory and phenomenology of
quantum spin liquids in the organic salts and other
materials;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) a theoretical description of a new class of
gapless quantum spin liquid states that are likely beyond the existing
paradigm;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) the theory and realization of spin analogs
of topological insulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects (i) and (ii) are
motivated by experiments on many Mott insulators that provide evidence for
various kinds of quantum spin liquid phases, typically with gapless excitations.
Project (iii) is on a new and rapidly evolving area which can deepen our
understanding both of quantum magnetism and topological insulators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports the training of graduate students in
modern concepts and methods in condensed matter physics. Undergraduates will be
involved in the research. The PI will develop lectures to expose graduate
students to the phenomenology of correlated materials and their experimental
probes. He will also develop lectures to convey the excitement of condensed
matter physics to other scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education on interesting new kinds of insulating states of matter. It has
long been known that in certain materials insulating behavior develops as a
result of the Coulomb interaction between the electrons rather than due to the
filling of quantum mechanical energy bands. Modern developments show that some
of these Mott insulators can be in very novel states of matter where the
microscopic degrees of freedom are quantum mechanically entangled over
macroscopic distances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several unusual counter intuitive
phenomena arise as a result of the long range quantum mechanical entanglement.
The PI will develop new concepts and methods to deal with insulators with long
range quantum entanglement, and their experimental signatures. He will also
develop a deeper understanding of the interplay between symmetry and quantum
effects in such interaction driven insulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
fundamental research has potential to generate concepts that will underlie
future quantum technologies. The study of long range entangled phases is a
relatively new chapter in condensed matter physics which holds promise to have
similar impact on technology as the previous chapter of the study of long range
ordered phases. This award also supports the training of graduate students in
modern concepts and methods in condensed matter physics. Undergraduates will be
involved in the research. The PI will develop lectures to expose graduate
students to the phenomenology of correlated materials and their experimental
probes. He will also develop lectures to convey the excitement of condensed
matter physics to other scientists.