* 1305247
* Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies of Air-Stable Organometallic Dimers as  n-Dopants for Organic Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Seth Marder, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 07/31/2017
* USD 358,497.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This research project is jointly supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry and the Electronic and Photonic Materials
Programs. Doping of charge-transport materials can greatly improve the behavior
of organic electronic devices. n-Dopants suitable for typical electron-transport
materials are inevitably air-sensitive if reacting by simple electron transfer.
Approaches in which air-stable precursors form dopants during, or subsequent to,
film deposition can simplify device fabrication. The PIs recently demonstrated
that air-stable dimers of certain sandwich compounds, such as rhodocene, can
n-dope materials, forming the corresponding monomeric sandwich cations. In
contrast to other air-stable precursor approaches to molecular n-dopants, side
reactions are likely to be minimized and materials with much lower electron
affinities (2.8 eV to date) can be doped. This proposal aims to understand the
chemistry of these dimers in detail and to broaden their utility. Synthesis, NMR
crossover experiments, vis-NIR monitoring of kinetics, and XPS, UPS, and
conductivity studies of solution-cast films will be used to establish: the
limits of doping using this approach without significantly compromising the
dimer air-stability; how the rate can be controlled to permit solution-casting
of films in air, with subsequent dopant activation; and the extent to which
heavy-metal dimers can be replaced by related dimers of 3d-metal complexes or
even all-organic dimers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;There is wide interest in lightweight-flexible electronic
devices (displays, lighting, solar cells), that can be made at low cost and low
temperature. These use organic (carbon-containing) molecules or polymers in
place of traditional semiconductors, the electrical properties of which can be
greatly improved using dopants, which increase (n) or decrease (p) the number of
electrons in the material. n-Dopants are generally highly reactive, which
complicates their use. The PIs have discovered n-dopants that are unusually
stable, yet dope many materials. This program will enable an improved
understanding and control of these dopants, related dopants, and their
reactivity, and may lead to more efficient devices. Students will be trained in
organic electronic materials, and, more generally, in investigating scientific
problems, and case-studies will be used in the PIs' lectures. The PIs will
educate and train women and underrepresented minorities by: hosting summer
students and encouraging their application to graduate school, recruiting via
seminars at HBCUs and other minority-serving institutions, and attending
workshops and conferences with significant minority participation. The PIs' work
with a NSF PREM at New Mexico Highlands University, a minority-serving
institution, will be supported; students there will determine the structures of
new dopants, and the PIs will give lectures linking chemistry and applications.