* 1305100
* RIGEE: Progressive Learning Platform for Computer Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Sohum Sohoni, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 84,120.00

The long-term vision for this Research Initiation Grant in Engineering Education
is to transform the way computer engineering is taught by establishing the
computer engineering curriculum around a carefully designed learning platform.
This engineering education project involves research and faculty collaborators
from Computer Engineering, the English Department, and the College of Education.
It aims to introduce the learning platform system in various computer
engineering courses and perform qualitative and quantitative studies to gauge
the impact on student learning. The project will generate new knowledge on how
students learn, retain, and transfer engineering concepts in a community of
practice. It will also test whether students? fixed mindsets can be changed to
growth mindsets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research initiation project will
provide a vehicle for the PI to explore PLP?s impact on student learning through
well-known frameworks and assessment models. The impact on the PI and his
graduate students will be significant, as they will learn the intricacies of
quantitative and qualitative research in education. Undergraduate students will
benefit through a well-designed educational tool. Collaborations will be formed
that will lead to future projects where experts from the social and educational
sciences will work with engineering faculty to perform rigorous research on
student learning.