* 1305070
* Digitization PEN:Targeted Digitization to Expand and Enhance the PALEONICHES TCN
* BIO,EF
* 05/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Ann Molineux, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 10/31/2015
* USD 135,103.00

The invertebrate and plant fossil collections of the University of Texas at
Austin document geological research spanning the last 150 years. These four
million fossils range in age from Precambrian to the Holocene, encompassing
critical intervals of geologic time and geographic areas and certain well-
studied organisms. Such huge collections are of little value unless the objects
along with related documentation, images, and analytical data are digitized and
made globally accessible. This project will connect digital data from these UT
collections to institutions that are part of the Paleoniches TCN and ultimately
to the national data resource (iDigBio.org). The geologic "deep" time slots that
have been selected are the Cambro-Ordovician, Pennsylvanian and Paleogene-
Neogene. The major groups of organisms will be brachiopods, echinoderms, and
molluscs. The digital record will link the specimen's scientific name to its
collection site and geological time period. The collection site will be recorded
in current and deep time geography, thus allowing the researcher to examine
organisms from the perspective of distinct "plate" configurations. High quality
multi-focus imagery with digitally embedded scales will provide researchers with
a functional image that can be analyzed in open source software. The final data
resource will provide a more robust database for future analytical studies on a
broad range of topics within the history of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This data
set will make visible long-term effects of major global changes in the
distribution, migration, and extinction of organisms. Using a web interface that
will allow for mobile platforms, this rich geological record will become
available to researchers, educators, and the general public. The project will
provide training for students. This award is made as part of the National
Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing
Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this
award will be available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).