* 1305787
* U.S. - Thailand Collaboration: Geologic Records of Tropical Cyclone Strikes on the Gulf of Thailand Coast.
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Harry Williams, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2015
* USD 38,992.00

This research project is a US-Thailand collaborative study with the objective of
establishing long-term records of tropical cyclone strikes for the Gulf of
Thailand coast. The devastating impact of Hurricane Katrina in the U.S.
highlighted the need for a better understanding of tropical cyclone risk and
impacts for vulnerable coastlines around the world. In Thailand, historical
records of tropical cyclone strikes are short, extending back only 50 or 60
years. The study will employ the new science of paleotempestology (study of
ancient storms) to obtain much longer prehistorical records derived from
geologic and biologic proxies of tropical cyclone strikes. Currently, very
little paleotempestological research has been conducted in this region, even
though this coastline is subject to intense tropical cyclone strikes, including
the 1989 Category 3 Typhoon Gay ? one of the deadliest tropical cyclones in
Thailand?s history, generating 11-m-high swells and causing 800 fatalities in
and around the Gulf of Thailand. Field sites have already been selected in
preliminary field reconnaissance conducted jointly by researchers from the
University of North Texas and Chulalongkorn University. The methods employed
will be a combination of trenching and coring of coastal marshes, with the aim
of identifying and dating anomalous sand beds that record prehistoric tropical
cyclone washover deposits. These deposits will be identified based on sediment
texture, organic content, stratigraphy and marine microfossils. &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project has important societal benefits because development of long-
term records of tropical cyclone strikes improves assessment of recurrence
intervals of large, damaging typhoons, such as Typhoon Gay. This project will
catalyze future research collaborations between the U.S. and Thailand by
representing a first step towards a regional database of paleotempestological
records for Southeast Asia, and by integrating research and education, through
participation of Chulalongkorn and UNT students.