* 1305087
* High Efficiency Hybrid Solar Cells Based on Intimate Hyperbranched Nanocomposite Assemblies
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Zhiqun Lin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 06/30/2016
* USD 330,000.00

The objective of this program is to develop an innovative approach to yield high
efficiency organic?{inorganic hybrid solar cells based on hyperbranched
nanocomposite assemblies composed of sea-urchin-like semiconductor nanocrystals
and upconversion nanocrystals that are intimately and permanently connected with
conjugated polymers (i.e., potentially transformative research).

The intellectual merit is manifested in innovative design and crafting of
inorganic sea-urchin-like nanocrystals (i.e., CdSe and upconversion
nanocrystal/CdSe) that are closely linked with conjugated polymers to yield high
efficiency hybrid solar cells for renewable energy production as a direct
consequence of (a) largely increased light harvesting efficiency due to the
incorporation of upconversion nanocrystals for expanding the absorption spectrum
to infrared range, (b) faster charge transfer from conjugated polymer to sea-
urchin-like nanocrystals attributed to intimate interfacial contact between
conjugated polymer and nanocrystals enabled by utilizing star-like block
copolymer templates, and (c) enhanced pathway for efficient charge transport and
longer electron lifetime resulting from the use of anisotropic sea-urchin-like
CdSe nanocrystals (i.e., they interconnect one another to yield a network for
fast charge transport).

The broader impacts include strong nanoscience education across several levels.
Undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented groups, will be
recruited to participate in the research project. Summer research for high
school teachers in the PI's lab will provide a medium for transferring
nanomaterials science and technology knowledge to high school classrooms. High
school students will further be exposed to nanoscience through annual Career Day
in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Georgia Tech.