* 1305872
* Chemical Bonding Across the Periodic Table
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Roald Hoffmann, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Roald Hoffmann is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program in research that melds chemical and physical approaches to
the prediction of new structures, properties and reactivity across the periodic
table, and especially matter under extreme conditions of pressure. The problems
being explored range across all of chemistry, from hydrogen to astatine. In the
realm of high pressure, the work is exploring the possible stability of SiO (not
familiar quartz, SiO2), the potential superconductivity of species as diverse as
AuO (with a so-called mixed valence transition between two forms of gold in the
structure), and Li- or H-doped NbN, to molecular acetylenes and ferrocene under
pressure. In order to gain further insight into the world in-between the
molecular and the macro, the work is exploring the interplay of polarity and
dimensionality in low-dimensional CdSe and NaCl arrays, looking at how to
stabilize the silicon analogue of graphene, and exploring potential metallic
micelles. Since prediction is the best test of understanding, the research sets
out to design as yet unmade molecular and extended systems, including some
nonclassical organometallics, untypical organoiodides, novel networks containing
both tetrahedral and square-planar main group atoms, and the possible formation
of O-O bonds in oxides.

Chemistry is to be found in the properties of persistent groupings of atoms, of
molecules. From their changeable combinations comes the incredible variety of
organic and inorganic chemistry at the center of the art, craft, business and
science of chemistry. And moving out from this center one encounters the still
greater richness of biological function and materials with unusual properties,
as chemistry touches and affects the rest of the world. The molecular science
continues to surprise in the shape of one molecule, in the reactivity of
another, in the unusual electric or magnetic properties of a third. But we have
a way to go to understanding, in the qualitative yet productive way chemists
have of parlaying experience into the making of the new. The proposed research
addresses this need for understanding, especially in the behavior of matter
under pressures such as those at the center of the earth (attainable in a few
laboratories as well). Addressing a range of bonding situations across the
periodic table, from hydrogen to the actinides, this proposal uses quite
specific bonding puzzles as a springboard to build frameworks of understanding
that chemists and physicists can take away and themselves design new molecules
and new extended structures (of the type found in minerals, diamond, metals).
Such molecules might have interesting and important properties, high temperature
superconductivity just one of them. Risky, specific, predictions of the
existence of molecules and extended systems, and their structures and properties
-- the best test of real understanding in chemistry is a hallmark of the work
being performed.