* 1305131
* II-EN: Shared Virtual Environments for Studying Social Influences on Risky Cycling and Pedestrian Behavior
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Molly Nikolas, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 10/31/2017
* USD 372,337.00

This project will create a simulation facility that will advance a capability to
study the social interactions of two children, or a child and parent, as the two
people walk or bicycle across a traffic-filled roadway. The project will expand
existing infrastructure at the University of Iowa to build a new simulator that
matches a recently installed simulator at the same institution, which will
permit each of two experimental participants to inhabit their own separate
simulated environment. The two simulators will be connected by a high-speed
network and programmed to share a single, virtual environment that can be
configured for either bicycling or walking. Experimental participants will
control their motion by actually walking or cycling across these virtual
intersections, surrounded by graphically rendered images that show a real-time,
first-person view of their motion through the environment. A full-body motion
tracking system will be used to create high-fidelity avatars that represent
participant motions to provide a realistic experience of walking or riding with
a friend or parent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the computational side, this research will advance
the technology for immersive, interactive virtual environments by developing
methods to represent full-body movements in avatars moving through large-scale
environments, and by studying how the fidelity of avatar movements influences
rider and pedestrian interactions. On the behavioral side, this research will
advance an understanding of social influences on risk taking by studying how
children interact with friends or parents in the context of crossing roads, an
everyday and yet risky activity. The reciprocal relations between the
computational and behavioral components of this project will motivate creative
solutions to the computational challenges that arise in creating realistic
avatars and semi-autonomous agents and will enable new discoveries about the
psychological processes underlying risky road-crossing behavior within the
context of a virtual environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help to address public health
problems by contributing to an understanding of the risk factors for car-bicycle
and car-pedestrian collisions. The project will create a foundation for future
intervention studies that will help to reduce such collisions. Advances in
simulation technology, experimental methodology, and methods to create life-like
avatars will contribute to the development of virtual environments for use in
behavioral research and simulation-based training. The results of this work will
be disseminated to the public through scientific publications and presentations,
along with community-based activities such as open house events and
bicycling/pedestrian safety lectures for the public.