* 1305006
* Bacterial Swimming and Pattern Formation in Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Xiao-Lun Wu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2017
* USD 404,500.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the effect of
long-range hydrodynamic interactions (LRHI) on swimming of a single bacterium
and a group of bacteria in proximity of each other. At a single cell level, how
the backflow influences the swimming behavior of the cell who creates it has
attracted attentions from mathematicians and physicists. Important theoretical
predictions were made, but they have not been rigorously tested in the
laboratory. This is in part due to most studies so far used Escherichia coli,
which have multiple flagella that are difficult to model mathematically and in
part due to the difficulty in changing the physical parameters, such as the
hydrodynamic load, over a broad range. Using marine bacteria V. alginolyticus
that possess a single polar flagellum and whose cell body can differentiate into
different sizes, these difficulties can be overcome. The marine bacteria also
have other interesting attributes that can contribute significantly to this
research, which include: (i) a tunable motor powered by the sodium ions in the
fluid, (ii) a large swimming speed, and most importantly (iii) the available
mutants that swim exclusively in the forward (pushers) and backward (pullers)
directions. Theoretically the mutual hydrodynamic interactions between two
pushers, two pullers, and a pusher and a puller are expected to be different. We
use a state-of-the-art optical trapping techniques to measure these different
forces quantitatively. At a macroscopic level, we examine hydrodynamic patterns
formed by these different swimmers. Recently, there have been intense
theoretical efforts in this area, resulting in interesting predictions for this
type of "living" fluids. These include the prediction of novel rheological
behaviors, nonequilibrium order/disorder phase transitions, and liquid-
crystalline-like hydrodynamic structures. This research trains graduate students
in the emerging field of biophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;It is a common experience that a mechanical disturbance
in a fluid spreads to its neighbors with a well-defined speed, i.e., the sound
velocity, while its intensity decreases with distance. A swimming bacterium can
be considered as a local source of mechanical disturbance and fluid motion in
the vicinity can influence the bacterium's own motion as well as others in its
neighborhood. This is what is called hydrodynamic interaction and can be
described by a mathematical theory developed by Lighthill; it appears to work
reasonably well for isolated swimming bacterium. However, its application to a
large group of swimming bacteria in high concentrations is not well understood.
The effect of hydrodynamic interaction on swimming of individual and a large
group of bacteria is significant because it influences their ability to
sequester nutrients in aqueous environments and to form biofilms on surfaces;
both are important for ecological and biomedical reasons. The project uses the
state-of-the-art techniques of laser trapping to manipulate bacteria to
determine mutual hydrodynamic interactions between pair of bacteria in different
configurations. These measurements compare and refine theoretical models that
make predictions about collective behaviors of large number of bacteria. Given
the multidisciplinary nature of the research, students trained are in high
demand in academia and in industry.