* 1305233
* Quasiconformal methods in analysis, geometry and dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Christopher Bishop, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2016
* USD 176,100.00

The PI, Christopher Bishop, will study the geometric properties of conformal and
quasiconformal maps, with an emphasis on the connections with other areas such
as dynamics, computational geometry, numerical analysis and geometric measure
theory. The proposal describes several areas that the PI will investigate using
quasiconformal mappings as a primary tool. The first is the iteration theory of
complex analytic functions on the plane. The PI has previously used
quasiconformal methods to solve a number of problems in the field and plans to
refine these techniques to attack several remaining open problems. The second
area is to use quasiconformal maps and hyperbolic geometry in computational
geometry, mostly in problems related to algorithms for meshing planar regions
with optimal complexity and geometry. Obtaining similar results in three
dimensions is one of the most important goals of the field, and the proposal
describes some ideas for attacking this problem too. The final part of the
proposal describes the dimension distortion properties of quasiconformal maps.
This is one of the most interesting problems intrinsic to study of
quasiconformal maps, but, as the proposal describes, can also be linked to
famous open problems in computational geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will investigate how combinatorial and discrete ideas yield new
results in analysis and how ideas from conformal analysis and hyperbolic
geometry can prove new theorems about discrete geometry and meshing. Conformal
maps preserve angles; these maps have been intensively studied for over 150
years and are of fundamental importance to a wide variety of problems in
analysis, geometry, probability, physics and engineering. Classically, conformal
maps have been used in the study of various differential equations related to
fluid flow, heat conduction and wave propagation. More recently, conformal maps
have been fundamental to the study of statistical mechanics, percolation and
random growth models. Quasiconformal maps allow a controlled amount of angle
distortion. These maps are a flexible and extremely useful generalization of
conformal maps that help us better understand the special case of conformal
mappings, but also introduces many important new problems and techniques. The
PI's previous work has used quasiconformal maps to give the best known algorithm
for computing conformal maps onto polygons and the best known algorithms for
meshing planar domains into triangles or quadrilaterals with optimal geometric
properties. Such meshes play an important role in many numerical problems from
computer graphs to finite element methods for PDEs and many of these methods
work more effectively if the underlying mesh has good geometric properties. The
proposed work will extend and sharpen the results already obtained and will use
similar ideas to attack other problems that arise in dynamics and geometry.