* 1305979
* Collaborative Research: CCSS: A Distributed Computation Framework for Networked Sensing and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Shuguang Cui, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 06/30/2016
* USD 180,000.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a unified
computation framework for distributed adaptive sensing and control in stochastic
multi-agent networks with either static or dynamic states, coupled with model
uncertainties. In such a fully distributed information processing and control
paradigm, collaborative communication and participation at the agent level is
explored to build efficient scalable architectures for real-time pervasive
decision making with provable performance guarantees. The distributed
methodologies are amenable to real-time implementation and adaptation over
parametric switching and uncertainties, through proper exploitation of locally
sensed data. The resulting mixed-time-scale information and cyber/physical
dynamics are analyzed with new novel techniques in stochastic analysis, with
special considerations over the associated non-Markovian
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is lying in the fact the proposed distributed adaptive framework involves
a complex and subtle closed-loop interplay among stochastic learning,
estimation, and communication, where the proposed approach leads to the novel
mixed-time-scale sequential stochastic schemes of the consensus + innovation
type. The dynamics of these procedures are non-Markovian, for which a completely
new and transformative systematic approach is proposed to conduct the system
performance analysis. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts are multi-fold. The results will enable efficient cyber-physical
system operations, and will provide new methodologies for advanced dynamic
system analysis. The proposed concurrent education program addresses the
undergraduate and graduate education issues in multiple aspects: teaching,
training, and mentoring, with outreach to the community and under-represented
minority groups.