* 1305037
* Studies of Hot and Dense Quark and Gluon Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jiangyong Jia, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2017
* USD 522,000.00

We will perform several measurements that can establish the properties of the
high energy density matter created in relativistic heavy ion collisions at both
the Relativistic Heavy ion Collider (RHIC) at BNL and the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) at CERN. Specifically, we will probe the properties of this matter by
studying the collective flow and jet quenching phenomena. In earlier work, we
have shown that this matter not only exhibits significant harmonic flows of many
orders arising from the density fluctuations in the initial collision geometry,
but also exhibits strong jet-medium interactions as well as a response of the
medium to the quenched jets. Our future efforts will be aimed at establishing a
more quantitative understanding of the microscopic mechanisms for the flow and
and jet-medium interactions. We plan to achieve this goal by finishing ongoing
data analyses as well as by pursuing new measurements. They include: 1) Ongoing
and future experimental and phenomenological efforts to constrain the mechanisms
for harmonic flow and the nature of the density fluctuations in the initial
collision geometry. 2) Future efforts to understand the jet-quenching response
to the density fluctuations and to search for medium response to quenched jets.
These projects are built upon our established expertise in single particle
measurements and jet correlation measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: These experiments will improve our quantitative understanding of
collective behavior and jet-medium interactions, and hence provide invaluable
constraints for determining the fundamental properties of high-density nuclear
matter under the most extreme conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Studies of high energy density matter can have a profound impact on our
understanding of the strong force in nuclei and the evolution of the early
universe, supernova explosions and the properties of neutron stars. The
experimental results on jet quenching and medium response at RHIC and LHC have
inspired important new developments in super-string theories. Both the PHENIX
and ATLAS experiments at these facilities provide excellent training
opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high school students. In addition,
the PI is also actively contributing to undergraduate education in nuclear
science by teaching in the annual BNL Nuclear Chemistry Summer School.