* 1305379
* II-NEW: BOLD: Big Data and Optical Lightpaths-Driven Networked Systems Research Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Alan Cox, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 900,000.00

This project will deploy an optically networked systems research infrastructure
named BOLD that integrates high-performance, low-power, optical networking
devices and programmable packet switches to enable transformative and inter-
disciplinary research. It enables experimental exploration of different
architectural design choices and it will potentially suggest new approaches to
integrated hardware-software designs. At the hardware level, it enables research
on novel optical network devices that can provide powerful communication
capabilities, possibly tailored to the specific needs of big data applications,
as well as experimentation with the device prototypes under real application
traffic. BOLD enables a broad range of transformative big data-driven research.
At the system software level, it enables research on storage, network, and
application control software that are designed from the ground up to coordinate
for optimal performance. At the application level, BOLD motivates research on
how fundamental algorithms for big data applications should be designed to
leverage the new network capabilities. BOLD has the unique potential to bridge
the gap between nano-photonics researchers, networked systems researchers, and
big data application researchers, creating inter-disciplinary research
opportunities. Furthermore, because BOLD is designed to operate alongside Rice?s
existing NSF-funded computing infrastructures BOLD can support big data
experiments at a substantial scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the inter-
disciplinary research enabled by BOLD will lead to future big data processing
system architectures that dramatically speed up a wide range of computational
scientific discoveries. Because optical networking devices are unique in that
they consume very little power, yet can support enormous data rates, BOLD will
inspire a new class of high performance, high energy efficiency system
architectures. Research enabled by BOLD could inform the design of future
nation-wide networking infrastructures by showing how optical networks can be
harnessed as shared ?cloud? resources. BOLD will serve as a platform for the
training and education of numerous undergraduate and graduate students,
including under-represented groups, in cutting edge big data-driven research.