* 1305024
* Digitization PEN: Facilitating a Shared Image Library and Occurrence Database for Ants of the Southwest as Part of the SCAN TCN
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Naomi Pierce, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 149,252.00

An award is made to complement the Southwest Collections of Arthropods Network
(SCAN) Thematic Collection Network (TCN). SCAN is a collaborative of museums
that pool their resources and digitize information for all their specimens of
ground-dwelling insects and close relatives. The Museum of Comparative Zoology
(MCZ) at Harvard will partner with SCAN and contribute world-renowned expertise
in the identification and digitization of ants. Digital records of the some
90,000 specimens of ants from the American Southwest, including the type
specimens (individual ants from which species have been described), will be
imaged, digitized and made available on line. The project will be of value both
to scientists studying biodiversity and the responses of ant species to climate
change in the Southwest, and to non-scientists seeking to identify their
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will focus on
the Navajo Nation, where researchers from the MCZ with Navajo scientists and
student interns, have already collected more than 15,000 ants. Additional
material to be developed with help from educators involved in Encyclopedia of
Life (EOL) will include a local field guide to the ants. This award is made as
part of the National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections through
the Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all data
resulting from this award will be available through the national resource
(iDigBio.org).