* 1305777
* Non-Heme Iron(II)-Nitrosyl and -Nitroxyl Complexes: Key Intermediates in Nitric Oxide Reductases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Nicolai Lehnert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 459,592.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Nicolai Lehnert from the University of Michigan to
prepare model complexes for the mono- and dinuclear non-heme iron centers in the
active sites of bacterial nitric oxide reductases (NORs), and to investigate the
mechanistic role that corresponding nitrosyl (NO) and nitroxyl (NO-/HNO)
complexes play in the mechanisms of these enzymes. Advanced kinetic and
spectroscopic methods, including resonance Raman and magnetic circular
dichroism, are to be employed. NORs are found in both denitrifying and
pathogenic bacteria, and are thought to play a role in their ability to infect
mammalian hosts, as NORs equip these bacteria with resistance to NO, which is a
primary immune defense agent in mammals. In addition, non-heme iron enzymes may
be involved in the generation and sensing of nitroxyl in biological systems via
formation of Fe(II)-NO/HNO intermediates, but the properties of these species
are not well understood. Dr. Lehnert and his team will set out to determine the
geometric and electronic structures of these species and investigate their
biologically relevant reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitric oxide (NO) is
biosynthesized in mammals as a signaling molecule, and as an immune defense
agent (by macrophages) to fight off invading pathogens. However, certain
bacteria have evolved enzymes called nitric oxide reductases (NORs), which
efficiently detoxify NO by reduction to non toxic nitrous oxide (N2O) and water.
Hence, NORs are thought to promote infection of the human body, leading to
chronic diseases. Despite this importance of NORs for bacterial pathogenesis,
the fundamental mechanism of NO reduction by these enzymes is not well
understood. The proposed studies seek to elucidate the mechanisms of these
enzymes. This pursuit will allow graduate students and undergraduates to acquire
specialized training in advanced synthetic and spectroscopic methods and
computational chemistry. Plans are put forward to include an outreach program to
introduce high school students from groups traditionally underrepresented in the
STEM disciplines to hands-on research in the fundamental sciences.