* 1305072
* CI-ADDO-EN: Infrastructure for the RF-Powered Computing Community
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* David Wetherall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 987,847.00

Prior to the start of this project, the investigators developed a novel RF-
powered sensing and computing platform called the WISP that harvests the
entirety of its operating power from RF signals emitted by RFID readers. They
also developed a companion SDR (Software-Defined Radio) reader platform that
sends RF signals to power and communicate with the WISPs using a power efficient
communication technique known as backscatter. The hardware and software for both
the WISPs and readers was open-sourced and made available to the research
community. This proposal enhances that previously developed infrastructure, and
makes it more widely available to the research community, by donating next
generation, enhanced versions of the WISPs, readers, and software to qualified
researchers. Compared to the first generation infrastructure, the enhanced
infrastructure has improved read range, program memory, computing power, and
programming abstractions.

This project facilitates a long-term transformation in which computing becomes
more and more deeply connected to the physical world. This transformation can
enable smarter living and working environments, better medical care, improved
manufacturing and logistics, reduced energy usage and pollution, and other
benefits. A fundamental difficulty has been how to power these physically-
embedded microelectronic systems. Batteries limit devices lifetimes, size,
weight, and form factor. However, improvements in the energy efficiency of
microelectronics have recently made it possible to run embedded computers using
only power harvested from RF signals. This proposal provides infrastructure to
the research community to enable RF-powered computing research, and thus deeper
embedding of computation in the physical world.