* 1305719
* Mechanisms and Effects of Tropical Indian Ocean Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Shang-Ping Xie, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 09/30/2016
* USD 683,600.00

A new concept of the tropical Indian Ocean (TIO) capacitor effect is emerging
for interactions between the Indian and Pacific basins: El Nino teleconnection
causes the TIO to warm, and the TIO warming persists and like a discharging
capacitor, exerts climatic influences after El Nino decays. Studies of the
capacitor effect so far tend to be diagnostic, and targeted model experiments
are necessary to make further progress.

This project will study ocean-atmospheric processes and mechanisms for the TIO
response to El Nino/the Southern Oscillation (ENSO), especially the long
persistence and climatic effects of this response during and after the decay of
an ENSO event; and to explore interdecadal changes in TIO mean state and
variability and determine their cause. A state-of-the-art coupled general
circulation model will be used to conduct experiments and test hypotheses
regarding the role of ocean Rossby waves in sustaining the TIO warming and moist
teleconnection from the TIO to the Northwest Pacific via atmospheric Kelvin
wave. Among teleconnective effects of the TIO warming are reduced precipitation
over the subtropical Northwest Pacific (including the U.S. affiliated Northern
Mariana Islands and Guam), and an anomalously active Meiyu-Baiu rainy season
from eastern China to Japan. The proposed research represents a systematic
investigation into the TIO's role in climate and will yield new insights into
the mechanisms for TIO variability and changes.

The successful completion of this project has the potential in improving
understanding and prediction of climate variability and change, which benefits
countries/communities within and rimming the TIO and Northwest Pacific. Graduate
students and postdoctoral will be trained and supported.