* 1305997
* Stochastic Spatial Models:   on Complex Networks, Coevolution, and Modeling Cancer
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Richard Durrett, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2015
* USD 165,000.00

Research will be carried out on various aspects of stochastic spatial models
taking place on regular lattices and on complex networks. (i) With Ted Cox and
Ed Perkins, the author has studied voter model perturbations. This work will be
the starting point for studying evolutionary games with weak selection in order
to try to resolve some recent conjectures of Martin Nowak. (ii) The proposer has
studied various processes on random regular graphs in joint work with Shirhsendu
Chatterjee. The main thrust of the new work will consider process on graphs with
more general degree distributions, but we will also consider models in which a
threshold of more than one neighbor with a different opinion is needed for an
individual to change. (iii) A third theme is to study networks in which the
state of the system and the connections in the network coevolve. This work leads
to difficult questions about stochastic evolutions on the space of all labeled
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world around us is spatially structured. In
biological systems, organisms and infections only spread over short distances.
Social systems have a network structure that is described by a graph with
vertices being individuals and edges between those that interact. Connections
between individuals may extend over large physical distances, but diseases,
opinions, and new technologies spreading due to the interactions between an
individual and their neighbors in the graph. Most mathematical analyses ignore
spatial or network structure because its inclusion greatly complicates the
analysis. However, as our past work with Simon Levin and others has shown,
incorporating spatial structure changes the outcome of ecological competition.
Our new work will focus on how spatial structure changes the impact of frequency
dependent selection, and how the network structure of a social system changes
the behavior of processes that occur in it. The models are idealized but the
results give valuable insights about real systems.