* 1305677
* Topological States of Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Shou-Cheng Zhang, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to investigate topological states of quantum matter, by proposing
novel theoretical concepts, by designing new materials, and by working closely
with the experimentalists to understand their novel properties.&lt;br/&gt;Search
for topological states of matter has become an important goal in condensed
matter physics. The quantum Hall state gives the first example of a topological
state which is characterized by a well-defined topological number and described
by the topological field theory at low energy. Recently, the theoretical
prediction and the experimental observation of the 2D and 3D topological
insulators provide another example of a new type of the topological state. The
topological insulator is a time reversal invariant bulk insulator, with gapless
edge states where opposite spin states counter-propagate. The PI plans to
investigate topological insulators with strong electronic correlations, develop
concepts, and search for candidate materials that are topological
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education through
review articles and pedagogical papers, and a book on young field of topological
states of quantum matter to communicate the exciting research to the broader
community and a more general audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education on
topological insulators and topological superconductors. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will
use theoretical methods to investigate the effect of strong interactions among
electrons in topological insulators. Like ordinary insulators, for example
rubber, topological insulators do not conduct electricity though the interior of
the material. Unlike ordinary insulators, topological insulators are able to
conduct electricity on their edges or boundaries through the formation of a new
state of matter that is insensitive to material defects and imperfections. Among
the known topological insulators are compounds made of the elements bismuth and
selenium, and bismuth and tellurium. Current theoretical descriptions of
topological insulators largely ignore the correlated motion of electrons that
results from their interaction. The PI aims to investigate how interactions
modify current understanding of topological insulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will also investigate topological superconductors with the aim to predict and
guide experimentalists to discover materials that are topological
superconductors. Like topological insulators, topological superconductors, are
able to conduct electricity on their surfaces. Unlike topological insulators,
the bulk of a topological superconductor conducts electricity without
dissipation. Some possible topological superconductors have surface states that
behave as if they were made of particles with the interesting property that
exchanging two of them can lead to a new quantum state. These particles might
enable the realization of a quantum computer in which computation is achieved by
the manipulation of quantum mechanical states, as opposed to the bits in modern
computers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education through
review articles and pedagogical papers, and a book on the young field of
topological states of quantum matter to communicate the exciting research to the
broader community and a more general audience.