* 1305661
* CCSS: Simultaneous Sparse Coding for Energy Efficient Sensing: from Low-illumination to Super-Clarity Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Xin Li, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 06/30/2017
* USD 257,429.00

The objective of this research is to develop a hierarchical representation based
on simultaneous sparse coding and explore its potential applications in energy-
efficient sensing. The newly constructed hierarchical representation is expected
to offer powerful prior models suitable for Bayesian reconstruction of images
from noisy or incomplete samples. Two novel applications related to energy-
efficient sensing will be studied: low-illumination imaging and super-clarity
imaging where the proposed computational approach can help strike a better
tradeoff between the cost (energy) and the quality of acquired images.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project includes: 1)
hierarchical extension of simultaneous sparse coding will require a new
theoretical framework operating with the fewest artificial mathematical
structures (e.g., not even the definition of a metric is introduced); 2) the two
applications of energy-efficient sensing are new frontiers of computational
imaging with potential high impact on both industry (e.g., consumer electronics,
mobile devices) and scientific community (e.g., super-resolution microscopy,
computational astronomy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts,
the PI will make special effort to broadly disseminate the research results at a
large scale to promote experimentally-reproducible research in sparse
representations and computational imaging. This project will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups by promoting geographic and gender
diversities within the NSF program. The proposed research is beneficial to the
general public by bringing images of higher quality to people's daily lives at a
lower cost.