* 1305724
* Organometallic Chemistry of Periodic pi-Electron Surfaces:  Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Robert Haddon, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program, involves preparation of a new class of graphitic
materials in which the surfaces are functionalized with transition metals,
thereby allowing the formation of atomic scale interconnects that consist of
bis-hexahapto-metal-bonds between the benzenoid ring systems; this approach is
anticipated to provide a method to increase the dimensionality of the electronic
structure of the 1-D carbon nanotubes and the 2-D graphene sheets. Preliminary
experiments show that chromium complexes are accessible by a wide range of
preparative methods, which include solution phase functionalization with
chromium carbonyl precursors, solid state thermal reactions under pressure
beginning with mono-hexahapto complexes and gas phase metal vapor synthesis
using electron beam physical vapor deposition (e-beam). All of these materials
show evidence of a change in the electrical conductivities of the starting
graphitic structures on organometallic functionalization and it is the purpose
of this proposal to broaden the fundamental understanding of the interaction
between metals and graphene surfaces and to refine the synthesis and physical
characterization of the materials. Based on a frontier molecular orbital
analysis of the electronic structure of graphene at the Dirac point, graphene is
identified as an excellent ligand in coordination complexes and it is apparent
that a wide variety of organometallic intercalation compounds can be prepared.
Thus the goal of the proposed research is to develop a class of novel transition
metal-graphene materials that exhibit unique electronic properties and to lay
the foundation for electronic interconnects between graphitic surfaces at the
atomic level. The new materials may be of interest as the active constituent in
electronic, opto-electronic and spintronic devices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to a new class of carbon
nanotube and graphene frameworks that are held together by covalent, rather than
ionic bonding. The proposed materials are expected to have novel catalytic,
electronic and magnetic properties; a number of the known charge transfer
graphite compounds exhibit superconductivity and such a possibility exists with
the proposed organometallic compounds. The broader impact of this project will
be most evident in the participation and training of students at the
undergraduate and graduate level which will occur in a highly integrated,
multidisciplinary program whose work is directed toward advancements in
fundamental and technologically significant aspects of the chemical sciences.
The students will be exposed to an extensive suite of modern research tools and
will become familiar with the Center for Nanoscale Science and Engineering
nanofabrication tools and analytical techniques. We have found that such
training serves as an invaluable asset for students that are seeking entry into
the electronics industry. Special effort will be devoted to attracting women and
minorities into the research program through the California Alliance for
Minority Participation (CAMP), the Summer Bridge Research Program and CNAS Dean
Summer Internships. This project is supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program.