* 1305039
* LSAMP: KY-WV Mid-Level Alliance
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Kazi Javed, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,500,000.00

The KY?WV LSAMP Alliance proposes to leverage the progress and momentum of the
Phase 1 effort to aggressively increase the quality and quantity of
underrepresented students receiving baccalaureate degrees in STEM fields and
subsequently applying for graduate study or entering the STEM workforce.

A collaboration among 9 academic institutions, 2 state EPSCOR programs and
diversity initiatives at all campuses, the Alliance was created with LSAMP Phase
1 funding in 2006. The Mid-Level LSAMP (2013-2018) projects the following
outcomes as goals:

(1) Increase URM STEM enrollment Alliance-wide by 15% by year three with a 10% -
20% increase yearly thereafter (1650+ students) and (2) By 2017, increase the
4-5 year graduation rate for URM STEM majors Alliance-wide to 50% of URM 2012
cohort or above; maintain or increase this rate thereafter.

These goals translate to 260+ STEM baccalaureates/year by year 5. These
admittedly ambitious projections focus on two key strategies: more carefully
targeted recruiting and more attention to the Year 4-Year 5 attrition problem.
URM Students with the clear motivation and potential to succeed will be
aggressively recruited and their recruitment will constitute an institutional
commitment to support their progress to the degree academically, socially and
financially. For example, Hispanic recruiting will be more aggressively targeted
since this growing population has not been recruited effectively to date.
Secondly, the Alliance will target attrition in the fourth and fifth years, the
STEM ?Valley of Death.? National studies show that URM students enroll as STEM
majors at the same rate as their counterparts, but graduate at significantly
lower rates. Key to retention will be the provision of timely effective support
as needed based on real time tracking and mentoring (both faculty and peer).
Strategies will be supported by effective real-time tracking integrated with
campus and Alliance support systems (academic, financial and social).

Effective Phase 1 activities will be continued and enhanced. These include
outreach and recruiting, peer mentoring, undergraduate research experiences
culminating in an annual student research symposium, summer bridge and
transitional programs for entering students, curricular reforms in "gatekeeper"
courses and workshops on STEM research career options. Supplementary funding for
student research (e.g., NSF REUs, DOE and NASA programs) will be pursued to
leverage Alliance resources and increase participation in the very popular and
effective undergraduate research participation programs. The leadership of the
chief academic officer for campus diversity has been obtained for this Phase II
effort and the program is housed in the Office of Institutional Diversity at the
Lead Institution. Finally, the Mid-Level Alliance will draw upon the experience
of other LSAMPs to optimize program performance.