* 1305136
* Self-assembled organic nanotubes from cyclic ureas
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Linda Shimizu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program at the National
Science Foundation supports the work of Professor Linda Shimizu of the
University of South Carolina that investigates the utility of functional porous
crystals to absorb, transport and organize guests and to facilitate their
subsequent photoreactions. These porous crystals are made by the self-assembly
of bis-urea macrocycles into columnar structures. The columns pack close
together to give crystals with homogeneous channels with diameters of 1 nm or
less. The mobility of the guest through cylinder like nanochannels is a function
of the dimensions (size, shape) and interior properties (polarity) of the
channel. The Shimizu group studies photoreactions and oxidations in these small
spaces. These reactions provide controlled model systems to test the effects of
confinement on reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental understanding of the
processes of absorption, diffusion, and storage in tiny straw-like channels with
diameters of 1 nm or less has practical application in separations and
catalysis. Ultimately, a better understanding of a reaction mechanism aids in
the development of safer, more environmentally friendly and economical reagents
for organic synthesis. This research provides training for undergraduates and
graduate students in organic and materials chemistry. In addition, this award
supports the continuation of a chemical demonstration program that brings
chemists into South Carolina K-12 classrooms to showcase the scientific method
and to foster interest in chemistry and in the natural sciences.