* 1305977
* The Ecological Rationality of Impulsive Choice in Rats
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Aaron Redish, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2015
* USD 197,940.00

Impulsive choice can be defined as a failure to maximize total gains when
choosing between options that are available at different times. This failure is
often ascribed to overly-fast discounting of delayed options (i.e., the value of
delayed options is decreased as a function of the delay). Such behavior is
thought to be a key component of many broader issues concerning society, such as
scholastic failure, debt, aggression, and various mental disorders like
addiction. Impulsive choice stands out as a topic that has been, and must be,
studied through multiple scientific disciplines: psychologists have measured
impulsivity through a wide variety of tasks in a number of populations (e.g.,
children, non-human animals); neurobiologists have identified neural systems and
brain structures that seem to affect impulsive choice; and psychopharmacologists
have examined the influence of pharmacological agents on impulsive behavior. In
the face of these varied lines of work, there is growing agreement that
impulsivity is a multi-dimensional phenomenon that is unlikely to be understood
through any single approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an interdisciplinary approach to studying
impulsivity that integrates tools and concepts from psychology, neuroscience,
and behavioral ecology that helps to elucidate both the mechanisms involved in
impulsivity, as well as the evolutionary causes of such behavior. Specifically,
this project extends and tests the ecological rationality hypothesis, which
states that impulsive choice is the product of placing evolved cognitive
mechanisms for foraging into evolutionarily novel situations in the laboratory
(such as standard delay-discounting tasks in which subjects choose between a
smaller-sooner option and a larger-later option). Foraging behavior can be
thought of as a series of choices to either stay in a patch of resources and
exploit it or leave the patch to look for other possibilities. This project (i)
replicates this basic finding in a new species by developing a new methodology
for assessing impulsive choice in rats, (ii) further investigates the
discrepancy between how decisions are made in the two types of tasks, and (iii)
gains a detailed understanding of the neural mechanisms involved in choice by
comparing neural representations of value during decisions in both types of
task. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because this
project exists at the intersection of several disciplines, the results and the
new methods that are developed are of interest to a wide variety of scientists
(e.g., psychologists, economists, biologists); and because a deeper
understanding of impulsive choice may benefit the study of several mental
disorders (e.g., addiction, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder) and other
major societal concerns, the results are also of interest to those developing
treatment and policy.