* 1305821
* Regiocontrolled Asymmetric alpha-Alkylation of Ketones via Activated Hydrazones
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Don Coltart, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2014
* USD 104,931.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Don M. Coltart of the Department of Chemistry at Duke
University will explore the development of new methods for the regiocontrolled
asymmetric alpha-alkylation of ketones. The central hypothesis of the planned
research is that activated hydrazones - those having at least one electron
withdrawing group on the distal nitrogen - and oximes will provide the basis for
a variety of new approaches to the asymmetric alpha-alkylation of ketones. From
this work, fundamentally new regiochemical substitution patterns that cannot be
generated using existing technology will be accessible in an asymmetric manner.
Moreover, it will be possible to conduct asymmetric alpha-alkylation in an
umpolung sense, thus enabling the incorporation of functionality that cannot be
introduced using enolate-based methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work could
lead to facile methods for the asymmetric alpha-alkylation of ketones. The
ability to easily and effectively prepare single enantiomer forms of alpha-
alkylated ketones will contribute greatly to our ability to synthesize optically
pure natural products, drugs and related compounds, thus impacting science and
society in important ways. In addition, this project will provide excellent
training of undergraduate and graduate students, including those from groups
historically underrepresented in the sciences.