* 1305929
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Holly Kindsvater, Kindsvater              Holly          K
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 06/30/2015
* USD 140,000.00

Linking early growth and survival with population dynamics, using hierarchical
Bayesian models and a global database of fish life-history traits

Studying the processes that regulate population demography, such as density
dependent growth and survival, provides knowledge that is critical to
understanding how species coexist and thrive in their environment. Marine
populations, in particular, are very difficult to study because parts of their
life cycle, such as larval or juvenile stages, remain a mystery. The objective
of this research is to develop a life-history model that can be parameterized
with public data from marine stock assessments of fished populations. These data
on the population dynamics of hundreds of marine species are collected by
international and federal agencies around the globe. With recently developed
statistical methods, these data can be used to indirectly infer the relationship
between life-history traits (including egg size and number) and population
resilience for many species. This was previously almost impossible to do,
because of the limitations of prior statistical methods and available data. This
comparative approach will provide new perspectives on the key life-history
traits that determine species? resilience to environmental change.

In addition to these impacts, this research allows for the training of an early
career scientist in novel statistical techniques. It also provides opportunities
to teach and work with others tackling problems in conservation, including
ecologists, resource managers, and policy makers. With the training received as
an NSF postdoctoral fellow, the PI will be able to continue developing
interdisciplinary approaches to the current challenges facing marine organisms.