* 1305592
* SusChEM: Next-Generation Dye-Sensitizers: Beyond the Shockley-Queisser Limit
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jeanne McHale, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,999.00

Technical Description: Organic dye sensitizers derived from plants are being
investigated for their potential to provide two or more charge carriers per
incident photon when used as sensitizers of titanium dioxide nanoparticles. The
goal of the project is to determine the molecular basis for devices in which the
efficiency of solar-energy conversion can exceed the 31% limit. Working with
betalain plant pigments previously found to give high yields for converting
photons to electrons in dye-sensitized solar cells, the principal investigator
and her students use spectroscopic methods to reveal the mechanistic details of
carrier multiplication and the molecular basis for enhanced light-harvesting
(spectral broadening) of betalain dyes on titanium dioxide.
Spectroelectrochemical measurements and time-resolved spectroscopy measurements
are applied to determine the possibility of simultaneous two-electron oxidation,
current multiplication, and singlet fission. The role of heterogeneous dye
binding, co-sensitization and dye-aggregation in enhancing the light-harvesting
of betalain pigments on titanium dioxide is examined using resonance Raman
spectroscopy of purified dyes and dye-cocktails adsorbed on shape-tailored
semiconductor nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description:
Results from this research benefit society by revealing how the efficiency of
solar-energy conversion can be improved in a variety of photovoltaic devices,
including those that are potentially cheaper and more environmentally friendly
than current-generation solar cells. Broader impacts include the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in research that fosters sustainable energy
generation. Graduate students in the principal investigator's lab receive
technological training in spectroscopy, electrochemistry and nanotechnology and
contribute to two outreach programs that engender excitement about science and
alternative energy in middle-school and high-school students. The Imagine
Tomorrow competition builds relationships between prospective future scientists
and faculty, while allowing both to showcase the results of their research in
alternative energy. Graduate students are designing a Cougar Quest summer
enrichment camp for Grades 7-12, which will allow campers to contribute to the
project while learning about solar energy conversion.