* 1305667
* Microfabricated Thermal Modulator for Comprehensive Two-Dimensional Gas Chromatography
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Katsuo Kurabayashi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 12/31/2016
* USD 249,997.00

This research aims to develop a key microelectromechanical
systems&lt;br/&gt;(MEMS) device necessary for low-power, low-cost, robust 2D GC.
The specific objectives of this&lt;br/&gt;project are to (a) develop a good
understanding of the physics and chemistry governing the&lt;br/&gt;microscale
thermal modulation based on theoretical modeling, (b) develop a new MEMS-
based&lt;br/&gt;thermal modulator (microTM) device design such that it enables a
2D GC system that achieves&lt;br/&gt;theoretically predicted maximum peak
capacity and minimum peak breakthrough, (c) fabricate the&lt;br/&gt;designed Ã¬TM
and experimentally characterize its performance, and (d) finally, demonstrate
micrTM incorporating&lt;br/&gt;2D GC with the highest compound separation
performance with optimal operational conditions
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: With the development of the
microTM, our study will provide the first step towards&lt;br/&gt;fully
implementing comprehensive 2D GC with MEMS technology. It is readily conceivable
that the&lt;br/&gt;improved separation power of 2D GC systems would pave the way
for highly reliable and accurate&lt;br/&gt;in-situ monitoring/detection of VOCs
in a sample even containing complex co-contaminant&lt;br/&gt;backgrounds. This
project will make important contributions to micro analytical instrumentation
for&lt;br/&gt;ultimate use in field-deployable GC
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Together with cost effectiveness,
complete elimination of consumables from the 2D GC&lt;br/&gt;operation with the
microTM would fill the gap between the current relatively limited use and
future&lt;br/&gt;general use of the 2D GC technique in a wide spectrum of
applications, potentially opening new&lt;br/&gt;commercial markets. The
fundamental knowledge gained from this research will be assimilated
into&lt;br/&gt;the PI's graduate course on MEMS and chemical sensing. Summer
interns from underrepresented groups will be trained through
synergetic&lt;br/&gt;coordination with the NSF National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network (NNIN) program.