* 1305193
* Native Point Defects, Electronically Active Impurities, and Plasmonics at ZnO Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Leonard Brillson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 936,552.00

Technical Description: This research project examines the use of native point
defects, degenerate doping, and nanostructures to advance the understanding of
contact rectification, photon-plasmon coupling, and nanocontacts at ZnO
interfaces. It builds on existing capabilities to identify the electrical
activity of native point defects on a nanometer scale using optical and
electronic techniques, to measure their effect on carrier densities and atomic
dopant concentrations quantitatively, and to controllably introduce or suppress
these native point defects using nanoscale surface science techniques. Native
point defects have a major effect on ZnO Schottky barrier heights, and their
interplay with dopant impurities influence plasmonic-resonance wavelengths in
ZnO. Because ZnO exhibits a wide range of contact rectification with metals, it
can serve to test the relative contributions of thermionic, tunneling, and
hopping transport through ZnO-metal interfaces on both a macroscopic and
nanometer scale, and the balance of physical mechanisms can be used to
understand barriers to charge transport for a wide range of compound
semiconductor junctions. The carrier densities influenced by native point
defects can in turn alter the dielectric response of ZnO and thus the plasmon-
resonance frequency used to couple light waves to ultrahigh frequency
electronics. This project employs a combination of growth, plasma processing,
and atomic indiffusion to control near-interface doping and native point defects
on a nanometer scale for both barrier rectification and plasmonic
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Semiconductor defects
are imperfections such as missing atoms or impurities in otherwise perfect
semiconductor crystals. They can be electrically-active, altering the amount of
electrical charge free to travel inside transistors, lasers, and other
electronic devices. They can also serve as shortcuts for charge to move through
electronic barriers usually designed to block such charge movement for
transistor switching, charge storage, or carrier confined light emission. The
influence of these defects in charge movement across ZnO interfaces provides a
test bed to understand and control other semiconductors, an issue starting when
these materials were first used for electronics. Their control can enable high
carrier densities for transparent electronics such as heads-up displays and
smart windows, high positive charge densities for lasers, and control of the
coupling between light waves and electronic circuits at wavelengths important
for telecommunications. The project provides training of graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school women in both basic scientific laboratory
techniques and advanced micro- and optoelectronic concepts. Students interact
directly with international collaborators at the University of Oslo, Sweden,
Aalto University, Finland, and CNRS / CRHEA, France. The project involves and
supports women at the high school through the Columbus School for Girls' summer
research internship program, building on NSF core funding with support from
several Ohio State University institutions.