* 1305845
* Collaborative Research: Synthetic Chemistry with Periodic Mesostructures at High Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kai Landskron, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The proposed research, funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program, is aimed at synthesizing mesostructures of diamond at high
pressure using periodic mesostructured carbons produced by soft self-assembly
with surfactant templates. For the synthesis, the carbons will be infiltrated by
polycarbosilanes until the pore space is filled. Heat-treatment of the so-
infiltrated carbons will produce periodic mesostructured silicon carbide/carbon
composite materials. Subsequently, these composites will be treated at high
pressure and temperature to transform the carbon phase into periodic
mesostructures of diamond. The synthesis will be performed in multi-anvil
assemblies which allow for pressures of up to 27 GPa and temperatures above
2000Â°C. The produced mesostructured silicon carbide/diamond composites will be
structurally characterized and tested for their mechanical properties. By
selective removal of the silicon carbide phase from the SiC/diamond composites
mesoporous forms of diamond will be produced. In addition, we will explore the
mechanisms and kinetics of the phase transitions within mesostructures at high
pressure by in-situ Raman, SAXS, and IR spectroscopic experiments. The in-situ
experiments will be done in diamond anvil cells. It is expected that the
realization of these aims will create seminal knowledge across the different
fields of high-pressure science and periodic mesostructures, and produce
potentially useful new materials.

NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY Mesoporous materials belong to the most important classes
of materials due to their wide structural diversity and broad range of
applications including catalysis, separation, microelectronics, and drug-
delivery. Pressure and temperatures are the two major thermodynamic variables in
synthesis. The emphasis of this work is to explore the role of high pressure in
synthesis to produce mesostructures of diamond and investigate the mechanisms of
phase transformations at high-pressure inside a mesostructure. Thereby, the
project will advance the understanding of the chemical high-pressure behavior of
periodic mesostructures and make a broad impact on synthetic high-pressure
chemistry which is currently an underrepresented field. Diamond is the arguably
the most technologically important high-pressure phase. Mesostructured
composites of diamond, which are the expected products in this research, could
find applications as ultrahard materials. Diamond is known as biocompatible
material and thus mesoporous forms of diamond could have potential in drug-
delivery. Commercially relevant outcomes of the work will be communicated to
industry via the Lehigh Nanotechnology Network and Lehigh's Industrial Liaison
Program. Leading companies for the production of diamond materials will be
involved in materials testing, which will catalyze technology transfer. The
project will be done in collaboration between a degree-granting University
(Lehigh University) and a non-degree granting research institution (Carnegie
Institution of Washington) thereby building a close tie between these
institutions. The involved students and post-docs will learn an unusual
combination of synthetic (synthesis of mesostructured materials, high pressure
syntheses) and analytical techniques (electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction,
gas sorption etc.). Results from the work will be integrated into "Advanced
Inorganic Chemistry", and "Solid State Chemistry" courses.