* 1305637
* RUI: Fluctuations and Phase Transitions in Iron Pnictide Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Matthew Sullivan, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 185,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This award supports experimental low-temperature
physics research at an undergraduate institution. The scaling analysis of
voltage vs. current curves has been an invaluable tool in the study of the
normal-superconducting phase transition. However, recent work has shown that the
conventional application of this tool is too flexible to uniquely determine the
critical parameters, and that extrinsic effects can obscure or destroy the phase
transition. With these caveats known, we have successfully applied this
technique to study the hole-doped cuprate YBa2Cu3O7 and the electron-doped
cuprate Pr2-xCexCuO4. This project will use the same technique to examine the
phase transition in the new iron pnictide-122 superconductors (SrFe2As2 and
BaFe2As2) both in a magnetic field and in zero magnetic field. This work will
lead to an understanding of the model that governs the phase transition in this
material and the differences and similarities of the phase transition between
iron pnictide superconductors and other superconductors. This project will also
train undergraduate students in experimental and low-temperature physics in
preparation for graduate work or industry careers. In addition, to encourage
broader education in science, this project will contribute to an existing
outreach program with local public schools and submit video demonstrations to
YouTube.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** This award supports experimental low-temperature
physics research at an undergraduate institution. "High-Temperature"
superconductors, discovered more than a quarter of a century ago, still hold
great promise and great challenges. The promise lies in the hope of eventually
making superconductors with much higher transition temperatures, and the
challenges lie in the fact that we do not, even 25 years later, fully understand
how or why these materials superconduct. Superconductors made from iron and
arsenic, discovered in 2008, are the latest in an array of unusual materials to
display superconductivity. This individual investigator award supports a project
that will study how iron- and arsenic-based materials become superconducting,
comparing them to copper-oxygen based superconductors and conventional, single
element superconductors, all in the hopes of understanding the underlying
mechanism that creates superconductivity in these materials. The proposed
studies will add to the knowledge of high-temperature superconductors and help
fulfill the promise of attaining higher transition temperatures. This project
will also train undergraduate students in state-of-the-art sample growth,
characterization, and measurement techniques. This project will also contribute
to broader educational goals by fostering science outreach to local schools and
promoting the research via online video demonstrations.