* 1305891
* Microscopic Theory of Many-Particle Systems from Nuclear Matter to Cold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gordon Baym, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2017
* USD 533,480.00

This project continues an interdisciplinary program to develop fundamental
theories of many-particle systems, ranging from ultradense nuclear matter in
ultrarelativistic heavy ion collisions and in neutron stars to ultracold atomic
and condensed matter systems. Nuclear theory will be applied to study the
properties of matter formed under extreme conditions of temperatures and
pressures, to matter in neutron stars, with the aim of understanding
observations and experiment and, conversely, using observations of neutron stars
to learn properties of matter under extreme conditions. This research makes
important interdisciplinary connections between nuclear and QCD problems and
cold atom systems and will apply expertise in quantum fluids to predict the
behavior of dilute helium solutions used in the proposed experiment at the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory Spallation Neutron Source to detect the electric
dipole moment of the neutron.

Understanding new states of matter and connections between them provides broad
intellectual insights into the basic properties of matter ranging from the
hottest to the coldest many-particle systems in the universe. By integrating
students and post-doctoral fellows into a diverse program that crosses the
traditional boundaries between nuclear, particle, condensed matter and atomic
physics, the PI and his colleagues provide unique opportunities for young
researchers to think and create across disciplines. The scientists trained in
this program have generally gone on to have significant impact in research at
U.S. universities and national laboratories, as well as abroad.