* 1305119
* Microstructural Evolution via Stochastic Morphology Reconstruction from Limited Tomography Data: Modeling, Simulation, and Experimental Verification
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Yang Jiao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Abstract. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intent of this project is to
dramatically improve our ability to quantitatively characterize and predict
real-time microstructural evolution of heterogeneous materials including
metallic alloys, ceramics, composites and granular media under various
conditions, based on the morphological information contained in limited
tomography data. An intrinsic understanding and knowledge of complex
microstructures and how they evolve under various conditions is extremely
important to the design of novel materials and achieving optimal material
performance. The large volume of data (several 100 GB data for a single static
microstructure) required in traditional tomography reconstructions significantly
limits their application in characterizing dynamically evolving microstructures.
We are thus motivated to find alternative methods to statistically characterize
and predict in situ microstructure evolution with a minimal set of tomography
data that can be obtained in a few measurements. &lt;br/&gt;The underlying theme
of the proposed research is to systematically investigate and quantify the
information content of the tomography data obtainable, via current experimental
procedures, in order to improve the utility of such data for microstructural
characterization and prediction, provide efficient protocols for data analysis
and management, and suggest novel experimental procedures for data collection.
We propose to quantify structural information using time-dependent spatial
correlation functions. We propose novel mathematical, computational, and
physical approaches to modeling, predicting, and experimentally verifying
material microstructure evolution from limited tomography data via stochastic
morphology reconstructions, which will lead to the development of freely
available integrated software package for efficient quantitative 4D (3D +
temporal) microstructure characterization and prediction based on available
tomography data.&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing materials education and public awareness of
the importance of imaging and visualization in material research is a crucial
component of our proposal. We propose a diverse educational and outreach program
that is integrated with the research program, which includes creation of
interactive microstructure visualization software for K-12 students, recruitment
and involvement of underrepresented female and minorities, project-based
activities and research opportunities for students at ASU, and creation of a
website on dynamical microstructure visualization. These activities will serve
to disseminate, educate, and involve students at all levels as well as the
public-at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous materials abound in nature and man-made
structures. Examples include composites, ceramics, alloys, stand stone, and
bone. Such materials usually exhibit complex microstructures on both large and
small scales, and the microstructures determine the macroscopic properties and
performance of the materials. The design of novel materials and achieving
optimal material performance rely on our ability to characterize and modify
material properties and behaviors under a myriad of external stimuli, such as
thermal, mechanical, and electrical. Thus, an intrinsic understanding and
knowledge of complex microstructures and how they evolve under various
conditions is extremely important. Traditional imaging techniques (such as x-ray
tomography) usually require a large amount of data to render a single snapshot
of the microstructure. This significantly limits their application to capture
the entire evolution process of the material of interest. In the proposed
project, we will investigate how much useful structural information is contained
in typical tomography data and whether methods can be devised that can smartly
utilize the most crucial structural information to accurately and rapidly render
snapshots of material microstructures. We propose novel mathematical,
computational, and physical approaches to modeling, predicting, and
experimentally verifying material microstructure evolution from limited
experimental data. &lt;br/&gt;Enhancing materials education and public awareness
of the importance of imaging and visualization in material research is a crucial
component of our proposal. We propose a diverse educational and outreach program
that is integrated with the research program, which includes creation of
interactive microstructure visualization software for K-12 students, recruitment
and involvement of underrepresented female and minorities, project-based
activities and research opportunities for students at ASU, and creation of a
website on dynamical microstructure visualization. These activities will serve
to disseminate, educate, and involve students at all levels as well as the
public-at large.