* 1305374
* Development and Evolution of Kelvin-Helmholtz Waves in Earth's Magnetopause and Their Effects on Earth's Magnetosphere: In-situ Observations with MHD Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Eunjin Choi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 12/31/2017
* USD 328,558.00

The investigators will study the generation and evolution of the Kelvin-
Helmholtz waves (KHW) at the dayside magnetopause and the low-latitude boundary
layer (LLBL) of Earth's magnetosphere under variable solar wind conditions. The
project includes studying the effects of the KHW on solar wind entry into the
magnetosphere and their impact on the inner magnetosphere. The research will be
based on a combination of global magnetosphere simulations and extensive and
intensive analysis of KHW observations from spacecraft to explore the global
distribution of the occurrence and characteristics of KHW over the surface of
the magnetopause. Direct spatial and temporal observations of KHW under a
variety of solar wind conditions are lacking, with the result that the
generation, development, and impact of these magnetopause waves are far from
being fully understood in geospace. Statistical studies of KHW including
sufficient numbers of conjunctive observations using multiple spacecraft will
provide direct spatial and temporal observations of the generation and evolution
of KHW and the effect of KHW on plasma transport and the inner magnetosphere.
The study will be enhanced by global magnetohydrodynamic simulations that are
suitable for investigating large-scale physical processes and their evolution.
The goal of the study is to better understand the physics of the Earth?s
magnetopause and the response of the inner magnetosphere to solar wind inputs
that reach the magnetopause. Understanding the generation and evolution of the
KHW at the magnetopause will have a large impact not only on terrestrial
magnetospheric physics, but also on other magnetized (Mercury, Jupiter, and
Saturn) and unmagnetized (Mars and Venus) planetary interactions with the solar
wind. The relationship between the ultra-low frequency waves observed in the
inner magnetosphere and the KHW on the magnetospause and the importance and
effectiveness of plasma transport facilitated by KHW into the plasma sheet and
inner magnetosphere are important for better space weather forecasting. It will
also have relevance to on-going studies of the radiation belt and ring current
based on observations currently being made by NASA's Van Allen Probes.