* 1305756
* Self-Recognition in the Self-Assembly of Hydrophilic Macroionic Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Tianbo Liu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 02/28/2017
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Tianbo Liu of the University of Akron will
explore the properties of soluble macroions which represent a missing link
between simple ions and large colloids. The research has three components:
first, experiments will be performed to determine whether the self-recognition
of macroions can be achieved under extreme conditions, such as tiny differences
in charge, shape, extra ligands or center metal ions. In the second part, self-
recognition amongst enantiomeric macroions and chiral counterions (or co-anions)
will be studied. Finally, potential applications of the self-recognition feature
in materials science, such as separating/purifying functional materials or
chiral catalysis will be pursued. The proposed work could have impacts on other
research fields, such as physical chemistry, supramolecular chemistry,
biochemistry, materials sciences and nanotechnology. The project also involves
training graduate and undergraduate students, as well as visiting local high
schools to interact with the students and encourage them to participate in
national science competitions and to pursue scientific careers in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-recognition involves a molecule, or larger
entity, that can selective "recognize" and associate with itself in solution or
even a more complex mixture. This phenomenon is a universal and critical
behavior in biological and chemical systems and leads to many important
properties. This research seeks to further understand the self-recognition
behavior of macroions (very large charged molecules) in solution, in order to
enhance our fundamental knowledge of how the self-recognition occurs, what are
the critical driving forces behind this phenomenon, and whether it can be
achieved in chemical process that mimic biological ones. This research could
provide scientists additional evidence to understand certain unsolved biological
processes and might lead to potential applications such as catalytic materials
or materials for separations and purification.