* 1305362
* II-NEW: The BetaHome Network: A Multi-Home Testbed for Smart Building Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Cameron (Kamin) Whitehouse, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 600,000.00

This award provides funding for a new institutional Computing Research
Infrastructure (CRI) project focused on residential energy research at the
University of Virginia. Recent studies have demonstrated great potential for
applications of embedded sensing and control in the home environment. However,
research in this area is limited by the inability to experiment beyond small
scale field tests and pilot studies. The BetaHome Network is a new residential
sensing testbed that includes an array of homes with extensive and semi-
permanent instrumentation of the electrical, water, and HVAC systems. The
testbed captures several dimensions of variability in homes that are not
captured by one-off field tests and small pilot studies. Additionally, and
perhaps most importantly, the BetaHome Network system tracks and records the
locations of occupants within the home, in relation to the energy, water, and
HVAC events that are also being recorded. This unique sensing testbed provides a
complete, real-time picture of both occupancy and energy usage in the home with
unprecedented detail about the internal happenings of the home. The testbed
enables several new types of studies that were heretofore impractical, including
cross-sectional analytics and controlled intervention studies. The project
enables research on novel techniques for (i) occupancy and energy monitoring in
homes (ii) personalized energy feedback (iii) intelligent thermostat control
(iv) low-cost energy audits, and (v) intelligent fixture-driven water heating.

The research infrastructure created by this project enables research on new home
monitoring and energy efficiency technologies, focusing on practical and low-
cost solutions that can be readily translated to market. For example,
preliminary studies demonstrated a 28% reduction per household in the energy
required for heating and cooling, at the cost of only $25 in additional sensors
per home. This project opens a new realm for residential ``living laboratories''
that enhance the infrastructure for research and education in the area of
energy-efficient technologies, helping to propel the nation towards its goal of
a 70% improvement in the total energy efficiency of existing buildings across
the country by 2030. New courses are being developed as a result of this
infrastructure and both graduate and undergraduate researchers are involved in
new research. The project is producing a new data set of unprecedented detail
that can be used as benchmarks for the energy monitoring community to enable
research and inspire future generations of researchers to study science and
engineering by illustrating its applied nature and potential for social benefit.