* 1305105
* A Chemical Model for the Prebiotic Origins of Tetrapyrrole Macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Lindsey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Jonathan S. Lindsey from North Carolina State University
to probe the formation and possible photochemical properties of tetrapyrrole
macrocycles under plausible prebiotic conditions. The formation entails a
multistage process beginning with simple acyclic reactants and proceeds through
a reactive pyrrole on to porphyrinogens, which upon oxidation yield porphyrins.
Combinatorial reactions afford a complex mix of tetrapyrrole macrocycles that
spontaneously partition among aqueous and membrane vesicles. A key objective is
to understand the scope and robustness of this self-organizing chemistry,
particularly where reactions may proceed in parallel. A second theme is to
employ quantitative analytical methods that place this rich chemistry on a firm
physical basis. The knowledge gained will provide a chemical model for the
possible origins and function of a potent set of catalysts (tetrapyrroles)
supporting proto-metabolism and proto-photosynthetic
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origin of life is an enduring and unmet
scientific challenge. Tetrapyrrole macrocycles (e.g., chlorophylls) play a
central role in all living organisms and have been proposed to play a central
role in the origin of life, yet their prebiotic origin has remained obscure.
While the exact origins may never be known, the development of a viable chemical
model, bounded by constraints of early earth conditions, could provide insight
into the possible origins of tetrapyrrole molecules. The proposed research
engages undergraduate and graduate students in scientific research with an
inherently interdisciplinary flavor (synthesize starting materials, perform
chemical reactions, analyze complex mixtures of chemical compounds, assess the
prebiotic implications in coordination with earth sciences considerations). A
companion course (Molecular Origins of Life), taught by Professor Lindsey
annually for senior undergraduates as well as graduate students, addresses
fundamental chemical principles in the context of the fascinating field of
prebiotic chemistry.