* 1305286
* II-NEW: A Robot Testbed for Real-Time Motion Strategies and Autonomous Personal Assistants
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Henry Fuchs, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2017
* USD 339,495.00

This infrastructure proposal supports the acquisition of a personal robot and a
high-end multi-&lt;br/&gt;GPU workstation to develop a new robot testbed for
designing and evaluating the next generation of parallel&lt;br/&gt;robot
algorithms and open-source software systems on modern commodity computing
platforms. The robot&lt;br/&gt;platform will be based on a Meka M1 robot, a
state-of-the-art robot with compliant, dextrous arms plus&lt;br/&gt;camera and
range sensors. This robot will be used to develop a new set of motion strategy
and planning&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and evaluate the capabilities of the robots
for two driving applications: (1) assisting older adults&lt;br/&gt;and people
with disabilities with activities of daily living and (2) active tele-presence
to give people in a&lt;br/&gt;remote environment the ability to physically
interact with people in the robot?s environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This robot
testbed could lead to novel technologies for the development of
personal&lt;br/&gt;robots for assistance with tasks of daily living and active
telepresence. These new capabilities could significantly&lt;br/&gt;improve the
quality of life for the elderly, people with disabilities, and other
individuals. The development&lt;br/&gt;of real-time motion strategies could also
benefit other areas, such as surgical simulation, CAD/CAM,&lt;br/&gt;virtual
prototyping, and virtual reality environments. The software libraries developed
under this project&lt;br/&gt;would be made widely available through the public-
domain release for all research and educational activities&lt;br/&gt;across
science, engineering, and medical domains. Teh research team will also integrate
research with education, reach out&lt;br/&gt;to under-represented groups via
programs such as the IBM-sponsored Girls? summer camps, actively
involving&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates in the proposed research, and organizing
workshops on many-core computing for real-time&lt;br/&gt;motion strategies.
Finally, the team expects the new robotics curriculum enabled by the proposed
equipment acquisition&lt;br/&gt;to help increase enrollment in Computer Science.