* 1305749
* Role of Chain Architecture on the Properties of Linear and Star Chain Thin Film Polymer Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Peter Green, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2017
* USD 692,209.00

TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions at interfaces between polymer
surfaces and substrates or the external environment are typically responsible
for changes to the local polymer structure, such as monomer "packing" densities
and chain organizational order. In polymer films of nanoscale thickness changes
to physical properties, including transport properties, average glass transition
temperatures, wetting properties and phase stability of blends, are associated
with such interactions. Theory and simulations suggest that the interfacial
interactions are sensitive to the architecture of the macromolecules.
Specifically, star shaped macromolecules exhibit a higher propensity to interact
with interfaces. They suffer lower conformational entropic penalties than their
linear chain analogs, when adsorbed at interfaces. The goal of this research is
to develop an understanding of the role of confinement (thickness and
geometrical) and of the macromolecular functionality (number of arms per
molecule) of stars on the dynamics, wetting, vitrification, phase equilibra and
aging in linear chain/multi-arm star macromolecule blends. The research is
accomplished through the use of simulations and complementary experimental tools
that include X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy, dielectric spectroscopy,
neutron scattering, atomic force microscopy, and transmission electron
microscopy techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer thin films are used in applications that
include protective and functional coatings, active material components in
organic electronic devices, and information storage. The performance and
reliability of a polymer film is influenced by interactions at interfaces formed
between its surfaces and a substrate, or with the external environment. It
recently became apparent that the architecture of the polymer molecule, whether
it is a linear chain or star-shaped (i.e. more than one chain attached to a
central branch point, has a significant impact on the strength of the
interfacial interactions. The goal of this project is to understand how the
architecture of the polymer molecules, including the number of chains connected
to the branch point, affects the physical properties of polymer films. The
success of this research will have implications on the use of polymers for
wetting and adhesion, protective and functional coatings, and other active
technologies. This research will involve a diverse group of collaborators, from
high school and undergraduate to graduate students, who will be introduced to
research and may become motivated to pursue scientific or technological careers.