* 1305713
* Architecture and Attributes of Gas Vesicles
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Judith Herzfeld, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1305713 PI: Herzfeld, Judith ORG: Brandeis
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Architecture and Attributes of Gas
Vesicles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The hollow, spindle-shaped floatation
vesicles of aquatic micro-organisms have remarkable physical properties. The 2.0
nm thick proteinaceous wall is impermeable to water but permeable to gas
molecules considerably larger than water. Vesicles measuring 75 nm in width and
up to 1000 nm in length can withstand as much as 10 atmospheres of hydrostatic
pressure. The wall, assembled almost exclusively from repeating units of the
highly hydrophobic 7 kDa gas vesicle protein A (gvpA), cannot be solubilized
with detergents. While it is difficult to imagine how nature achieves these
mechanical, interfacial, and permeability properties, it is also clear, from the
strong homology among gvpA's across all organisms, that nature has not found
many ways of doing it. Furthermore, the absence of homology with other proteins
indicates that the gas vesicle construct is a very special one. The general goal
of the project is to understand the structural features of gas vesicles that are
responsible for their properties. Two systems will be studied, one adapted to
fresh water and the other adapted to highly saline conditions. The work will
employ solid state NMR experiments and atomistic modeling. Solid state NMR has
the advantage of being able to measure internuclear distances in systems not
amenable to either solubilization or crystallization. This information will
allow modeling of the complete structure and the interfacial properties of the
gas vesicle shell, taking fully into account the periodicity and the asymmetric
environment of the vesicle wall. Comparisons between vesicles adapted to fresh
water and vesicles adapted to highly saline conditions will help in assigning
functional significance to different structural features.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: From a practical point of view, the gas
vesicles of aquatic micro-organisms are finding direct use in a number of
contexts. In particular, they have been used to confer buoyancy in cells that
normally do not float, to improve oxygen perfusion in anchorage-dependent cell
cultures, and as vaccination vehicles. It is expected that detailed knowledge of
gas vesicle structure will allow these direct applications to be fine-tuned with
respect to engineering interactions with wild type vesicles or choosing mutant
vesicles. In addition, understanding how nature has designed gas vesicles may
inspire the design of new materials that make use of the same underlying
principles. Of particular interest are the origins of the resistance of the
vesicle walls to detergents and proteases, their mechanical strength, their high
permeability to gases, and the anticipated extreme dewetting behavior of their
inner surface. Education and outreach activities associated with this project
will include direct involvement of undergraduates from the Brandeis University
Science Posse program during the summer, hands-on activities for students in
field trips to campus from underserved high schools in the greater Boston area,
and instruction with hands-on activities in the Kroka Expeditions program that
serves teens primarily from New Hampshire and Vermont.