* 1305190
* The Neural Engineering Data Consortium: Building Community Resources to Advance Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Joseph Picone, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2016
* USD 116,000.00

Despite significant progress in Neural Engineering in recent years, overall
progress in the field does not appear to have been commensurate with the scope
of investment. It has become evident that the field can benefit from a new
paradigm in research and development that focuses on robust algorithm
development. The purpose of this planning grant is to develop community support
for the creation of the Neural Engineering Data Consortium (NEDC) at Temple
University. The NEDC is focusing the attention of the research community on a
progression of research questions as well as generating and curating massive
data sets to be used in addressing those questions. Under this award, we are
conducting an extensive series of workshops and site visits to build consensus
amongst various research groups from academia and industry. Guided by this site
research, we are developing an operational model for the NEDC that is
simultaneously relevant to academic research, industry R&D, and government
funding agencies. The NEDC is structured to significantly accelerate research
progress and provide resources that promote the development of more robust
technology. We are also broadening participation in neural engineering research
by making data available to research groups who have significant signal
processing expertise but who lack capacity for data generation. The impact of
funded research is thus improved by enticing more participation in focused
evaluation tasks. Finally, the NEDC is accelerating the transfer of technology
to the healthcare marketplace, where it can directly enhance quality of life for
a variety of patients.