* 1305476
* Statistical Physics of Brain Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Hernan Makse, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2017
* USD 379,448.00

In this project the PIs will develop a theoretical framework to understand
information processing in brain networks. The theoretical developments will be
tested with experiments done in the collaborating lab of Canals (Alicante) by
observation of the hemodynamic and electrical neural activity in animal with
micro-electric stimulation in in-vivo animal experiments. A vast corpus of
theoretical analysis and experimental data will serve to analyze the brain as a
network of networks. This will involve a novel theoretical framework conceived
to robustly determine how modules dynamically form and share information at
different scales. The network analysis will reveal the brain nodes that are
essential to control brain functionality in terms of super-spreaders and super-
inhibitor nodes, cascading effects, robustness and vulnerability to node
failure. The mathematical framework of the PIs challenges current thinking
regarding the functional structure of the brain as a small-world and scale-free
network, which is defined by short paths, large local clustering and a single
degree distribution. Small-world networks have been proposed to solve a basic
conundrum: the brain needs to form modules which ought to be sufficiently
independent to guarantee functional specialization and sufficiently connected to
bind multiple processors for efficient information transfer. However, this
structure presents an intrinsic tension between shortcuts generating small-
worlds and the persistence of modularity; a global property unrelated to local
clustering. In this project the PIs depart from the current thinking in brain
functional structure, replacing the concept of small-world by that of
hierarchical Networks of Networks that describes the brain as a set of
hierarchical modules made of weak/strong links. The broader significance of the
proposed theory for the large-scale organization of the brain extends the
mathematical theory of networks to radically novel information processing
systems. The findings from this research will have implications, not only for
systems neuroscience, but also for a number of complex systems ranging from
technological, social to biological networks. This proposal represents a
symbiosis between the labs of two physicists with expertise in statistical
physics and complex networks and a neuroscientist. Such a setting will provide
interdisciplinary and international opportunities to students involved in this
project. Further broader educational impacts include involvement of
underrepresented minority students from CCNY and curriculum development.