* 1305125
* New, Chemically Reactive Fullerene-Based Assemblies: Accomplishment Based Renewal
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Alan Balch, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 515,914.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Alan L. Balch and Marilyn M. Olmstead of the
University of California, Davis will explore the structures and chemical
reactivity of a promising group of endohedral fullerenes, cages of carbon atoms
that encapsulate a variety of atoms, ions or small molecules. Work on the
structural characterization of large fullerene cages and chiral fullerene cages
by X-ray diffraction involves molecules that provide a bridge between smaller,
nearly spherical fullerenes like the Bucky ball, C60, and carbon nanotubes. The
use of endohedral fullerenes in light harvesting and other electro-optical and
electrochemical devices involves reduction and oxidation of these molecules, yet
little is known about the structures and chemical reactivities of externally
functionalized endohedral fullerenes and of the cations and anions formed by
oxidation and reduction of these endohedral fullerenes. The researchers intend
to prepare crystalline salts of a variety of endohedral fullerenes to determine
how oxidation and reduction behavior alters their structure, the location of the
contents with regard to the cage, and the nature of interactions between atoms
inside cages. They have discovered several new families of fullerenes with
compositions M3C106-124, M4C122-154, M3C107-125 and will explore the chemical
reactivity and structures of these remarkable molecules.

This project will provide state of the art laboratory experiences for graduate
and undergraduate students who will be learning the techniques of chemical
synthesis, fullerene formation in an electric arc, chromatographic methods of
fullerene separation and purification, crystal and cocrystal growth, and single
crystal X-ray diffraction methods including both conventional in-house sources
and synchrotron radiation. The students will also learn how to collaborate
within the group and also with scientists in varied locations globally. Once a
rare chemical, the prototypical fullerene, C60, is now available in ton
quantities. Professors Balch and Olmstead anticipate a similar increase in the
availability of endohedral fullerenes. Endohedral fullerenes are versatile
materials that have properties that reflect the nature of the atoms trapped
inside. Thus, gadolinium-containing endohedrals are effective contrast agents
for magnetic resonance imaging and have the advantage of safely trapping the
toxic gadolinium atoms inside an unreactive carbon cage. Lutetium-containing
endohedrals are useful in X-ray contrast imaging. Fullerenes are the molecules
of choice in the design of new plastic solar cells, and endohedral fullerenes
represent a promising new set of molecules to improve and enhance the
operational characteristics of these cells.