* 1305993
* The Michigan AGEP Alliance for Transformation (MAA): Mentoring and Community Building to Accelerate Successful Progression into the Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Joseph Dunbar, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 02/28/2019
* USD 118,000.00

The Michigan AGEP Alliance for Transformation (MAA) was created in response to
the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 12-554) for the AGEP-Transformation (AGEP-T) track. The AGEP-T
track targets strategic alliances of institutions and organizations to develop,
implement, and study innovative evidence-based models and standards for STEM
graduate education, postdoctoral training, and academic STEM career preparation
that eliminate or mitigate negative factors and promote positive practices for
underrepresented. The Michigan AGEP Alliance for Transformation (MAA): Mentoring
and Community Building to Accelerate Successful Progression into the
Professoriate represents a collaboration between the University of Michigan,
Michigan State University, Michigan Technological University, Wayne State
University, and Western Michigan University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
vision and planned outcome of MAA is to increase the success U.S. citizens who
are underrepresented minority (URM) graduate students and postdoctoral scholars
in all fields of STEM through graduate study, postdoctoral training and the
professoriate. This vision and outcome is being addressed by pursuing the
following three overarching goals of the MAA:&lt;br/&gt;1) Adapting two existing
models, one for fostering multidisciplinary learning communities with diverse
students and the other for improving faculty mentoring of URM graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows, to the needs of the five MAA campuses; &lt;br/&gt;2)
Studying their effects on the academic identity and career progress of U.S.
citizens who are URM graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in STEM
programs; and &lt;br/&gt;3) Implementing more widely on campuses those models
that lead to improved academic outcomes and widespread institutional
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives for this project
are:&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Designing, adapting and implementing evidence-based
mentoring initiatives, on all five campuses, that are focused on improved
mentoring for U.S. URM graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in all fields
of STEM. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Designing, adapting and implementing evidence-
based initiatives to promote interdisciplinary learning communities, on all five
campuses, that are focused on improved mentoring for U.S. URM STEM graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: Conducting research
about the ways in which improved mentoring and improved sense of community are
linked to a sense of academic identity, and the ways in which academic identity
is linked to important academic and career outcomes, for U.S. URM graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows in all STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 4:
Conducting research about the ways in which departmental and university
variables moderate the relations among mentoring, community, academic identity
and academic outcomes for U.S. citizens who are URM graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in all STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
activities that contribute to the model for the alliance include: &lt;br/&gt;1.
Designing, adapting and implementing the University of Michigan's Mentoring
Others Results in Excellence (MORE) model as a foundation for improving
mentoring of U.S. URM graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in STEM. This
includes training facilitators who run faculty mentoring workshops, conducting
mentoring workshops, training advanced level students for intergenerational
mentoring, and developing/distributing individualized mentoring agreements to
faculty and STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;2. Designing, adapting and implementing the
Michigan State University's interdisciplinary learning community model as a
foundation for improving the sense of belonging, peer support and academic
identify of U.S. URM graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in STEM. This
includes training facilitators, conducting institution-specific community
meetings, and holding MAA-wide community meetings for graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MAA includes a social
science research study that will explore the mechanisms that help explain the
under-representation and attrition of URM students in STEM, as well as the
contextual and individual factors that can promote academic persistence and
success in those fields. The research team predicts that racial/ethnic stigma
experiences in students' academic contexts lead to dis-identification from the
academic discipline, which then leads to lower academic performance and
completion. They also predict that contextual-level resources, such as high-
quality mentoring, moderate these relationships. Examples of specific study
hypotheses being tested include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Students reporting more negative
department diversity climates (stigma experiences) will report lower sense of
belonging (affective indicator of academic identity) in their academic
departments than students reporting positive diversity climates.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Students reporting having higher quality mentoring relationships with their
faculty advisors will report more positive academic identity outcomes (higher
perceived preparation, higher sense of belonging, higher curricular/professional
involvement) than students reporting lower quality mentoring
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;3. Quality mentoring will moderate the association
between stigma (e.g., reported negative department climate) and academic
identity (e.g., reported sense of belonging), such that the negative association
of negative department diversity climate with sense of belonging will be
stronger for students reporting lower quality mentoring relative to those
reporting higher quality mentoring.