* 1305844
* Global Aspects of the N-Body Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Richard Montgomery, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2018
* USD 189,946.00

The Newtonian N-body problem suffers (or enjoys) two difficulties not shared by
the typical dynamical systems of general theory: collision singularities which
render the flow incomplete, and symmetries which make all its periodic orbits
degenerate. The investigator and his colleague eliminate these two difficulties.
They eliminate collision singularities by Levi-Civita regularization,
Kuustaanheimo-Steifel regularization or McGehee blow-up. They eliminate the
symmetries by symplectic reduction and invariant theory. They call the resulting
regularized reduced flow the "global regularization." This flow is complete and
has the minimum number of degrees of freedom possible among for a flow encoding
the N-body problem. Given the global regularization, the investigator and his
colleague study previously inaccessible problems within the N-body problem, such
as the dynamical and variational nature of collision-collision solutions, and
the existence or lack of existence of a symbolic dynamics for the planar zero-
angular momentum three-body problem whose 3 symbols are the 3 types of syzygies
(collinearities).

Imagine the moon going around the earth, the earth going around the sun, and the
sun spinning around the galaxy. The dominant force in the large scale dynamics
of the universe is the attractive force of gravity and is responsible for the
large scale rotational type motions of celestial bodies. The N-body equations
are the equations governing this motion. ("N" stands for the number of bodies.)
When two bodies get close the forces get large to the point that when the bodies
collide the forces become infinity. This infinity is called a "collision
singularity." If the whole universe is translated, or rotated some fixed amount,
the motion remains identical and so there are extra variables in the usual
N-body equations, namely the variables describing the "origin" and "axes" of the
universe. The investigator and his collaborator eliminate the collision
singularities, and the extra variables in the N-body equations. These
eliminations yield a potentially more useful system of equations for the motion,
a system free of infinities which may provide a good platform from which to
solve some of the many open problems about one of the dominant dynamical
behaviors going on in our universe.