* 1305653
* CHIP SCALE MAGNETIC SENSOR ARRAYS BASED ON MAGNETOVISCOUS EFFECT OF FERROFLUIDS
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Srinivas Tadigadapa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2017
* USD 330,000.00

This project will investigate the design and implementation of a novel
magnetometer array capable of picoTesla magnetic field sensitivity at room
temperature. The principle of operation of the magnetic sensor is based on the
sensitive monitoring of the magnetoviscous effects in ferrofluids using
micromachined, shear mode, bulk acoustic wave resonators. The uniqueness is in
the exploitation of, hitherto unexplored, response of a ferrofluid atop a high-
frequency shear wave resonator to externally applied magnetic field that is
sensitively monitored through the at-resonance impedance characteristics of the
resonator. Ferrofluids consist of ~10 nm sized ferri- or ferro-magnetic
nanoparticles suspended in a carrier liquid. Interaction of the ferrofluid
nanoparticles with the surface of the resonator is considered to result in the
formation of a dense magnetic double layer at the interface with a high magnetic
susceptibility. Application of external magnetic fields results in changes in
magnetoviscosity of the magnetic double layer at the resonator-ferrofluid
interface and can be accurately monitored using micromachined quartz resonators.
High frequency micromachined quartz resonators are highly sensitive to small
changes in the viscoelastic loading at the resonator surface and can be used for
the quantification of the magnetoviscous effect and is the working principle of
the magnetometer proposed here.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed work aims at exploring the interaction of high
frequency shear waves and magnetic fields on the spontaneous organization of
ferromagnetic nanoparticles suspended in a fluid medium focusing specifically on
the immediate layers adjacent to the resonator surface. The proposed experiments
and model development will attempt to explore the interfacial origins of the
phenomenon of magnetoviscosity. Combining real-time viscoelastic measurements
with magnetic flux concentrator structures will provide the designs for
realizing high-sensitivity magnetic sensors capable of vector measurements of
magnetic field and a greater understanding of the magneto-rheological effects.
Current experimental techniques on ferrofluids employ shear rates that are five
orders of magnitude lower and preclude such interfacial investigations on
ferrofluids. This work will demonstrate high-sensitivity, chip-scale,
magnetometer arrays capable of resolving pico-Tesla magnetic field vectors.

Broader Impact: This project will explore the basic interaction of acoustic
waves, magnetic fields, and ferromagnetic nanoparticles in a fluid. A deeper
understanding of this phenomenon will provide the tools for understanding the
role of thermal energy, dipole interaction energy, and hydrodynamic forces on
nanoparticles. This work will elucidate the relationship between the observed
rheological properties of the ferrofluids and the agglomeration characteristics
of the nanoparticles at ferrofluid-resonator interface. The successful
development of the integrated sensors in this proposal has the potential to
revolutionize the biomagnetic field detection and imaging. The potential impact
of this technology on life science research and functional brain imaging, in
particular, is immeasurable because it creates an opportunity to produce an
array of portable devices operating at room temperature that are currently
unavailable. In addition to supporting graduate student training the proposed
work includes the creation of demonstration models using ferrofluids to
demonstrate magnetic fields, dipoles and nanoparticle concepts to K-5 students.