* 1305564
* Chemical Pathways for Controlling Polymorphism in Nanoscale Metal Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Raymond Schaak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

This award by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program supports
work by Professor Raymond Schaak at the Pennsylvania State University to
identify and understand the chemical factors that lead to the formation of
nanoparticulate non-equilibrium phases of transition metal sulfides and
selenides, including ZnS, ZnSe, and several sulfides and selenides of Co, Ni,
and Mn. The targeted materials exhibit a variety of interesting and useful
electronic, magnetic, and optical properties, and their crystal structures
directly impact their properties. This research builds on emerging capabilities
for synthesizing non-equilibrium phases using chemical routes that form
nanoparticulate solids in solution from soluble precursors. Such discoveries are
usually serendipitous, involving a large number of variables and complex in-situ
chemistry. In this project, Prof. Schaak's group investigates the reaction
pathways by which these new solids form to reveal important insights that can
help lead to a predictive framework for selectively targeting desired non-
equilibrium phases based on fundamental chemical principles.

The crystal structure that an extended solid adopts plays a key role in defining
its properties. At the same time, the techniques and conditions used to
synthesize a solid can help to influence the crystal structure that it forms.
This project seeks to identify and understand the chemical factors that
selectively lead to the formation of one crystal structure instead of others in
a system where multiple structures may be accessible. These insights will help
researchers to more predictably synthesize desired materials with targeted
properties. This project provides multi-disciplinary training to a diverse group
of graduate and undergraduate students. Emphasis is placed on integrating teams
of undergraduate researchers directly into the technical goals of the project
through specially designed undergraduate research projects.