* 1305836
* CAREER: Rapid host-parasite evolution and its effects on host invasions: a resurrection ecology study
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Meghan Duffy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2017
* USD 746,459.00

As rates of parasitism increase and species invasions skyrocket, there are
increasing numbers of outbreaks of disease that result from novel host-parasite
pairings. How do hosts and parasites evolve in response to these new
interactions, and what are the consequences for ecological dynamics of native
and invasive hosts? This project uses interactions among a native bacterial
parasite, a native zooplankton host, and an invasive zooplankton host that is
now infected by the native bacterial parasite to ask how parasites adapt when
they first enter a novel host. Existing genetic archives for both host and
parasite provide a rare opportunity to study the important process of how
pathogens that originate in one host species move to another; this host switch
is very difficult to observe in nature. In addition, observational studies of
lake populations, laboratory experiments and mathematical models will be used to
understand how parasitism influences population dynamics of native and invasive
hosts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important component of this project involves
educating, training and diversifying the next generation of scientists. The
principal investigator will work with science educators to develop hands-on,
experiential learning activities for inner city children in Atlanta, focusing on
plankton and microbes. Informal science education activities aimed at the
general public will also be developed, and will be used to engage visitors to an
inner city park. Pre-teacher undergraduates from Georgia Tech will be trained in
scientific research, educational research, and pedagogy. In addition, students
from Georgia Tech and nearby Spelman College will be involved in the proposed
research, gaining valuable research experience. Finally, because many new human
pathogens likely arose in different hosts, understanding the process by which
pathogens jump from one host to another will have broad societal significance.