* 1305140
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Terraces, Warfare, and Climate Change:  Late Intermediate Period Agricultural Risk Management Strategies Puno, Peru (A.D. 1100-1450)
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* BrieAnna Langlie, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 25,127.00

Under the guidance of Dr. David Browman, Ms. BrieAnna Langlie will conduct
archaeological excavations and analyze ancient plant remains to measure how
farmers in the Peruvian Andes near Lake Titicaca adapted their agricultural
strategies to account for a period of prolonged drought and intense warfare
during the Peruvian Late Intermediate period (LIP; A.D. 1100-1450). During this
unstable time, a warring ethnic group called the Colla occupied nucleated
hilltop forts flanked by agricultural terraces. This research will be carried
out at one of the largest Colla fortresses called Machu Llaqta, and will examine
human agricultural adaptation as a metric to understand the relative importance
of climate change and warfare to peoples' daily lives. Methods include
excavations of terraces adjacent to Machu Llaqta, utilization of dating methods
to determine the age of terraces, and analyses of previously excavated ancient
plant remains. Dating methods include optically stimulated luminescence dating
and accelerator mass spectrometry dating of radiocarbon. Analyses of ancient
plant remains consist of identification of preserved seeds and stems, and starch
grain residues recovered from the living quarters of the fort, and pollen
analysis of soils recovered from adjacent agricultural terraces.

This research will clarify the specific social and environmental factors that
motivated LIP food production, agricultural technologies, and plant procurement
strategies. Researchers currently contest the severities of ancient Andean
climate change and warfare. These new data will provide a metric for
understanding the perceived severity of warfare and climate change during the
LIP. Identifying when ancient altiplano (high altitude) farmers constructed
terraces will be a major advancement in the understanding of Titicaca basin
agriculture. While previous research has only generalized about the impact of
terrace agriculture in the altiplano, Ms. Langlie's findings will directly
correlate terrace technology to the pre-history and environmental chronology of
the Peruvian Andes. These data will address wider theoretical discussions in the
region such as climate change, political involvement in agriculture, and the
motivations behind agricultural intensification.

This project aims to study the deep time history of traditional ecological
knowledge in a characteristically marginal landscape, especially during a period
of climate change and warfare. Locally developed indigenous knowledge provides
an appropriate model for environmentally and socially sustainable agriculture.
With the impending worldwide increase in annual temperature predicted in the
next century, local models of social and environmental sustainability will be
essential. This research tests the local deep time political ecological
sustainability of terrace agriculture, which remains an enduring and sustainable
farming method. Ms. Langlie's investigation builds on the fifteen-year
collaboration between U.S. and Peruvian researchers as part of the Collasuyo
Archaeological Research Institute located in Puno, Peru. Important results of
this project will be graduate student training, and improved resources for
future archaeological investigations in the region. International collaboration
will be an integral part of this project. The cooperation of the Ministerio de
Cultura in Peru, the Collasuyo Archaeological Research Institute, Ms. Langlie,
and other researchers in the U.S. foster and promote strong international
collaborations.