* 1305766
* Global Studies of Einstein Spacetimes
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Vincent Moncrief, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2014
* USD 60,000.00

One of the main aims of this project is to continue the development of light-
cone estimates for the Einstein equations that parallel those that have already
been developed and successfully used to prove a global existence theorem for the
Yang-Mills-Higgs equations. Though strict global existence is not valid for
general relativity the Penrose cosmic censorship conjecture provides its
natural, gravitational analogue and the resolution of this conjecture is
considered to be one of the main open mathematical problems in classical general
relativity. Recent analysis has succeeded to derive an explicit, exact integral
formula for the curvature of a vacuum spacetime, at an arbitrary point. This
integral formula should also admit applications to other fundamental, open
mathematical problems such as the rigorous proof of black hole stability. An
additional, principal aim of this project is to continue work on the development
of improved numerical methods for the analysis of gravitational waves. A primary
goal is to determine how best to integrate this discovery with standard,
unconstrained, numerical evolution techniques. A final goal of this project is
to adapt recently developed "Euclidean signature semi-classical" approximation
methods to the study of the Wheeler-DeWitt equation of formal, quantum general
relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the research involved in this project
is of interest to mathematicians working in geometry and partial differential
equations. Techniques developed for studying, numerically, the propagation of
waves that literally extend all the way to infinity could well prove to be
useful in other areas of science and engineering. It is anticipated that these
same methods, when applied to the study of gravitational radiation, will have a
significant influence on the ongoing worldwide efforts to model, numerically,
interesting sources of such waves and thereby, ultimately, to impact the
experimental search efforts. The proposal to further develop "Euclidean-
signature semi-classical" methods for the study of quantum field theories,
especially gauge theories, should have far-reaching implications for the
understanding of such systems. It is expected that enlisting the contributions
of students and younger researchers in these endeavors should have significant
implications for the development of human resources in the mathematical and
physical sciences and this is an additional, principal aim of the project.