* 1305120
* Nonlinear Markov processes, large weakly interacting particle systems, and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Amarjit Budhiraja, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 299,999.00

This work considers systems with a large number of weakly interacting particles
with Markovian dynamics, and nonlinear Markov processes that arise in the large
particle limit. Such systems originally were considered in statistical
mechanics, however in recent years studies in many different fields have led to
similar stochastic dynamical models. Some examples include, loss network models,
default clustering in large portfolios, chemotactic response dynamics, and
belief systems in social sciences. The basic mathematical object is the
empirical measure of the trajectories of the collection of particles. There is
extensive work on the law of large number behavior(LLN), central limit theory
and large deviation results for this object. For example, under conditions, this
measure under a large particle limit converges to a deterministic measure that
is characterized through a nonlinear evolution equation known as the McKean-
Vlasov equation. Most of the existing theory concerns the behavior of the system
on a finite time horizon. In the proposed work the interest is in the long time
behavior of the empirical measure process and its LLN limit. More precisely, the
goal is to develop a systematic stability theory for the associated Mckean-
Vlasov equation, and to study its consequences for the time asymptotic behavior
of the interacting particle system. Three specific families of models will be
studied: (A) Finite state Markovian systems arising from communication networks;
(B) Models for active biological transport; (C) Opinion dynamics
models.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In many applications the time asymptotic behavior
of an interacting particle system of the above form is of central concern. For
example, in communication systems stability and control is fundamental and one
is interested in system design and control protocols that keep the state
processes in the neighborhoods of desirable operating conditions over long
periods of time. In applications coming from biological systems, one is
primarily interested in describing aggregation, self organization and other
pattern formations in the steady state of the system. In social science
applications, such as opinion dynamics modeling, one of the key goals is to
understand long term consensus formation mechanisms. All of these topics have in
common the feature that they are related to the behavior of the large time limit
of the associated empirical measure process, the study of which is the central
goal of this research. Research in (A) will lead to ideas for improved design,
stability, and regulation of complex communication networks. Research in (B)
will provide insight and understanding for diverse pattern formations observed
in biological systems. Research in (C) will enable development of minimal
intervention protocols that lead to desirable long term consensus patterns.