* 1305773
* SusChEM: Electroactive Polymers via Inverse Vulcanization of Elemental Sulfur
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Pyun, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 673,024.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Jeffrey Pyun and Richard Glass of the
University of Arizona and Michael Mackay of the University of Delaware will
explore polymer chemistry to utilize elemental sulfur as a monomer feedstock to
prepare majority sulfur copolymers. Elemental sulfur exhibits a number of useful
electrochemical and optical properties. However, due to its low solubility and
compatibility with the majority of organic compounds, the preparation of sulfur-
based polymers, with a majority content of sulfur has not been extensively
explored. A bulk polymerization method, inverse vulcanization, that uses molten
liquid sulfur as the reaction medium and as a comonomer for the synthesis of
sulfur-rich copolymers will be studied. New styrenic comonomers with varying
reactive functionality will be prepared and their copolymerization with sulfur
will be examined. Chemical, mechanical and electrochemical characterization of
these sulfur based polymers will be performed, and the polymers will be
evaluated as electrode materials for lithium-sulfur batteries. The broader
impacts of the proposal involve the potential uses of the polymers in lithium-
sulfur battery technologies, and the creation of new research classes and
lectures at the Tucson High Magnet School. International activities will link
the University of Arizona with Seoul National University and students at both
institutions will work together to improve technical communication and writing
skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to utilize waste sulfur
in the preparation a new class of plastics. Elemental sulfur is a waste product
from petroleum refining and natural gas production, and in this research project
new chemical processes will be explored that combine organic plastics with
sulfur in ways that will create useful new materials. This research could lead
to new technologies that may impact battery industries and well as commercial
uses of plastic materials.