* 1305041
* Georgia - Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2020
* Carlton Brown, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2020
* USD 3,465,320.00

The GALSAMP is comprised of nine institutions. The program plans to
significantly increase the number or underrepresented minorities in STEM
receiving baccalaureate degrees in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. An important element of the plan is an early and sustained exposure
of undergraduates to research training throughout the undergraduate experience.
The alliance expects to significantly contribute to GALSAMP schools of
increasing the quantity and quality of minority students in STEM disciplines and
to ensuring their entry into graduate programs. The program also seeks to
improved recruitment, retention, community college student transfer, and
graduation for underrepresented students in STEM. The project has the following
goals: - Increase the number of students recruited into STEM majors by 50% over
five-years. - Increase persistence and progression of STEM students in the
expanded alliance to 85% over five-years. - Increase the number of STEM students
transferring from alliance two-year community colleges to four-year
baccalaureate alliance institutions from 31% to 50% over five years. - Increase
the number of STEM baccalaureate graduates from the 2012 baseline total by 100%
from 380 to 760 over five years. - Increase the number of STEM Baccalaureate
graduates who compete successfully for entry into graduate degree programs from
40% to 80% over five-years.