* 1305449
* Self-Assembled Nanoscale Patterns Produced by Ion Bombardment of Solid Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Richard Bradley, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 280,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Mathematical Sciences and the
Division of Materials Research contribute funds to this award. It supports
theoretical research and educational activities focused on advancing
understanding of how self-assembled nanoscale patterns are produced by
bombarding a solid surface with a broad ion beam. The spontaneous emergence of
these patterns is not just fascinating in its own right; ion bombardment has the
potential to become a cost-effective method to rapidly fabricate large-area
nanostructures at length scales beyond the limits of conventional optical
lithography. This project will yield insight into how these patterns form, and
so will aid in the optimization of this tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
sponsored research, the PIs will pioneer the application of the mathematical
theory of pattern formation to the ion bombardment of solids. They will
determine whether well-ordered hexagonal arrays of nanodots can be formed by
bombarding an elemental solid while concurrently depositing impurities, and
develop a theory that explains why nearly regular hexagonal arrays of nanorods
form during ion-assisted deposition of some binary materials. Methods that may
reduce or prevent the formation of defects in the patterns produced by ion
bombardment will be developed and evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach to
K-12 students and the education of undergraduate and graduate students are
important aspects of the project. High school students in AP Physics will study
a macroscopic analog of pattern formation induced by ion bombardment, patterns
formed by sandblasting. Demonstrations of pattern formation will be developed
that will be used by Little Shop of Physics, a nationally-recognized outreach
program that brings hands-on physics demonstrations to K-12 students and to the
general public. The graduate student supported by the award will receive
interdisciplinary training in the physics of ion bombardment and the mathematics
of pattern formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Division of Materials Research
contribute funds to this award. It supports theoretical research and educational
activities focused on advancing our understanding of the nanoscale patterns that
emerge when a solid surface is bombarded with a broad ion beam. These nanoscale
patterns have features on small length scales some million times smaller than
the head of a pin. A plethora of patterns can be produced, including nanoscale
mounds arranged in hexagonal arrays of remarkable and unforeseen regularity. The
spontaneous emergence of these patterns is not just fascinating in its own
right: ion bombardment has the potential to become a cost-effective method to
rapidly fabricate large-area nanostructures. This project will yield insight
into how these patterns form, and so will aid in the optimization of this tool.
The sponsored research will therefore contribute to the burgeoning field of
nanotechnology, which promises to transform fields as diverse as medicine,
energy, and electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach to K-12 student and the
education of undergraduate and graduate students are important aspects of the
project. High school physics students will study an analog of pattern formation
induced by ion bombardment, patterns formed by sandblasting. Demonstrations of
pattern formation will be developed that will be used by Little Shop of Physics,
a nationally-recognized outreach program that brings hands-on physics
demonstrations to K-12 students and to the general public. The graduate student
to be supported by the award will receive interdisciplinary training in the
physics of ion bombardment and the mathematics of pattern formation.