* 1305117
* RUI:  Synthesis and Characterization of End-Functionalized Starches for Generating Functional Hybrid Polymers and Novel Self-Assembled Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Peter Iovine, University of San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Peter M. Iovine of the University of San
Diego will develop new chemistries to functionalize starch-based polymeric
materials and to incorporate them into more complex macromolecular
architectures. Starch is a versatile polymeric materials platform due to its
abundance, biodegradability, biocompatibility, structural diversity, and
molecular recognition behavior. The research objectives include studying and
optimizing chain end-modifying reactions that lead to the installation of click
synthons, developing a new class of natural-synthetic hybrid polymer featuring
amylose or amylopectin side chains, and synthesizing and studying amylose-based
self-assembled polymers. The broader impacts focus primarily on the high quality
mentoring of undergraduate and postdoctoral researchers. Beyond these core
outcomes, the project impacts include curriculum development, community outreach
activities, and the support of interdisciplinary research in the undergraduate
environment.

Polymers are long chain organic molecules and are found in many facets of
everyday life that utilize plastics, including food packaging, structural
materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and lightweight
electronic devices. Polymers can be classified as either naturally occurring or
synthetic, meaning they have been synthesized using raw materials that can be
traced back to petrochemicals. This research explores the preparation of hybrid
polymers, consisting of a combination of both natural and synthetic polymers.
More specifically, this research focuses on studying and utilizing starch, an
abundant and cheap raw material, as the natural component of the hybrid
polymers. Such fundamental knowledge about starch chemistry could lead to new
technologies for biomedical materials, personal care products, and packaging
materials, amongst many possible uses.