* 1305537
* Inferring the Physics of Living Systems from Dynamic Light Microscopy Data
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2018
* Mark Bathe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 03/31/2018
* USD 540,000.00

In this project the PI will investigate the role of contractile actin networks
in driving shape changes and morphogenesis in Drosophila embryos. Contractile
actin networks are increasingly being shown to play a central role in
fundamental biological processes involving cellular transport including cell
division and embryogenesis. A physics-based approach that integrates
quantitative analysis of fluorescence microscopy data with mechanistic, physics
based modeling is proposed to investigate these processes. A major challenge
posed by this data-driven modeling approach is the unbiased evaluation of
competing physical models. To meet this challenge, a Bayesian inference
framework is explored that models noise in the data generation process to
systematically test competing hypotheses of transport mechanisms. Specific
contributions of this research project include a unified, physical understanding
of how dynamic, contractile actin meshworks operate to transport organelles and
entire cells during basic biological processes including cell division and
embryogenesis. Further, a data-driven approach to bridging physics-based
transport models with fluorescence microscopy data sets is explored that will be
of broad utility to the biological physics community.

Contractile actin networks are protein networks present in eukaryotic cells that
play an important role in cell division, cell movement, and tissue development.
However, a mechanistic, physical understanding of how short time-scale, dynamic
contractions of actin at the subcellular scale interact mechanically to
coordinate cellular transport at larger length and time-scales does not exist.
Resolving this mechanism requires a quantitative, physics-based approach that
models contraction-driven transport at multiple scales ranging from single cells
to collections thereof. The present project is at the forefront of this research
area, which is of great importance to our scientific understanding the roles of
contractile actin networks in development.

Educational initiatives being advanced by the PI include undergraduate and
graduate curriculum enhancement, including the new graduate elective offered in
the Department of Biological Engineering, Physical Biology, and a new Institute-
wide seminar series in Biophysics at MIT. As a result of the present research
project, the PI is establishing a webserver for objective, Bayesian analysis of
transport measurements to infer physical transport models in a variety of
scientific disciplines, updating a webserver for integration of physics-based
modeling into molecular animations of proteins, protein assemblies, and
cytoskeletal dynamics for educational purposes, and developing a virtual
laboratory in molecular and cellular biophysics for students at City on a Hill,
a local charter high school serving under-represented minorities in the Boston
area. Educational and research activities of the PI will be further disseminated
via continuous rotation of undergraduate students from the Biological
Engineering Research Experience for Undergraduates program and MIT's
Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program, as well as from developing foreign
countries.