* 1305838
* Collaborative Research: An Asynchronous Exterior Calculus Framework for Charge-Conservative Electromagnetic Particle-in-Cell Simulations of Space-Charge Effects on Irregular Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Fernando Teixeira, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop new electromagnetic particle-in-
cell discretizations for irregular grids that will neither require linear
solvers nor be bounded by global stability constraints on the time step. The
approach is based on (1) the use of an exterior calculus framework and tools
from algebraic topology to represent discrete spatial derivatives and particle
gather/scatter operations on irregular meshes in a consistent fashion and (2)
the coupling of the proposed spatial discretization with an explicit
asynchronous technique for time integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to provide a transformative approach
for the modeling of multiscale phenomena combining partial differential
equations and particles on irregular meshes. Current linear solver technology
sets an upper limit on the size of problems solvable on such meshes, and solvers
with disparate time scales require enormous resources in terms of computing time
when using traditional time-stepping algorithms. This research program will
enable accurate solution of problems presently beyond reach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
benefit the analysis and design of new microwave, terahertz, and optical devices
with complex geometries; the simulation of transport in porous media and
electromagnetic fields in complex geological formations for energy prospection
or monitoring of environmental contaminants; and the simulation of plasma flows,
to name a few applications. This research project will support one graduate
student at the Ohio State University and two senior researchers. Results of this
research will be integrated into several courses at OSU and the software will be
publicly disseminated.