* 1305660
* RUI:  Advancing Electrodeposited Dicyano-ferriprotoporphyrin as an Electrocatalytic Material Capable of Selectively Oxizing Hydrogen Sulfide Over Interfering Gasotransmitters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jason Bennett, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 243,462.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Jason Bennett at Penn State University, Erie, Professor
Eva Zurek at SUNY Buffalo, and their groups will be studying electrodeposited
dicyano-ferriprotoporphyrin as an electrocatalyst capable of selectively
oxidizing hydrogen sulfide (H2S) in the body while in the presence of carbon
monoxide (CO) and nitric oxide (NO), two known interferences. Selective in vivo
detection of H2S is important for understanding the molecule's physiological and
pathological roles, specifically with regard to understanding various
neurological diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. This project is
expected to result in a strategy for modifying an electrode with a material
capable of selective H2S detection that can be incorporated into a future
amperometric sensor capable of real-time in vivo measurements. The gained
knowledge will hopefully lead to improved understanding and subsequently better
treatments for neurological diseases. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this
goal, the electrodeposition process of the porphyrin molecule onto an electrode
surface and its subsequent interactions with H2S, CO and NO will be investigated
using a variety of electrochemical, microscopic, and computational methods of
analysis. These studies will allow for the optimization of the material for
future incorporation into an H2S gas sensor. Additionally, this research will
expand computation methods that will improve the general understanding of
electrocatalytic reactions. Undergraduate research students will be involved in
all facets of this project to further integrate year-round research into their
education experiences concurrent with the NSF mission and objectives of the
Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program. The collaboration between
Dr. Bennett at a predominantly undergraduate institution (PUI) and Dr. Zurek at
a large research institution will both broaden the experience of the
undergraduate researchers at PUI, allowing them to conduct research at a large
university, as well as provide training to one of Dr. Zurek's graduate students
on how to effectively mentor undergraduate research students and prepare him/her
for a future teaching position at a PUI.