* 1305525
* Theoretical Physics of Biological Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Curtis Callan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 870,000.00

In this project the investigators will explore phenomena that span the tree of
life: from metabolism in bacteria, through the determination of cell fate in
embryonic development, to coding and computation of sensory information in the
brain. They have identified broad theoretical problems which cut across the
traditional biological divisions of organism and system: Do living organisms
operate near the limits set by the laws of physics as they gather and process
information? Can the detailed microscopic model of an organism, its wiring
diagram be understood from the finite set of observations that can be made on
how it behaves? How do organisms set the parameters that govern their function
(i.e. how do they learn from experience)? These questions will be given a
mathematical form, which will guide a search for answers in terms of general
principles, in the tradition of physics, that will apply across disparate
biological domains. The participants in the project will assemble into subgroups
to attack instances of these problems. The individual projects will have unusual
scope: as an example, the question whether the complex statistics of biological
behavior can be captured in a learnable mathematical model will be asked in very
similar terms both of spiking retinal neurons, and of the antibody sequence
repertoire of individual zebrafish. These questions will be answered in the
light of accurate data and the work will involve a close partnership with many
experimental groups in fields ranging from bacteriology to human perceptual
psychology. The product of these interactions will be the design of novel
experiments and the creation of novel data analysis methods in order to address
clearly formulated mathematical questions of broad significance. An important
component of this project is the training of a new generation of physicists for
whom the development of a theoretical understanding of biological systems is a
central part of their discipline. The graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars who pass through the group will learn by example how to pursue that
goal in a way consistent with the intellectual rigor and traditions of physics.