* 1306261
* RAPID: Liquefaction and its Effects on Buildings and Lifelines in the 2010-2011 Canterbury, New Zealand Earthquake Sequence
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Thomas O'Rourke, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2014
* USD 101,916.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award provides funding to
investigate liquefaction and its effects on buildings and lifelines in the
2010-2011 Canterbury, New Zealand earthquake sequence with the goal of capturing
perishable data that would lead to the development of enhanced analytical
procedures for evaluating the hazard holistically. The 2010-2011 Canterbury, New
Zealand earthquake sequence started with the Mw7.0, 4 September 2010 Darfield
earthquake that occurred to the west of Christchurch and included 3 events
having ML &gt;=6.0 and 45 events having ML &gt;=5.0. Because of its close
proximity to Christchurch and shallow depth of fault rupture, the Mw6.2, 22
February 2011 Christchurch earthquake was the most devastating event in the
sequence, resulting in nearly 200 deaths and thousands of injuries, with
widespread liquefaction and damage to the built environment. This earthquake
sequence provides a unique opportunity to evaluate in considerable depth the
effects of earthquake shaking of different intensities on the response of
various soil profiles, and the effects of liquefaction on building foundations
and critical lifeline systems. This research has three main thrusts: (1) re-
occurrence of liquefaction; (2) building performance in areas of liquefaction;
and (3) lifeline performance in areas of liquefaction-induced ground failure.
Significant accomplishments were made in each of these areas in a previous RAPID
effort. However, as is often the case in research, in performing the previous
investigations additional significant, time-critical opportunities to advance
the knowledge of geotechnical and lifeline earthquake engineering were
identified. There is still much to learn from comparing the different levels of
soil liquefaction caused by the earthquakes in this sequence and from evaluating
the differing seismic performance of buildings, lifelines, and engineered
systems during these events. It is extremely rare to have the opportunity to
learn how the same ground and infrastructure responded to multiple earthquakes
having different levels of shaking intensities. Furthermore, the magnitude and
distances of the Darfield and Christchurch earthquakes are two of the scenarios
often considered in US cities. Capturing details of lateral spreads and the
impacts of liquefaction on well-built structures, such as office buildings and
their interconnecting buried utilities, are critically important. Field
reconnaissance will be focused on capturing perishable data and characterizing
the soil profiles at select sites. This study will be coordinated through the
GEER Association and performed in collaboration with the University of
Canterbury (i.e., Professors Misko Cubrinovski, Brendon Bradley, and Mark
Quigley) and the New Zealand government. This proposal requests the funding
necessary for carefully documenting the perishable data in as much detail as
possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this stem from
documenting and learning from observations after design level earthquakes, which
are invaluable to advancing the state-of-practice in earthquake engineering.
Surveying the re-occurrence of liquefaction, documenting cases of liquefaction-
induced ground movements, and evaluating the effects of liquefaction on
buildings and lifelines advances fundamental understanding of earthquake effects
and develops benchmarks for future analysis and design. The Darfield and
Christchurch earthquakes, in particular, represent important earthquake
scenarios for the U.S. Thus, there is a real need to document their geotechnical
effects. Moreover, these earthquakes involve multi-hazard effects. The combined
settlement caused by liquefaction during both earthquakes has exposed many
Christchurch neighborhoods to increased threats from river and ocean flooding,
including tsunami. Collection of data on liquefaction-induced ground movement
will form the basis for flood risk assessment as well as earthquake
vulnerability. The proposed study combines the efforts of several leading
researchers to examine the effects of liquefaction holistically. The team also
includes graduate students; this research will help develop their capabilities
in earthquake engineering and allow them to establish research contacts in New
Zealand. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering, East Asia and Pacific Program.