* 1306447
* Bottom-up synthesis of filamentous polymer nanoparticles through bio-templated approaches
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Nicole Steinmetz, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2017
* USD 540,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Jon Pokorski and Nicole Steinmetz of Case
Western Reserve University will develop methods to form complex polymeric
nanostructures based on the templated polymer growth from a biological scaffold,
specifically tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). The bottom-up synthesis of polymeric
nanoparticles with controlled sizes and features, such as ligand spacing is a
critical need in nanoscience. The approach involves exploring three methods to
synthesize rod-shaped nanostructures: 1) using ATRP to graft polymers from the
exterior of TMV, 2) grafting polymers from the interior surface of TMV, followed
by removal of the template to yield high-aspect ratio polymeric nanoparticles,
and 3) polymerize both on the interior and exterior surface to yield complex
inside-out polymeric nanoparticles. The template surface can be modified using
genetic engineering methods in order to increase or decrease the particle
dimensions in a rational manner. Organizing functional molecules in
deterministic arrays provides a means to chemically program new functional
devices for applications in medicine and energy. The broader impacts of the
project also involve training graduate and undergraduate students, as well as
participation in the Polymer Envoy Program for training high school students in
Cleveland's school districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of precisely
defined structures that have dimensions on the order of nanometers (termed
"nanostructures") continues to be a challenge for chemists. Nature has perfected
the assembly of proteins into a myriad of nanostructures, particularly in the
case of viruses. This project will develop new and innovative ways to synthesize
these materials in a highly pure form using viruses as a scaffold for further
materials synthesis. These types of virus-templated nanomaterials could find
applications as promising platforms for drug delivery or as connecting elements
in nanoelectronics.