* 1306627
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Eli Swanson, Swanson                 Eli            M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2016
* USD 207,000.00

Title: Hormones as Mediators of Life History Tradeoffs Over Evolutionary Time

Tradeoffs between the future well-being of an organism and investment in
offspring represent a hallmark of biological diversity. Much research has
focused either on the evolutionary reasons to expect certain tradeoffs or the
physiological mediation of individual life history traits. Recent research
suggests that individual hormones regulate multiple life history traits.
However, it is unclear whether the multifaceted role hormones play represents an
adaptation, or an unavoidable result of a limited number of available
physiological mechanisms. The research will compare the results of evolutionary
simulations to novel empirical data to test these contrasting hypotheses. The
proposed research makes use of butterflies as a model due to the extensive
natural history information available for many species, combined with their
experimental tractability.

This research represents a potentially transformative contribution to the
understanding of how hormones mediate life history tradeoffs, and how these
relationships evolve. In addition to the research aims, the fellow will design a
blog incorporating stop-motion animation to present training objectives to a
wider audience in an entertaining format. The fellow will mentor over ten
undergraduates who will have opportunities to develop related independent
projects. During the final year of funding, the fellow will be involved in
teaching undergraduate and graduate courses. A team of mentors will train the
fellow in new laboratory and field skills, mathematical modeling, and computer
programming.