* 1306848
* NPGI:  NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Sharon Gray, Gray                    Sharon         B
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2016
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2013. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Sharon B. Gray is "The Effects of Elevated Atmospheric
Carbon Dioxide on Development and Cell Type-Specific Gene Expression of Tomato
(Solanum lycopersicum) roots" The host institution for the fellowship is the
University of California-Davis, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Siobhan
Brady.

This project focuses on understanding tomato root morphological, developmental
and gene expression responses to elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2)
concentrations predicted for the second half of this century. Specific aims of
this research are to (1) determine the effects of elevated CO2 on root
development at the morphological and cellular levels in cultivated tomato
(Solanum lycopersicum) and a wild relative (Solanum pennellii); (2) analyze
cell-type specific gene expression responses to elevated CO2 in Solanum
lycopersicum roots; and (3) utilize an introgression line (IL) population
derived from a cross of Solanum lycopersicum and Solanum pennellii to identify
quantitative trait loci (QTL) influencing responsiveness to elevated CO2 in
several aspects of root morphology and cellular anatomy.

Training objectives include plant genomics, quantitative genetics and
bioinformatics. Broader impacts include development of a laboratory training
module for an educational outreach initiative at a local high school, as well as
development of a website for this outreach program, making lesson plans freely
available online for high school teachers and for use in other outreach
programs.