* 1306373
* Collaborative Research (EAGER): Data Ecosystem for Catalyzing Transformative Research in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2014,01/31/2014
* Aditya Johri, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 01/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The engineering education research (EER) community is engaged in a mission to
improve the education of engineers across their lifespan. EER researchers
working on federally funded projects are now being asked to become progressively
transparent about the nature of data that they collect and to share that data
with other researchers. This drive for transparency has its genesis both in the
need for accountability and verifiability of research results, as well as the
realization that advances in data sharing capabilities are essential for a field
to conduct transformative research and to impact potential audiences. Although
data management and sharing are seen as advantageous, no examination as yet has
been done of data sharing practices and capabilities among EER researchers. It
is important to understand current practices, adoption patterns and motivations,
as well as future community needs related to data to fully leverage the benefits
of data sharing and create a core knowledge base for the community as well as
eventual creation of large datasets that can benefit other decision-makers from
students and parents to administrators and policy makers. Sharing data across
projects is more likely to provide a representative picture as well as
contextual variation in findings, lead to useful meta-analyses, and help avoid
repetitive research and policy making. This EAGER project will develop a data
ecosystem for the EER community and bring together two major areas --
engineering education and data sharing cyberinfrastructure (i.e. "big data") --
that have not been funded together so far. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed
work will (a) Understand the culture of data creation, exchange, and use that
exists within the community of engineering education researchers as well as the
consumers of this research; and (b) Identify a promising collection of available
data sharing mechanisms to seed an initial development effort and present
guidelines for the uptake of identified mechanisms. We will collect data through
interviews and focus groups (N=100) and surveys (N=300) with a representative
sample of the research community. We will supplement these efforts with
secondary data collection and targeted understanding of large-scale efforts. We
will then examine currently existing data sharing mechanisms that exist and can
be utilized by the EER community. The final product of this work will be
guidelines for improving data sharing including design requirements, analysis of
existing mechanisms, and an initial framework for a cyberinfrastructure to
support such activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will benefit the
entire engineering education community by providing a rubric for sharing data
that reflects community-driven priorities, best practices, and design principles
that can form the foundation of a data sharing practice and system for
engineering education research. This project will potentially impact hundreds of
faculty and students engaged in engineering education research and teaching. The
project is broadly inclusive with the goal to involve stakeholders from a
diverse range of institutions with a variety of backgrounds. An infrastructure
for data sharing has the potential to infuse a fundamental perspective change in
how knowledge is shared and used and, in the long-term, we expect this project
to bridge the communities of researchers and practitioners.