* 1306720
* Ion Hydration and Nanocalorimetry in Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Evan Williams, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2017
* USD 546,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program and the
Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Evan Williams at University of California, Berkeley, and
his group will be developing thermochemical tools that will enable novel
measurements that can lead to both detailed insights into ion-water interactions
as well as an accurate new way to measure energetics of challenging chemical
reactions. Ions play important roles in chemistry and biology, and can affect a
wide range of physical properties, including structures of biomolecules, such as
proteins and DNA. Although much is known about ion chemistry, the origins of
some ion-induced effects are still hotly debated. The accuracy of a method
developed by this group called nanocalorimetry will be calibrated using laser-
generated light at precise frequencies. This method will then be applied to
understanding how water solvates ions and to measure energetics of chemical
reactions. These state-of-the-art measurements should make it possible to obtain
information about the electrochemical properties of ions that have not been
measured using conventional methods, such as one-electron reduction potentials
of some ions. From measurements of absolute reduction potentials of single ions
in aqueous nanodrops, an accurate absolute electrochemical scale and absolute
ion solvation scale could be established. Because the sizes of the nanodrops are
so small, a significant fraction of the water molecules in these droplets are at
the surface. Infrared photodissociation spectroscopy will be used to investigate
how ions affect the hydrogen-bonding network of water molecules, both in the
interior of the nanodrop as well as at the surface. Ions at surfaces have been
extensively investigated with computation chemistry, but the water surface can
be difficult to characterize with conventional spectroscopic methods owing to
the overwhelming number of water molecules below the surface of bulk samples.

This research bridges many traditional disciplines in science, and data obtained
in these studies provide stringent benchmarks that can be used by others to
improve the accuracy of computational methods, which are being increasingly
applied to solving important problem in chemistry. Both graduate and
undergraduate students who participate in this research, as well as those who
enroll in a related undergraduate course on chemical instrumentation or a
dedicated graduate course on mass spectrometry learn about the newest
developments in mass spectrometry, a method that is used in many fields of
science with applications ranging from drug discovery, molecular
characterization of cellular contents, chemical imaging, and petroleum
characterization. Prior NSF funded research has lead to international
collaborations, which exposes students to different cultures and approaches to
science, and this NSF funded project will enable continued opportunities to do
so.