* 1306642
* RUI: Super-resolution plasmon-enhanced imaging and spectroscopy with patterned metallic surfaces and dynamic illumination
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Nathan Lindquist, Bethel University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2017
* USD 252,393.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting Dr. Nathan Lindquist and his undergraduate researchers at Bethel
University to develop new methods for high-resolution imaging and spectroscopy
using metallic nano-surfaces. Diffraction-limited light microscopy cannot
achieve the control of optical fields necessary for many demanding applications
in nano-scale imaging, sensing, and spectroscopy. To address this issue, the
field of plasmonics aims to manipulate light within dimensions much smaller than
the optical wavelength called "hotspots" by exploiting plasmons in metallic
nanostructures. The hotspots are then able to provide chemical information via
plasmon-enhanced spectroscopy. Using these properties, Dr. Lindquist and his
students are developing sub-diffraction-limited chemical imaging substrates. To
address challenges associated with the precise positioning of focused hotspots
for scanning and imaging purposes, Dr. Lindquist's team is using a spatial light
modulator and computer-controlled holographic laser
illumination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resolution of conventional
microscopic methods is on the order of 200 nm, which is too large to observe
many cellular components and the structural details of many materials. This
project uses a very different strategy to generate microscope images: very small
metal structures that can restrict the light collected to very small dimensions
and improve image quality. The precise nano-fabrication and nano-
characterization techniques explored in this research also will have broad
scientific impact because nano-scale metals have many unique properties that
macro-scale metals do not. Beyond this, the research is being performed at a
primarily undergraduate institution, training motivated students for future
careers in science and engineering. The student's work will incorporate cross-
disciplinary research activities into their undergraduate education, give them
experience with state-of-the-art equipment and experimental techniques, and
inspire course projects, research activities, and summer research opportunities.