* 1306990
* RUI: Vibrational Properties of Dense Colloidal Suspensions with Short-Range Attractive Potential
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Piotr Habdas, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2017
* USD 220,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Glass transition theories and the nature of
the glassy state are considered to be unsolved problems in soft condensed matter
physics. Colloidal suspensions are a model system for studying the nature of
glasses and the glass transition. Two distinct colloidal glass states, driven by
particle caging and particle bonding, have been observed in experiments and
simulations. Since in colloidal suspensions the trajectories of colloidal
particles can be followed in space and time using confocal microscopy, particle
dynamics and structure will be studied to determine whether particle caging,
bonding or both are important for the structural arrest of the system. This will
be the focus of this project. Knowledge gained in this project will advance
fundamental understanding about colloidal suspensions with various attractive
strengths and volume fractions, and thus will further elucidate the nature of
molecular glasses. Undergraduate students involved in this project will conduct
research learning cutting edge experimental techniques such as sample
preparation, microscopy, programming, and colloidal science. Obtained results
will be widely disseminated by the undergraduate students through posters and
talks at regional and national conferences, and through student-coauthored
papers. Moreover, students involved in this project will gain insight into
careers in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Complex liquids and amorphous solids such as colloidal
suspensions, emulsions, liquid crystals, and polymer melts are materials
encountered in every day life in a wide range of industrial branches, from the
food industry to cosmetics to materials science. This experimental project
explores the dynamics and structure of amorphous systems by studying suspensions
of micrometer-sized particles in a liquid with varying interparticle attraction.
By experimentally studying such colloidal suspensions, new results will be
obtained which will confirm or refute current computer simulations and theories.
Such fundamental knowledge of complex systems will aid development of new
complex materials and provide insight into practical applications listed above.
Furthermore, since this project includes undergraduate students, it will provide
them with critical experience in cutting edge research and dissemination of
obtained results through presentations at conferences and student-coauthored
publications, simultaneously encouraging them towards careers in science and
technology. Notably, this project will foster close professional interaction
between students and the faculty mentor as an expression of cura personalis
(care for the entire person), a fundamental principle of Jesuit institutions.