* 1306928
* Chemical Sensors Based on Electrodeposited Metal Nanowires: Three New Mechanisms for Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Reginald Penner, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2016
* USD 465,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry and Chemical Measurement
and Imaging Programs jointly support Professor Reginald M. Penner of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of California at Irvine to investigate
chemical sensors based upon metal nanowires. Three new modes for detecting
molecules using metal nanowires are being developed in this project, which
coincide with three objectives: 1) the use of surface electron scattering to
detect gas phase molecules using noble metal nanowires. A specific example is a
single gold nanowire that is capable of rapidly detecting 1 ppm NO2 and NO in
air at elevated temperatures. 2) To exploit the heat of molecular chemisorption
as means for detecting adsorbates in the gas phase using arrays of suspended
metal nanowires. These investigations focus on ethylene on platinum and ethanol
on palladium. 3) To create a family of nanoscopic chemical sensors based upon
nanogaps in metal nanowires that are modified by the insertion of an affinity
medium, such as a conductive organic polymer imprinted for the analyte molecule
of interest, as well as a conductive polymer with incorporated antibodies during
polymerization from solution. A broader impact of this research activity is a
project involving outreach to economically disadvantaged high school students in
the Santa Ana, California school district. Each year this provides a student
from Santa Ana High School ten weeks of full-time paid summer research in
Professor Penner's laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a chemical sensor is made
progressively smaller, it responds more rapidly to changing concentrations of
the molecule that is being measured. In this project, a family of highly
miniaturized chemical sensors are created using metal nanowires. These nanowires
are prepared using a process that is closely related to those used in the
semiconductor industry to prepare integrated circuits. The resulting nanowires,
composed of gold, palladium, or platinum, are approximately 1/100th the diameter
of a human hair, but of similar lengths on the order of millimeters or
centimeters. The electrical resistance of these diminutive wires increases when
molecules attach to the surfaces of the wire, and this process provides a means
for detecting these molecules very rapidly, within a few seconds. The molecules
that are being detected in these studies are nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide,
carbon monoxide, and hydrocarbons like methane and ethane. In addition to a
rapid response, a second advantage of these nanowire-based chemical sensors is
their simplicity: A chemical sensor consists of a single metal nanowire, two
electrical contacts to this nanowire, and an instrument for measuring its
electrical resistance. Consequently, these sensors can be very inexpensive.