* 1306815
* Optical Excitations of Organic Macromolecular Aggregates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Theodore Gore Goodson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 435,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic hyperbranched polymers are now
promising candidates for a number of electronic and optical applications. In
this project a hypothesis of the mechanism of the enhanced dielectric effects in
phthalocyanine hyperbranched polymers is investigated. The proposed studies are
to be carried out in two phases. The first phase consists of a detailed
investigation of the polaron dynamics in organic branched macromolecules. The
second phase is related to the development of a hybrid capacitor/fuel cell
design for increased energy and power density energy storage devices. The PI's
research group will design, synthesize, and investigate in detail hyperbranched
phthalocyanine polymers and probe their structure-function relationships. The
scope of this work thus involves: a) detailed mechanistic studies of the polaron
hopping rate and delocalization length in hyperbranched polymers; b) the design
and fabrication of a capacitor/battery hybrid system which will deliver reliably
increased energy and power. In the proposed studies, the PI's group will
investigate different factors affecting the hopping length and rate and thus
contributing to the dielectric response of the proposed hyperbranched systems.
Both optical and electronic experiments will be conducted to probe structure-
function relationships as they relate to the dielectric response in
hyperbranched systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns the understanding of the
electronic properties of new materials useful for electronic applications. In
particular, research is to be carried out on certain organic polymer materials
which have unusual properties that are beneficial for energy storage devices.
Research will be conducted to understand the fundamental properties of these
materials and to calibrate their energy storage characteristics based on their
structure. This planned research allows for the mentoring of younger (high
school) scientists in the surrounding areas in the field of materials and
enriching their scientific and mathematical backgrounds. Also, with industrial
collaborations, this research project will provide opportunities for mentoring
women and minority scientists to further their careers in graduate school and in
academic professions.