* 1306972
* Estimation, model selection and inference in two classes of non- and semi-parametric models for repeated measurements
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Shujie Ma, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2016
* USD 99,948.00

In this proposal, the PI plans to develop new non- and semi- parametric
regression strategies in the context of repeated measures data with diverging
number of covariates. The methods are supported by large sample theories.
Specifically, the PI aims at: (1) developing efficient estimation and model
selection procedures by incorporating the within-subject correlations in two
proposed broad classes of models: a generalized varying index coefficient
additive model and a generalized additive coefficient model. The PI proposes to
employ a group penalized estimation method with polynomial splines; (2)
proposing an oracally efficient and computationally expedient two-step spline
estimation procedure for nonparametric additive functions. The proposed two-step
estimator is proved to have the oracle efficiencies in terms of both model
estimation and selection. Such superior properties are achieved by taking
advantage of the joint asymptotics of spline functions with different smoothing
parameters and regularization; (3) conducting statistical inferences after model
selection. The PI proposes a new nonparametric inferential tool to test whether
a nonparametric function has a given parametric form, and constructs
simultaneous confidence bands to provide global inference of functions with
their asymptotic properties established; and (4) studying model checking
problems for the proposed structured models by an integrated conditional moment
test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal meets the immediate needs from various
scientific areas for analyzing high dimensional repeated measures data within
the non- and semi- parametric framework. The proposed research is motivated by
the real data problems coming from the PI's interactions with researchers from
different disciplines. The data applications include gene-environment and risk
factor-environment interactions, nutrition scores, children growth, and economic
growth problems. The completion of the proposed projects will greatly enhance
the capability of researchers to analyze high-dimensional repeated measures data
with more reliable, flexible and effective statistical methods. The research
methods and results will be disseminated through journal publications, seminars,
conferences and workshops, and they will be incorporated into a graduate course
on longitudinal data analysis. Moreover, the project will promote teaching and
training of undergraduate and graduate students on the state-of-the-art
techniques in the research topics related to this proposal. The PI plans to
provide practitioners with easy-to-implement and easy-to-interpret well-
documented procedures coded in software such as R and to make the software
packages available to the public.