* 1306441
* On the Behavior of Solutions of Einstein's Equations and Other Geometric Nonlinear Partial Differential Equation Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* James Isenberg, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

A good portion of this award is devoted to the study of the formation of
singularities, both in solutions of Einstein's equations and in solutions of
Ricci flow. For Einstein's equations, one of the key issues is Strong Cosmic
Censorship ("SCC"): Is it true that the ubiquitous geodesic incompleteness
predicted by the Hawking-Penrose theorems generically involve spacetime
curvature (and therefore gravitational tidal) blowup? At least in certain
families of spacetimes defined by isometries, the determination that the
solutions exhibit "AVTD" behavior (dominance of time derivatives of the fields
over space derivatives near the singularity) is a very helpful tool for studying
SCC, and is interesting in its own right. Some of our work involves the
development of a framework for proving that there are large sets of smooth (non-
analytic) solutions in these families which show AVTD behavior. Our studies of
singularities in Ricci flow have focused on those known as "neckpinches". We
have, in particular, shown that there is a discretely parametrized family of
Ricci flow solutions which develop "degenerate neckpinches", with the geometry
asymptotically approaching a "Bryant soliton" at a prescribed rate (consistent
with Type 2 behavior). These solutions are all rotationally symmetric. Wanting
to know if the detailed asymptotic behavior seen in these solutions is also
characteristic of non-rotationally symmetric solutions, we have chosen to first
address this issue in the case of mean curvature flow ("MCF"), since MCF
neckpinches share many features with those of Ricci flow, and since it is easier
with MCF to compare non-rotationally symmetric solutions with rotationally
symmetric ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the projects discussed above, as well as
in many others in my research program, the primary goal is to develop an
understanding of the general behavior of large classes of solutions of
complicated nonlinear systems of partial differential equations. Such equation
systems, which play a major role in our modeling of physical phenomena at the
terrestrial scale as well as at the astrophysical/cosmological scale, cannot be
solved explicitly. However, using techniques such as those developed and used in
this proposal, one can learn a tremendous amount of practical information about
the behavior of solutions of these models, and therefore make very useful
predictions regarding the behavior of the physical systems modeled by these
equation systems.