* 1306943
* Correlative X-ray Fluorescence Tomography and Multiphoton Imaging of Zinc in Developing Zebrafish Embryos
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Christoph Fahrni, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2018
* USD 405,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Dr. Christoph J. Fahrni from the Georgia Institute of
Technology to establish a multimodal imaging approach for the spatial
correlation of Zn pools and areas of proliferating activities within developing
zebrafish embryos. The imaging modalities utilized in the proposed work
represent the forefront of current trace metal imaging research. Using a series
of specifically optimized emission ratiometric fluorescent zinc probes, the 3D
redistribution dynamics of labile zinc pools are visualized in live embryos by
two-photon excitation microscopy (TPEM). In parallel, areas of mitotic activity
are identified using a transgenic zebrafish line (zFucci), in which
proliferating cells are expressing a fluorescent marker protein. At selected
developmental stages, the total zinc distribution are also visualized by XRF
tomography as recently implemented at the Advanced Photon Source of the Argonne
National Laboratory. This multimodal imaging approach should provide for the
first time direct insights into the redistribution dynamics of zinc pools and
their role in the cell cycle progression during early
embryogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zinc is an essential trace nutrient required
for the vitality of all living organisms. It plays a central role in major
cellular processes, and it is required for cell proliferation and critical to
proper embryonic development. As the zinc requirements vary widely between
organs, the embryo is most likely forced to redistribute the limited supply of
trace nutrients in the course of development. Despite being of fundamental
importance, the mechanisms governing zinc regulation and redistribution during
development remain largely unexplored. Progress has been hampered in part due to
the challenges associated with quantifying the distribution of zinc in situ. The
combination of the three imaging modalities will allow to spatially correlate
the location of labile Zn pools, the distribution of total Zn, and the cell-
cycle progression, in a single embryo, and thus to elucidate the role of Zn in
proliferating activities during embryogenesis. The multimodal imaging approach
is expected to be readily adaptable for the investigation of a broad range of
questions concerning Zn homeostasis during development. Dr. Fahrni will also
work with Dr. John Cody at Wheeler High School in Marietta, Georgia to provide
students with an opportunity to participate in a four-week summer program that
would give them experience in a range of cutting-edge research techniques,
including synthetic chemistry, spectroscopy, photophysics, and biological
imaging. It is expected that this summer program will increase the enthusiasm of
the students for further study in STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is being co-funded by the Physiological and Structural Systems (PSS)
Cluster of the Integrative Organismal Systems (IOS) Division of the Biological
Sciences (BIO) Directorate.