* 1306730
* GOALI, SusChem: Organocatalysis for Sustainable Polymer Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Hedrick, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 530,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Robert Waymouth of Stanford University, in
collaboration with Dr. James Hedrick of IBM, will develop new catalysts and
catalytic methods for the generation of biodegradable materials and plastics
from renewable resources. The research will focus on the development of
environmentally benign organic catalysts for the synthesis of new families of
functional oligomers, polymers and macromolecular assemblies. These materials
are targeted as alternatives to petrochemically-derived plastics and as new
families of biodegradable materials for biomedical applications. Mechanistic and
synthetic investigations of zwitterionic ring-opening polymerization will be
carried out to generate large cyclic macromolecules - a class of materials that
remain poorly understood as a consequence of the paucity of synthetic methods to
generate large ring macromolecules. The discovery of a new synthetic method for
the generation of cyclic polymers also provides an opportunity to investigate
one of the most basic problems in polymer science, notably the influence of
endgroups and polymer topology on the properties of macromolecular materials.
Complementary efforts will focus on the development of new strategies for the
synthesis of biodegradable polyesters, polyamides, poly(phosphoesters) and
polyurethanes and their assembly into biocompatible materials. The broader
impacts involve the potential societal benefits of sustainable polymers /
plastics, providing an excellent training ground for project participants via an
academic-industry collaboration, and participation in an outreach program to
local high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New synthetic methods drive
innovation in polymer chemistry and materials science. The development of
renewable materials whose physical properties are competitive with existing
petroleum based plastics, but whose environmental footprint is smaller than that
of existing materials is a grand challenge. This research seeks to meet these
challenges with the development of organic catalysts and initiators as
environmentally attractive alternatives to metal-based strategies for polymer
synthesis. This program provides a model collaborative academic / industrial
collaboration between Stanford and IBM Almaden Laboratories that will advance
new strategies in polymer synthesis and create new technologies for
polymerization and recycling of polyester thermoplastics, the generation of
renewable plastics and new functional materials for biomedical applications.