* 1306718
* MEETING: International Congress of Vertebrate Morphology, July 8-12, Barcelona, Spain
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* John Long, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* elsbeth walker
* 02/28/2014
* USD 25,000.00

This award will support participation of students, postdocs, and early-career
faculty in the 10th International Congress of Vertebrate Morphology, Barcelona,
Spain, July 8th -12th, 2013. Morphology, the study of form or shape, is the
foundational field for a diversity of areas of biological research including
developmental biology, biomechanics, paleontology and evolutionary biology.
Symposium topics are forward looking and interdisciplinary, and include sessions
on Hominin evolution, the function and evolution of the nose, the function of
non-contractile components of muscle and the curation and analysis of 3-D data.
The Congress will bring together leaders in the field from around the world,
students and post-doctoral fellows, and integrative scientists from related
disciplines. The international nature of the meeting is an excellent opportunity
for students, postdoctoral researchers and junior faculty to develop productive
collaborations with non-US researchers and to gain new insights and perspectives
about the conduct of scientific research and infrastructure in different
countries. The funding will be used to partially offset the travel and
registration costs for 25 presenters at the meeting. Travel support provided
through this award will be aimed at broadening participation in the meeting
ensuring that greater numbers of women and members of underrepresented groups of
US researchers will be able to attend. Among other broader impacts of the
Congress will be the (1) integration and communication of research, (2)
enhancement of research infrastructure through the encouragement of partnerships
and collaborations, and (3) broad dissemination of research through publication
of abstracts and posters. The posters will be available through the open source
Faculty of 1000 web site.