* 1306108
* Single-Molecule Methods for Interfacial Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 493,000.00

In this research project funded by the Chemical Measurements and Imaging program
in the Chemistry Division, Prof. Daniel K Schwartz and his group at the
University of Colorado at Boulder will develop single-molecule (SM) imaging
methods, based on total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy,
including dynamic SM resonance energy transfer (RET) methods, to probe the nm-
scale molecular environment and molecular conformation, while simultaneously
observing dynamic molecular behavior at the solid/liquid interface, including
adsorption, desorption, intermolecular association (i.e., aggregation), and
interfacial diffusion. Specific experiments are being performed that will (1)
link molecular conformation directly to interfacial dynamics, and (2) explicitly
probe the dynamics of intermolecular association (e.g. clustering, aggregation)
in the near-surface environment. Some of the new methods involve intermolecular
RET between mobile donor-labeled probes and an acceptor-labeled molecular
matrix. These methods provide direct information about the ways in which the
interfacial environment affects adsorption, surface residence time, interfacial
mobility, and molecular recognition kinetics. Other methods use intramolecular
RET to probe conformational changes of polypeptides and oligonucleotides, and to
correlate these conformational changes with dynamic interfacial behavior.

The methods developed as part of this research represent enabling new techniques
that will be broadly used in the research community to study materials
interfaces, especially "wet" interfaces of soft materials such as polymers. An
improved understanding of these phenomena will lead to improvements in
biomaterials, pharmaceutical separations and formulation, medical diagnostics
based on molecular recognition, and self-assembled nanomaterials. Interactions
between surfaces and biomolecules have widespread relevance to biotechnology and
human health, affecting medical diagnostics, therapeutic protein stability,
vaccine efficacy/safety, and biomaterial design. In particular, the methods
developed here will be widely-applicable to biomaterials characterization,
permitting a new level of understanding of the ways in which surface chemistry
influences molecular conformation and lateral interactions. The researchers
involved in this project will gain expertise in multidisciplinary areas
projected to be at the forefront of science and technology in the coming
decades, including single-molecule microscopy and self-assembled molecular
systems. Also, through their participation in a variety of educational and
outreach programs, the researchers will share this project with students,
teachers, and other community members.