* 1306388
* Chemical orthogonality in tandem differential mobility spectrometry at ambient pressure
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Gary Eiceman, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2016
* USD 399,998.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Office of Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), Professor Gary Eiceman at New Mexico State University and his
group will explore and develop enhanced capabilities in chemical measurements
using ion mobility spectrometry (IMS). Increases in specificity of a chemical
identification of substances through IMS will be introduced using orthogonality
provided by ion transformations in a tandem differential IMS analyzer. Ions
which are mobility selected in a first mobility analyzer and passed into a
reactive zone, are subsequently reacted or fragmented using molecule selective
pathways before entering a second mobility analyzer. Orthogonality can be added
through changes in strong electric fields and studies will disclose
quantitatively the effect of field strength and ion structure on dissociation or
fragmentation reactions. Investigations will focus, for selected pharmaceutical
substances and pesticides, on the stability and mobility of clusters formed
between sample-derived ions and specific reagent gases. The influence on ion
chemistry and chemical orthogonality of temperature, moisture, and vapor
concentrations in air at ambient pressure will be explored and assessed for
specificity of chemical measurements toward a next generation of IMS
instruments. Ion mobility spectrometry is central to military preparedness and
commercial aviation security with emerging impact in clinical diagnostics and
industrial process control. Impacts of these studies should include the
education of a new generation of students in gas phase ion-molecule chemistry at
ambient pressure and should provide new capabilities for specific measurement
challenges within industry and government.