* 1306507
* Semiconductor Belts, Sheets, and Wires Having Idealized Optical and Transport Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* William Buhro, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

William E. Buhro is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry to perform a thorough
experimental study of the synthesis and optical properties of 1D and 2D
colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals optimized for long-range charge and energy
(exciton) transport. An exciting aspect of 1D and 2D nanocrystals having
extended length dimensions, such as quantum wires, quantum belts, nanoribbons,
and nanosheets, is their potential for transporting energy and charge over
lengths approaching the millimeter scale. As transport is intimately involved in
nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, and solar-energy conversion, large potential
advantages exist for the use of 1D and 2D nanocrystals in such applications. The
semiconductor 1D and 2D nanocrystal fields are now poised for rapid development.
As a result of recent advances in surface passivation, some resulting from the
prior NSF funding to the PI, quantum wires and nanowires are now available with
excellent passivation and optical properties, and further rapid advances appear
imminent. The 2D colloidal nanocrystal field is in its infancy, surface
passivation and optical properties are initially good, and the field is
developing at a very fast pace. A catalog is being constructed of 1D and 2D
nanocrystals capable of efficient long-range transport as well as corresponding
synthetic and structural strategies. This work strives to solve a long-standing
problem with the currently available 1D colloidal nanowires, which are poorly
passivated and have correspondingly poor transport properties. The specific
goals of the proposed work are to (1) advance core-shell strategies for
optimizing the optical properties and photoluminescence efficiencies of
semiconductor quantum wires, by oxidative substitution, and by the new colloidal
atomic-layer-deposition (c-ALD) method, (2) isolate and further characterize
magic-size II-VI nanoclusters to provide experimental structural and
spectroscopic data, (3) investigate magic-size nanoclusters as low-temperature
nanocrystal precursors, (4) develop methods for gaining control over quantum-
belt lengths, widths, and thicknesses, and (5) explore the synthesis and
spectroscopic properties of quantum platelets and sheets of II-VI, IV-VI, and
I-III-VI semiconductors.

There is considerable interest in incorporating semiconductor nanocrystals into
next-generation devices for solar-energy conversion. Solar cells constructed
from semiconductor nanostructures are expected to be fabricated more
economically than the traditional silicon-based devices, and to have other
application advantages. A solar cell functions by capturing light energy and
converting it to energetic positive and negative electric charges, which are
then separated and transported to opposite electrodes in the cell. This provides
electrical energy for charging a battery or operating an electrical appliance.
The critical steps are thus the efficient separation of the positive and
negative charges and the efficient transport of those charges to the electrodes.
1D and 2D semiconductor nanocrystals are targeted for use in new solar-cell
designs because they can in principle transport energy and charge over long
distances. However, efficient transport requires that charges not be trapped at
defect sites in the nanocrystals. This project is aiming to identify and
eliminate those trap-site defects, enabling the application of 1D and 2D
semiconductor nanocrystals in solar cells, nanoelectronics, and in small-scale
devices for light detection and generation. The broader impacts include
technological advances to assist in addressing the nation's energy challenge.
The PI also has an excellent record of training women and members of
underrepresented groups, thereby increasing the diversity of the nation's
technological work force. The PI is co-leading an effort at Washington
University to increase the retention of undergraduate women in science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields.