* 1306063
* Protein Translocation Using Chimeric Toxins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Andrew Feig, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Andrew Feig from Wayne State University to study a new
approach to using chimeric proteins that can spontaneously transport themselves
across the cellular membrane of eukaryotic cells. The chimeric proteins will be
built using a scaffold based on toxins from Clostridium difficile. These toxins
kill host cells by transporting a glucosyltransferase that initiates apoptosis
by modifying cellular G-proteins. The Feig team works to remove the natural
catalytic domain and replace it with designed cargos. This is expected to allow
for the delivery of metabolically active proteins in lieu of the natural cargo
domain. Chimeras are to be optimized to improve their delivery properties and
test the limits to which this technology can be pushed to regulate cellular
functions by direct protein delivery to cells. In addition, the possibility to
replace the domain of the toxin that normally binds the cell surface with
fragments that recognize specific receptors is being explored. The goal is to
effectively target cargo delivery to only those cells expressing the designated
partner. This would achieve a holy grail of protein delivery since it would
provide tunable cell selectivity and deliver tagless proteins directly to the
cytosolic compartment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists have, for many years,
manipulated cells to study the way in which individual proteins contribute to
cellular functions. However, a major limitation of this approach is that one is
limited to those building blocks available in the cell since the proteins are
still translated by the ribosome. This work will further develop technology that
was recently put forth by the Feig Lab that allows properly designed proteins to
transport themselves across the cell membrane releasing an active protein in the
cytosol without any residual tags. There are many potential uses for such
technology including the targeted delivery of protein therapeutics, the delivery
of modified proteins that can be easily tracked within the cell to study their
fate and the manipulation of cellular pathways. The project will be integrated
with faculty development work that the principal investigator is involved with
that trains new faculty in the fields of Chemistry and Biochemistry to use
evidence-based teaching methods in the classroom and to better assess the
quality of student learning in real-time.