* 1306844
* Fundamental Studies on Transport of Ions and Large Penetrants Through Structured Polymer Matrices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Venkat Ganesan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education on polymeric membranes possessing both enhanced mechanical and
electrochemical properties. Recent experiments aiming to develop polymeric
membranes with these properties explore a variety of strategies, including
cross-linking of the conductive homopolymers, use of inorganic fillers to create
polymer nanocomposite membranes, and using diblock copolymers in which a
mechanically strong block complements the conducting phase. While mechanical
properties can be enhanced by such means, intriguing observations have also been
noted in the dependencies of transport properties upon the physicochemical
parameters that characterize these modified polymer
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated to understand the transport
properties, the PI plans to study the physics of diffusion processes involving
ions and large molecule penetrants in two broad classes of systems: (i) Polymer
membranes containing nanoparticulate fillers: the PI aims to use a hybrid
simulation approach combining atomistic level molecular dynamics with a coarse-
grained kinetic Monte Carlo approach to probe the mechanistic origins of the
behavior of the conductivity of polymer nanocomposite membranes. The PI will use
such a simulation approach to interrogate the filler-induced modifications to
the ion motion, complexation and polymer motion, and to unravel the roles of the
polymer-filler interactions and particle concentrations; (ii)
Nanostructured/self-assembled block copolymer membranes: The PI plans to use a
coarse-grained bond fluctuation Monte Carlo simulation approach to probe the
mechanistic underpinnings of the behavior of the conductivity and transport
properties of block copolymer membranes. In particular, the PI proposes to use
simulations within the context of a non-charged, selective solvent
representation of the ion to unravel the interplay between ion motion, polymer
dynamics, the morphology of self-assembly, and composition fluctuations upon the
macroscopic transport properties of the membrane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is expected to result in a better understanding of the mechanisms
underlying ion and large molecule penetrant diffusion in such structured and
inhomogeneous polymeric matrices. Advances in computational approaches and
theoretical models for studying ionic and penetrant transport using atomistic
and coarse-grained simulations will be made in the course of this project.
Resulting methods may also have applications to fuel cells and water
purification membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational broader impacts are
integrated with research aims, and include opportunities for undergraduate
researchers to participate in this project with an aim to include students from
community colleges. An international workshop devoted to fundamental aspects of
coarse-graining the equilibrium and dynamical aspects of soft-matter systems
will also be organized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education that can contribute to developing improved batteries and fuel cells.
Electrochemical devices such as batteries and fuel cells have recently become
popular in the quest for clean and sustainable energy sources. Many present-day
batteries involve the presence of a liquid electrolyte which serves to conduct
ions between the positively charged terminal and the negatively charged
terminal. However, the presence of this liquid component leads to potential
safety issues. To enhance safety, researchers seek to develop conducting media,
electrolytes, which are non-flammable but still ensure efficient operation of
the batteries. In this context, plastics have emerged as potential candidates.
However, it remains a challenge to design plastic materials that are strong
enough and have properties that lead to efficient battery
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop computer-based tools to
investigate new classes of polymeric materials which have been demonstrated to
possess properties desirable for batteries. The computer-based tools will
provide means to interrogate the operation of the polymeric materials and
thereby suggest directions for designing new materials with better and improved
properties. The tools developed in this project are can be adapted to study
other renewable energy options such as fuel cells and the operation of water
purification membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create new
research opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students to study the
newly emerging classes of materials and thereby suggest strategies for improving
their properties. Moreover, new courses and demonstration modules will be
designed to educate students and the public on the principles underlying devices
such as fuel cells, batteries, and solar cells.