* 1306969
* Collaborative Research: Modeling &amp; Model Systems for Adsorbate Behavior in Lateral Confinement
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ludwig Bartels, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry Division, Prof. Theodore L. Einstein of
University of Maryland and Prof. Ludwig Bartels of&lt;br/&gt;the University of
California, Riverside, and their students will use a combination of scanning
tunneling&lt;br/&gt;microscopy and methods of statistical mechanics, especially
Monte Carlo simulations and lattice-gas&lt;br/&gt;modeling, to understand the
formation of large regular self-organized networks of acene-
related&lt;br/&gt;molecules on substrates with prominent metallic surface states
and the role of the resulting nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;pores in providing boundaries
that modify the arrangements and reactions of small adsorbates like
CO&lt;br/&gt;therein. With international collaborators we will test theories of
modification (from large surfaces) key&lt;br/&gt;reaction rates because of
altered entropy of mixing in the confined pores and will study the relation of
the&lt;br/&gt;superstructure to the surface state on the close-packed face of
the copper substrate and investigate the&lt;br/&gt;corrections to a simple
picture of dot-induced pore formation. We will also take advantage of research
in&lt;br/&gt;two dimensional (2D) materials dominated by electronic states with
many similarities to metallic
surface&lt;br/&gt;states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide state
of the art modeling and/or laboratory experiences for graduate
and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students who will be learning the techniques of
scanning probe microscopy and&lt;br/&gt;complementary Monte Carlo simulations
and calculations of correlation functions, as well as ab
initio&lt;br/&gt;electronic structure calculations to help parameterize the
statistical mechanical studies. The project&lt;br/&gt;consists of an exploration
of the formation of regular porous superstructures by organic molecules
on&lt;br/&gt;substrates with slowly decaying 2D electronic states. The
validation of the novel explanation of pore&lt;br/&gt;stabilization by 2D
quantum-dot-like states will be pursued. The impact of such states on the
distribution&lt;br/&gt;of small adsorbates (especially carbon monoxide) within
the pore will be scrutinized. Calculations of&lt;br/&gt;associated parameters
will require use of the latest advances in incorporating van der Waals
interactions&lt;br/&gt;into density functional theory computations. Through
leadership by a theorist experienced in statistical&lt;br/&gt;physics, this
project will foster systematic perspective, deeper understanding and faster
testing of results&lt;br/&gt;for phase and pattern formation and predictions
promising alternative substrates and adsorbates. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed work is
expected to have impact on industrial methodologies and society at large by
providing&lt;br/&gt;access to large arrays of identical nanoscale cells in which
one can do the experimental equivalent of&lt;br/&gt;parallel computation.
Control of such structures will allow tuning of cell sizes to select for
favorable&lt;br/&gt;configurations and enhance particular reactions, as well as
to explore natural fluctuations. The work will&lt;br/&gt;also provide
opportunities for educational and outreach activities with proven broad
national,&lt;br/&gt;international and societal impact.