* 1306101
* On the Novel Properties of Ir Modified Si(001) and Si(111) Surfaces: Nanowires and Rashba Type Spin-Orbit Splitting
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Nuri Oncel, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 05/31/2017
* USD 358,611.00

Technical Description: This research project investigates iridium modified
silicon surfaces at (001) and (111) orientations using surface science tools
such as scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, low energy electron
diffraction, and Auger electron spectroscopy. The project contains two major
research components. The first component focuses on iridium silicide nanowires
formed on Si(001) surface. The physical and electronic properties of these
nanowires are investigated. The second research component is on the electronic
properties of the root-7 by root-7 phase observed on Ir/Si(111) surface. The
research is carried out at the University of North Dakota, in collaboration with
other scientists nationally and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: Investigation of the initial stages of thin-film growth
on various semiconductor surfaces is important because of the technological
relevance of these interfaces and the novel physics that these interfaces
exhibit. This research project focuses on iridium-silicon interface, which has
not been investigated extensively. In addition to the fundamental understanding
gained during the course of the project, graduate and undergraduate students are
trained in the art of research. The students involved in this project learn
technologically relevant topics such as nanoelectronics, low-dimensional
physics, and semiconductors. In addition, the project includes outreach
activities that are designed to attract participants from local/tribal high-
school students.