* 1306296
* Domain Walls in Ferromagnetic Shape Memory Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 06/30/2017
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Aberration-corrected Lorentz Transmission Electron
Microscopy (LTEM) will be used to study magnetic domain wall behavior in a
number of multi-ferroic materials which exhibit multiple phase transitions, each
giving rise to a fine-scale domain microstructure. The interactions between
these domains (for instance, between crystallographic twin boundaries and
magnetic domain walls, or between anti-phase boundaries and magnetic domain
walls) is the main focus of the proposed research. Magnetic materials form an
important class of materials for a wide variety of engineering applications and
it is important to understand how they behave under a changing magnetic field.
When an applied field is reversed, the magnetization in the material will
attempt to follow the direction of the field, but this reversal process is
strongly influenced by the presence of other crystallographic entities, such as
interfaces and line defects. Phase reconstructed LTEM is the technique of choice
to determine the local magnetization state and the potential interactions
between domain walls and lattice defects. The alloys of choice are the
ferromagnetic shape memory alloys with compositions near the stoichiometric
Ni2MnGa compound and Fe-Pd alloys with around 30 at% Pd. The proposed research
will consist of experimental observations of domain walls in static and dynamic
conditions, supported by image simulations based on micro-magnetic models. In
addition, Magnetic Force Microscopy (MFM) and Electron Channeling Contrast
Imaging (ECCI, in a scanning electron microscope) will be employed to image
micro-structural features as well as surface-penetrating defects at a number of
different length scales. The improved spatial resolution offered by aberration-
corrected LTEM will enable this quantitative study of static and dynamic domain
wall processes, and will make it possible to obtain 3-D information about the
magnetization state of the material by carrying out observations with different
viewing directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research program will study how the magnetization state of a material
changes when a slowly changing magnetic field is applied. A specialized
experimental technique, making use of a transmission electron microscope, will
be used to visualize the magnetization pattern, either as a static pattern, or
as a dynamic changing pattern when a field is applied. Magnetic materials form
an important class of materials for advanced engineering applications; for
instance, in a modern car, there are several hundred magnets for a variety of
components (electric motors, door locks, and various sensors). Understanding the
behavior of these materials while they are used in a changing magnetic field is
crucial in the context of energy efficiency. The proposed research may also have
an impact in the area of novel magnetic recording media. The experimental
protocols used during this research as well as direct observations will be made
available to the broader scientific community. The educational component of the
proposed program has the potential to impact middle and high school science
education in several schools in the greater Pittsburgh area. The program will
make several scanning electron microscopes available to students in local middle
and high schools, and will educate a number of science teachers so that they can
use these microscopes in their class rooms. In addition, the proposed program
will provide an opportunity to a number of undergraduate material students to
carry out research in the area of mineral identification through collaboration
with the Hillman Hall of Minerals and Gems in the Carnegie Museum of Natural
History located right next to Carnegie Mellon University.