* 1306110
* Immunomodulatory ultrathin coatings for pancreatic islet transplantation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Eugenia Kharlampieva, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2017
* USD 499,998.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1306110 PI: Kharlampieva, Eugenia ORG: University of
Alabama-Birmingham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Immunomodulatory Ultrathin
Multilayer Coatings for Pancreatic Islet
Transplantation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Although transplantation of
pancreatic islet cells has emerged as a promising treatment for Type 1 diabetes,
its clinical application remains limited due to adverse effects of
immunosuppression and declining allograft function. To overcome these hurdles, a
preclinical approach to protect isolated islets and to modulate autoimmune
responses in Type 1 diabetes is proposed. The goal of this proposal is to
develop novel cytoprotective coatings with controlled immunomodulatory and
inflammatory responses, and to gain insight into the fundamental mechanism of
the coating activity to preserve islet viability and function. These coatings
will be designed through layer-by-layer hydrogen-bonded assembly of
cytocompatible macromolecules with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
characteristics. The objectives of the proposed study are as follows: (1)
Synthesize ultrathin coating materials with a layer-by-layer hydrogen-bonded
assembly approach. A series of novel functional copolymers with antioxidant
metalloporphyrin modality will be synthesized and self-assembled through
hydrogen-bonding interactions. (2) Define the immunomodulatory effects of
'islet-free' coatings in vitro. A novel polymer coating with advanced
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity will be obtained. The coatings are
adaptable and can be further modified to facilitate non-invasive imaging. (3)
Evaluate the immunomodulatory effects of 'on-islet' coating in response to
immune challenges in vitro. These efforts will establish fundamental
correlations with biomaterial properties and islet function, and provide
transformative knowledge for modification of other living cell types in a rapid
and efficient manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: The proposed research
presents new opportunities for the development of novel cytoprotective materials
to be used for basic research applications as well as a cell-based
transplantation therapy for diabetic recipients. Our proposal is particularly
timely since current islet encapsulation systems are challenging for
transplantations due to high cytotoxicity and the requirement for large
injection volumes. The design of novel immunoprotective materials will open new
prospects for developing biomaterials with unique characteristics having
applications in various bio-related areas such as bioengineering and tissue
engineering. The educational objective of this project is to develop a
discovery-driven, multidisciplinary biomaterials/polymer sciences program at UAB
to promote diversity from the high school through graduate-level. The PI is
currently developing a polymer science program at UAB with a specific focus on
biomaterials at the B.S. and Ph.D. levels. High school, undergraduate, and
graduate students, including underrepresented minorities, will be trained in
modern aspects of biopolymer science including state-of-the-art synthetic and
analytical methods, and will take part in intensive multidisciplinary
collaborations throughout and beyond UAB. The proposed activities will develop
interdisciplinary collaborative research between the Departments of Chemistry,
Surgery, and Microbiology. These collaborative efforts will stimulate awareness
of the needs of the UAB biomedical research community for specialized polymer-
based biomaterials as novel platforms for cell transplantation therapy. The
results will be disseminated through publications in peer-reviewed journals and
presentations at national and international scientific conferences.