* 1306665
* Biomimetic Tissue Analogs via Micropatterned Deposition of Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ozan Akkus, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 397,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1306665 PI: Akkus, Ozan ORG: Case Western Reserve

Title: Biomimetic Tissue Analogs via Micropatterned Deposition of Proteins

Technical: Fabrication of mechanically robust biomaterials that also possess
sufficient porosity for cell and blood vessel penetration remains a major
challenge, particularly in engineering of load bearing musculoskeletal tissues.
The proposed research will be groundbreaking through electrochemical-compaction
(ELC) of collagen-rich protein solution using micropatterned electrodes, thus
creating the provision for designing arrays of pores with controlled size and
distribution. The utility of ELC will be assessed in terms of fabricating
scaffolds for tendon repair. First aim studies will provide fundamental insight
on the effects of matrix anisotropy and matrix modulus (in a range of MPa to
GPa) on differentiation and matrix deposition by adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (aMSCs). The topographical differentiation cues will be
supplemented with compositional cues by including dermatan sulfate (DS), a
glycosaminoglycan richly present in tendon, in the matrix. That material
formulation determined to be the most conducive to desired cell response will be
used in second phase studies during which key technologies such as CAD, CAM and
FEM will be used collectively to design for optimal lattice micromorphology
resulting in robust macroscale mechanical function. Computationally meritorious
scaffold structures will be fabricated using computer controlled fabrication
methods and cellularized to screen cell response in the 3D environment.

Non-Technical: Tendon degeneration, particularly those associated with aging at
the shoulder, is a widespread health problem that is affecting hundreds of
thousands and imposing a substantial burden on the economy. There is a lack of
mechanically robust scaffolds to repair tendon, and most biomaterials are
applied as reinforcement patches over the injured tendon. The proposed pattern
deposition technology presents a viable alternative as a 3D bioactive framework
to regenerate tendons. This carries the potential to improve the current
treatment modalities. The proposed research will also develop an enabling
technology that can be extended to other tissues such as bone, ligament, liver,
and vascular structures. Patterned deposition of interconnected controlled pore
space allows for enhanced mass-transport, creating the opportunity for
engineering larger tissue volumes. One of the merits of the proposed studies is
understanding the relative roles of matrix anisotropy and matrix stiffness in
inducing marrow-derived stem cells to become tendon cells in the absence of
growth factors. Achievement of differentiation by mechano-compositional cues is
highly significant, because growth factors are expensive and heavily regulated.
The outreach component of the proposed project will foster undergraduate
students' interests in scaffold design and fabrication through interdisciplinary
senior design teams and research engagement. Undergraduate students will be
exposed to the emerging field of biofabrication by: (a) accommodating one
undergraduate student (full-time summer) for each year of the project, and (b)
mentoring senior design teams on topics that map to the proposed activities. The
emerging field of biofabrication is important in the new economy, and the
proposed activities aim to inspire the innovators of the future.