* 1306204
* Quantitative Biosensing at the Single-Molecule Level
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Joel Harris, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2016
* USD 521,900.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program of the Division of Chemistry
is supporting Professor Joel M. Harris and his students at the University of
Utah to develop new microscopy methods to help understand and optimize sensors
for ultrasensitive detection of target biomolecules, including DNA and proteins.
These goals are being addressed through the quantitative imaging of individual
molecules. Single-molecule fluorescence imaging can provide absolute coverage
information of both binding sites and bound target molecules on a biosensor
surface. This technique represents quantitative analysis at the ultimate limit
of counting individual molecules. It is first being applied to studies of
peptide binding to lipid bilayers that is relevant to cell signaling and to the
behavior of proteins at biosensor surfaces. Quantitative single-molecule imaging
is also being adapted to measuring DNA hybridization, which forms the basis of
genetic testing and gene-chip applications. The influence of electrostatic
interactions on DNA binding is being studied in order to understand how ionic
strength acts at controlling variability in DNA sensor applications. Single-
molecule imaging can also serve as an analytical method, where counting
individual bound DNA molecules on a capture surface enables detection of
extremely low concentrations of target DNA in biological specimens. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The program is assembling new instrumentation capable of imaging
single molecules and data analysis methods for quantitative detection of
molecules in the images. This research will provide routes to new understanding
of structural factors that influence the performance of biosensors that are used
to detect disease and toxins. The research also advances fundamental
understanding of protein-membrane interactions and DNA hybridization kinetics,
which are critical to development of new pharmaceuticals and biotechnologies.
The research provides multidisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate
students in spectroscopy, microscopy, and bioanalytical chemistry and supports
several collaborations with other research groups. The project also impacts K-12
science education and public awareness through development of microscopy
exercises and their deployment in classrooms of a Title I elementary school in
Salt Lake City.