* 1306134
* Genetic and Behavioral Predictors of Susceptibility to Social Stress
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Noah Snyder-Mackler, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 11/30/2015
* USD 199,449.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong relationship between chronic
social stress and adverse health outcomes, including higher mortality rates, is
well established. However, the mechanisms through which this relationship
arises, as well as predictors of variation in individual response to social
stressors, remain poorly understood. Research on this topic is complicated by
the need to integrate tools, analytical methods, and perspectives that bridge
multiple disciplines, including animal behavior, psychology, sociology, and
genetics and genomics. The research in this project draws on tools and theories
from these fields to investigate two potential mechanisms that mediate the
response to social stress: behavioral strategies - particularly the
establishment of close social bonds; and genetic variation, which may alter
individual susceptibility to these effects. To do so, it utilizes a powerful
animal model for social stress, dominance rank in captive female rhesus
macaques. Specifically, it tests how social bonds, genetic variation, and the
combination of the two modify biological responses to social stress, as measured
by genome-wide gene expression. This project therefore expands on previous
demonstrations that dominance rank-induced stress has potent effects on gene
regulation. The significance of this work is three-fold. First, it reveals how
individual variation in behavioral strategies and genotype alleviate or
exacerbate the detrimental effects of chronic stress. Second, it identifies what
physiological processes are altered by behavioral strategies and genetic
variation. Finally, it presents a valuable opportunity to train the PI (Fellow)
in new areas, including psychology, genetics, and genomics, that will be
important to his development as an independent interdisciplinary
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this proposal are three-fold: 1) It promotes teaching,
training and learning not only through mentorship of the Fellow, but also by
including him in the training of undergraduate students at Duke. Specifically,
the Fellow trains two undergraduates in data collection, analysis, synthesis and
presentation, with the ultimate goal of having the undergraduates present their
findings as part of one of Duke's undergraduate research poster symposiums. 2)
It promotes public interest and understanding of scientific research through
presentations by the PI on animal behavior, evolution, and social and behavioral
studies to local K-12 schools in Durham and Chapel Hill, and to a public
audience at the Nature Research Center (part of the North Carolina Museum of
Natural Sciences). 3) Finally, it contributes to society as a whole by improving
the understanding of how adverse social environments, many of which are
associated with low socioeconomic status, promote disparities in health and well
being. Such findings are critical both to identifying the most susceptible
members of the population, and to establishing effective interventions to
alleviate the adverse effects of social stress.