* 1306571
* RUI: Critical Models of Two Dimensional Statistical Mechanics. A Mathematical Approach
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Pierluigi Falco, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2014
* USD 25,906.00

The long-standing interest of the Mathematical Physics community in critical
models of two-dimensional Statistical Mechanics has recently had an intense
revival due to two major ideas coming from Probability: the description of
random interfaces in terms of the Schramm-Lowner-Evolution (SLE), and the study
of the conformal invariance of the large scale properties by means of the
discrete complex analysis. This research project deals with that aspect of the
theory of Statistical Mechanics, the universality in dimension two, but has an
independent origin and a different specific objective. It uses a mathematical
approach that is natural and effective for studying the critical exponents of
correlations: the physicists' Renormalization Group (RG) in a rigorous
mathematical reformulation. There are two types of systems of major interest in
this project: a) Coulomb systems; b) spin, dimer and vertex models. After many
years of studies, it seemed that, with very few exactly solvable exceptions, it
was not possible to arrive at a rigorous computation of critical exponents of
these models. The PI has recently achieved, independently and in collaborations,
significant progress in the RG technique, which has shown that critical
exponents in both cases are in fact accessible. This project aims for
completions and extensions of such results; and opens the way to a re-blossoming
of the field. Physicists have devoted considerable efforts to test the
predictions of Statistical Mechanics on real materials. Recent experiments,
performed in space (Shuttle space missions, MIR, ISS), showed a spectacular
agreement between collected data and theoretical computations of critical
exponents of second-order phase transitions. Yet the theory lacks, almost
completely, mathematical rigor. The PI's research activity, already accomplished
or planned in this project, represents a concrete stimulation for re-starting
the grand endeavor of filling this gap. Broader Impact: Reconciling experimental
physics with mathematics is fascinating and intellectually rewarding. The PI
will engage masters degree students in such an activity by mentoring them in
related educational or research works that are focused on comparative studies of
different methods of exact solution of dimer and Ising models. In the experience
of the PI this subject always strikes the students as being one of those
fortunate cases in which the knowledge of linear algebra and rudimentary
combinatorics, accompanied by enough patience, suffices to arrive at the
forefront of the research! The PI teaches in a large undergraduate institution
with high Hispanic enrollment and a large number of students who are first in
their families to go to college. The student training has the ambition of
building in talented students the self-confidence for continuing their studies
in a PhD program: in the optimal case, original results in connection with the
main research project will be produced; in a less fortunate case, students may
still develop enthusiasm and a limited, but significant, expertise in
mathematical and physical sciences.