* 1306808
* RUI: An Inverse Problem Approach to Stiffness Mapping for Early Detection of Breast Cancer
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Lorraine Olson, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 349,802.00

Manual breast exams and mammograms are currently the most effective and widely
used techniques for early detection of breast cancer. Unfortunately, manual
breast exams are limited in their ability to detect tumors since they only
produce local information about the site where the force is applied. In
addition, mammograms do not quantify tissue stiffness, an identifying
characteristic of breast tumors. This project's long-term goal is to develop a
system that automates, quantifies, and enhances the resolution of the manual
breast exam. An electro-mechanical device will gently indent the tissue surface
in various locations, recording the tissue surface deflections. This deflection
data will be used with inverse techniques to provide detailed 3D maps of the
elastic modulus of the interior of the breast tissue.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research takes an approach to early detection
of breast cancer that utilizes a fundamental mechanical difference between
cancerous and noncancerous tissue via an inverse problem approach. Although this
stiffness difference is the basis of breast palpation, it has not been
systematically investigated from an engineering point of view. Insights gained
in this study may also have broad implications for flaw detection and
localization of sparse sources.

Broader Impact: This system has the potential to significantly increase the
early detection of breast cancer with no unnecessary radiation, essentially no
risk, and with little additional cost. Nearly forty undergraduate students will
engage in interdisciplinary research that can make a difference in someone's
life, and develop outreach programs to impact over a hundred middle school
students.