* 1306133
* Collaborative Research:Transfer Learning for Chemical Analyses from Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Melinda Dyar, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 141,129.00

With support from the Chemical Measurements and Imaging program, Professors
Melinda Dyar of Mt. Holyoke College and Sridhar Mahadevan of University of
Massachusetts at Amherst and their students will use laser-induced breakdown
spectroscopy (LIBS) measurements, including laboratory investigations of
standard materials at varying experimental conditions, to develop numerical
methods that will address limitations to the broad application of LIBS imposed
by matrix effects and plasma variability. State-of-the-art dimensionality
reduction and transfer learning methods from machine learning and statistics
will be used to build innovative LIBS-based predictive models. These
investigations will extend classical methods in statistics for dealing with
multiple paired data sets, such as canonical correlational analysis, to deal
with unlabeled data, and extract nonlinear low-dimensional regularities in the
data. The project includes the design of a suite of model-building tools that
can deal with a range of problems and optimization objectives, including
different types of correspondence information available across datasets,
diversity of global objectives ranging from preserving local to global geometry,
and producing linear or nonlinear mappings to lower-dimensional factors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) is a chemical
analysis tool that uses the light emitted by a sample when a focused laser pulse
generates a plasma at the sample surface. LIBS has a number of features that
make it particularly useful for field use, including rapid analysis, minimal
sample preparation and suitability for stand-off, that is remote, detection.
Moreover, LIBS can detect and quantify light elements that are not always
measured using other methods. Consequently, LIBS is well-suited to many
applications including, defense interests (e.g., military explosive detection,
illegal drug detection, airport security), in-situ analysis of archeological
sites, field work at hazardous waste sites, and geological resource exploration.
However, utilization of LIBS measurements is limited by signal variability with
measurement and sample conditions. This project launches an integrated research
program to couple state of the art LIBS instrumentation at Mount Holyoke College
to equally state of the art numerical methodology in artificial intelligence and
machine learning at the nearby University of Massachusetts to increase the
utility of LIBS measurements. This project will provide an interdisciplinary
training environment that includes undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral
researchers.