* 1306196
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Jonathan Jacobs, Jacobs                  Jonathan       M
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 08/31/2015
* USD 161,552.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship award to Dr. Jonathan M. Jacobs is
supported by both the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Office of
International Science and Engineering at the National Science Foundation. During
the 24-month fellowship, Dr. Jacobs will work on a project titled, "Virulence
effectors-triggered production of plant regulatory sRNA as a novel strategy to
silence rice immune signaling by a bacterial pathogen" under the sponsorship of
Dr. Sébastien Cunnac at the Institut de recherche pour le développment (IRD) in
Montpellier, France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small RNAs (sRNAs) have emerged in
eukaryotes as important regulatory players in gene expression of many biological
functions including stress responses. The nature of sRNA biogenesis and activity
remains heavily underexplored in model systems of important crops such as rice
(Oryza sativa) during biotic attack. The aim of the proposed research include
understanding sRNA biogenesis and activity in rice upon infection by the
bacterial plant pathogen, Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae. This project will
employ bacterial and plant genetics and molecular biology to define the
mechanisms that govern pathogen-dependent sRNA biogenesis and activity. This
research will expand our basic understanding of plant-microbe interactions and
host immunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X. oryzae pv. oryzae causes bacterial blight
of rice, arguably the most important disease of rice worldwide, and the broader
impacts of this research include increasing knowledge of a major plant disease
on a globally important crop. The fellow will develop strong international
connections between the French and US agricultural research community by
participating in a multidisciplinary research team at a leading French
agricultural research institute. The fellowship training will also include
mentorship of students from diverse backgrounds, which will strengthen the
fellow?s research program upon return to the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides a unique opportunity for a US scientist to collaborate with foreign
scientists, and utilize the unique facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions available abroad.