* 1306783
* Renewal of Support for Short-range Tests of Gravity at Humboldt State University
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Charles Hoyle, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 155,746.00

This award supports research in the Humboldt State University Gravitational
Physics Laboratory (HSU GPL). Precision experiments will test the Weak
Equivalence Principle (WEP) of General Relativity and the gravitational Inverse-
Square Law (ISL) at unprecedented levels. The WEP will be tested at the
millimeter scale and the ISL will be probed over sub-millimeter distances with
unmatched sensitivity down to approximately 25 microns. In recent years the
study of the gravitational interaction at short (sub-millimeter) distance scales
has gained much attention due in a large part to unification scenarios arising
in string or M-theory that require more than three spatial dimensions, some of
which could be macroscopic. Short-range tests of gravity and the WEP also
investigate possible proposed mechanisms that endeavor to explain the
accelerated expansion of the universe, generally attributed to Dark Energy.
Finally, such tests present the possibility to search for hypothetical new
interactions due to exotic particles or other phenomena. Many scenarios
concerning these effects predict a violation of the WEP or ISL at short
distances. Since 1999, experimental limits have improved dramatically so that
the ISL has proven valid over distances down to approximately 55 microns. A
dedicated test of the WEP, however, has not been performed below the millimeter
scale. The initial work described in this proposal will probe the WEP at the
millimeter scale and below. This measurement will be accomplished with a
parallel-plate torsion pendulum design that will provide an essentially null
experiment and use multiple composition dipole combinations. Subsequently, a
more difficult test of the gravitational ISL will be pursued by decreasing the
pendulum/attractor mass separation to 100 microns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Humboldt State University is in a predominantly rural area of Northern
California and the GPL is the only dedicated physics research laboratory in the
Department of Physics and Astronomy. This award ensures that our undergraduates
gain valuable research skills necessary for continuation of studies or pursuit
of a career in industry. Undergraduates will also be sent to perform research at
the University of Washington through a collaboration formed with a gravity
research group there. Alumni of the laboratory have secured graduate fellowships
and industrial positions. This award greatly contributes to the valuable
expansion of research at HSU in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;Within the major
program, software developed for data acquisition and analysis will be
transferable to educational opportunities in the upper division classroom. This
award also allows undergraduates to participate in valuable dissemination
efforts through presentations at national and regional conferences as well as
publication of research results. Finally, tests of gravity are of great interest
to research in diverse fields ranging from astrophysics and cosmology to
particle physics and precision measurement science.