* 1306493
* Studying the ATP Cosubstrate Promiscuity of Lipid and Nucleotide Kinases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Mary Kay Pflum, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Mary Kay Pflum from Wayne State University to establish
several novel assays to probe the activity and substrates of lipid and
polynucleotide kinases. These studies are based on the Pflum lab's recent
observation that protein kinases promiscuously accept delta-phosphate modified
ATP analogs as cosubstrates, a property we term "cosubstrate promiscuity¨. To
fully harness the power of cosubstrate promiscuity, this proposal will test the
ATP promiscuity of kinases that modify lipid and nucleic acid substrates to
reveal the prevalence among the full kinase family. In addition, several novel
assays based on the cosubstrate promiscuity of lipid and polynucleotide kinases
will be developed. These novel chemical tools will encourage a deeper study of
lipids and nucleotides in biological systems, which will broadly enhance
biochemistry and cell biology research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kinases catalyze
the transfer of a phosphate group to substrates, which is a key chemical trigger
in metabolism, cell signaling, communication, and adaptation. Moreover, the
large kinase family phosphorylates a wide variety of substrates in vivo,
including proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and metabolites. Historically,
studies involving kinases have played a prominent role in dissecting the
biochemistry and cell biology of many life processes. This research project will
significantly impact biochemistry and cell biology research by paving the way
for creation of new chemical probes of lipid and nucleic acid biology. This
program will also encourage a future generation of scientists by exposing
students of all ages to research. Undergraduate and graduate students will
perform all experiments in the project, which will expose them as members of the
next generation of chemists to multidisciplinary science. At the middle and high
school levels, Dr. Pflum will introduce students from the diverse Detroit
metropolitan area, particularly women and minorities, to multidisciplinary
science and scientific careers through outreach programs. By integrating
research and educational activities, this application will broadly impact the
community by fostering the next generation of scientists.