* 1306024
* Assessing poverty dynamics in an arid agrarian context--pre-Saharan Morocco
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Karen Rignall, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 208,569.00

This research is a two-year interdisciplinary project between an anthropologist
(the PI) and an agricultural economist at the University of Kentucky (Dr. Yoko
Kusunose). The purpose is to explore the determinants of upward economic
mobility and chronic poverty in an oasis valley of southern Morocco and builds
on the ethnographic fieldwork conducted for the Fellow's PhD in cultural
anthropology at the University of Kentucky. The goals of the research are to: 1)
empirically test a model of poverty dynamics developed through ethnographic
field methods and a small sample of household case studies; 2) use the tools of
economic poverty analysis to explain which households in the Mgoun valley
experienced upward mobility or chronic poverty and why; and 3) use empirical,
economic and qualitative, anthropological approaches to offer an explanation of
vulnerability to poverty that places household strategies to manage income and
assets in the context of broader structural and temporal processes. The
hypothesis is that multiple stable equilibria--divergent and stable trajectories
of capital accumulation for some and chronic poverty for others--have emerged
for households in the Mgoun valley of Morocco. The primary research method is a
survey of 300 household heads from&lt;br/&gt;throughout the Mgoun valley. The
survey will use current and recall data on income, assets, demographic, and
livelihoods to test the representativeness of previous research findings and
yield new insights about poverty dynamics in this arid agrarian context.
Households will be chosen through stratified random sampling techniques. This
survey will allow for econometric analysis with the support of the faculty
mentor. Complementary anthropological methods such as open and semi-structured
interviewing will provide context for the survey data. The data collection and
poverty analysis necessary for the project rely on an interdisciplinary
collaboration between the quantitative techniques from economics and the
anthropological emphasis on complex determinants of social and economic
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses one of the four topic areas
of interest outlined in&lt;br/&gt;the NSF report "Rebuilding the Mosaic":
sources of social and economic disparities and processes that alleviate those
disparities. It examines sources of disparity in a marginalized arid zone of a
strategically important region of the world, North Africa and the Middle East.
The research will contribute empirical and theoretical insights into how upward
socio-economic mobility of some household may improve overall standards of
living but also produces new forms of economic inequality. This contribution,
though emerging from data specific to southern Morocco, will be applicable to
other situations where migration and arid land agriculture are prominent
features of the livelihood systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conclusions from this research will be presented to
Moroccan policymakers and researchers with the goal of enhancing official
understanding of poverty dynamics at the household and community level. This
research also has applied implications for development agencies, policymakers,
and applied research institutes engaged in broader policy dialogues about how to
support rural livelihoods and poverty alleviation efforts. The proposed project
uses new theories of poverty dynamics--specifically how a dynamic view of
poverty traps predicts who will or will not escape chronic deprivation--to
explore how processes of upward mobility can occur outside of government
agricultural development or poverty alleviation policies. In the case of
southern Morocco, the use of remittances to support the emergence of small-scale
commercial agriculture was a largely informal process driven by the migrants and
their families, not official programs, but it also engendered new patterns of
inequality. This is an important finding with implications for migration policy,
poverty alleviation efforts, and our understanding of the role of agriculture in
the diversified livelihood portfolios of the marginalized rural poor in arid
settings around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this being a
postdoctoral fellowship project, it embodies integration of research, training
and education. The project facilitates the Fellow's future career development in
the emerging interdisciplinary fields of research within the social, behavioral
and economic sciences.