* 1306313
* Geometric Structures in Field and String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Shing-Tung Yau, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2017
* USD 510,025.00

This research is concerned with the study of geometric structures occurring in
field and string theories using methods from mathematics as well as from
physics. The intertwine of research in both fields has led to many surprising
connections and new ideas. A rich source of insights is the study of the
deformation of the geometrical structures associated to physical quantities.
This has led to an understanding of physical dualities and has uncovered a rich
variety of new mathematical structures. The change of certain characteristics of
the underlying mathematical description known as wall crossing is a very
powerful feature of many mathematical deformation problems. These questions are
best studied using mirror symmetry which combines techniques from various fields
of mathematics. The projects proposed here intend to derive new mathematical
ideas, structures and tools associated to physical deformation problems shedding
thus new light both on the physical theories as well as on the interconnections
between different mathematical structures. A class of objects which is suitable
for studying wall crossing phenomena are supersymmetric BPS (Bogomol'nyi-Prasad-
Sommerfield) objects. These have played a prominent role in understanding field
theories, dualities and black hole micro-state counting problems. They will be
studied in the context of string theory compactifications where they are
associated to a special set of objects, the D-branes, which are studied using
tools from topological string theory and mirror symmetry. These allow one to
systematically study the dependence of these on the moduli of the theory,
leading to powerful equations and important insights. Understanding BPS spectra
and their jumping is furthermore crucial to unravel their deep role in the
description of physical theories. By connecting ideas from theoretical physics
and very diverse areas of mathematics such as differential and algebraic
geometry, representation theory and number theory, these projects are pushing
the boundaries of knowledge in these fields. The PI is a pioneer and leader in
the field of geometry and mathematical aspects of string theory. Broader
Impacts: Lying at the intersection of cutting edge research in both physics and
mathematics, the project seeks to enhance the interactions and communication
between the two communities. An integral part is to train postdocs and graduate
students to be comfortable using methods and ideas from various fields and to
conduct advanced cross disciplinary research. The PI is also actively bringing
fundamental science and research to the public through various talks,
presentations and publications.