* 1306410
* Structural transitions, energetics, and folding pathways of colloidal clusters
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Vinothan Manoharan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2018
* USD 378,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The structures and transitions of colloidal
clusters may reveal local mechanisms governing bulk phenomena such as nucleation
and structural arrest. Such clusters are also useful model systems for
understanding self-assembly pathways. This experimental program will investigate
three-dimensional colloidal clusters composed of 6-30 particles held together by
weak interactions such as depletion or DNA-mediated binding. An advanced imaging
method, digital holographic microscopy, will be used to measure the positions
and motions of every particle in a cluster with sub-millisecond temporal
resolution and 10 nm precision in all three dimensions. This technique enables
detailed, quantitative studies of the ground states, equilibrium structural
transitions, and topological transitions of the clusters. Results will be
compared and used as input to energy landscape calculations, with the broad goal
of understanding how phase transitions and nonequilibrium phenomena emerge as
the size of the system increases. The program will train a graduate student and
undergraduate in soft matter physics and applied optics. An outreach and
education program will bring 20-40 high-school physics students from Cambridge
and Boston-area public schools to Harvard for a series of discovery-based labs
on waves, optics, and holography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This award supports experimental research on unusual
materials called clusters, sometimes called an "intermediate state of matter."
Compared to the usual states of matter we encounter in our daily lives -- gases,
liquids, and solids -- clusters consist of a far smaller number of atoms or
particles. Because they are less complex than ordinary matter, they are in
principle easier to understand. Studying how these clusters change their shapes
over time and in the presence of external forces could help solve longstanding
challenges in materials science, such as how crystals form and why they
sometimes form disordered structures called glasses, both of which are important
classes of materials for industry. However, clusters remain difficult to prepare
and study experimentally. This project will take advantage of a new way to make
clusters using microscopic particles called colloids, which can be seen with an
optical microscope. The motion of particles in the clusters will be observed
using an advanced imaging method involving holograms. The project will train a
Ph.D. student and undergraduate in physics, materials science, and holography,
an emerging high-technology field. The project will also educate 20-40 public
high school students in physics and optics through a series of labs designed to
be fun, engaging, and aimed toward motivating them to continue studying science.