* 1306215
* Optogenetic Dissection of a Neural Circuit Underlying the Extinction of PTSD
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* David Anderson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2015
* USD 225,258.00

Fear is a powerful emotion and under normal conditions this works to the
advantage of every species on this planet. One of the most poignant examples of
this is post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). This project maps the neural
circuit underlying the extinction of PTSD by combining molecular genetic tools
with in depth behavioral analyses. Using a rodent model of PTSD adapted for use
in the mouse, it extinguishes specific symptoms of PTSD such as enhanced fear,
increased aggression and disruptions in sexual behavior, by genetically
identifying and optogenetically targeting specific subsets of neurons known to
be involved in fear inhibition. This project is comprised of three aims. Aim 1
determines whether extinction under the optogenetic activation of a population
of cells in the lateral division of the central nucleus of the amygdala known to
be involved in fear inhibition (PKC-d+ neurons) can subsequently reduce PTSD-
induced enhancements in fear, increased aggression, and alterations in sexual
behavior. Aim 2 determines whether optogenetic silencing of a distinct but
intermingled population of neurons (CRH+ neurons) in the same brain region can
produce the same reduction in PTSD symptomology. Aim 3 examines whether similar
effects can be obtained using selective silencing or activation of prefrontal
cortex projections to the amygdala.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
significant intellectual merit in its cross-disciplinary approach. Namely, it
combines cutting-edgemolecular biology and genetic tools with well-designed
behavioral paradigms. The application of such molecular techniques with
solid&lt;br/&gt;behavioral design and analyses are intellectually important in
terms of the extent to which these tools can be applied to behavioral
neuroscience, taught, and shared with the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The dissection of PTSD extinction circuitry has the powerful potential
to provide a highly targeted, translational approach for the treatment of
anxiety disorders and phobias. In addition, this project encourages the
teaching, learning and training of optogenetics and applications of molecular
biology to questions within psychological science from within the publically
accessible and motivated framework of PTSD treatment.