* 1306467
* Cooperation with Germany: Studies of Polyelectrolyte Brushes in Confined Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Christopher Ober of Cornell University will
study the physical chemistry of polyelectrolyte brushes. This work includes an
international collaboration with Prof. Jurgen Ruhe of the University of
Freiburg, Germany. Prof. Ruhe's work will be funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). Polyelectrolyte brushes are of particular interest
because they feature both confinement, which forces the polymer chains into a
largely stretched conformation, and the presence of charges along the polymer
backbones. The international team will investigate how the swelling of
polyelectrolyte brushes scales with the size of a nanostructure produced using
advanced lithography and how the system transitions from swelling of a two-
dimensional pattern into swelling of a three-dimensional structure. Furthermore,
the team will characterize the effects of brush height, charge and density on
interactions with soluble species and establish what are promising strategies to
stabilize polyelectrolyte brush structures and prevent "entropic death," that is
the entropy induced breakage of chains from the brush surface. The broader
impacts involve active international exchanges exposing graduate students and
associated undergraduate researchers to a global research partnership.
Additionally, summer schools will be hosted on specific topics that enable a
deeper consideration of the types of problems encountered in the study of
polymer brushes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are long chain organic molecules
and are found in many facets of everyday life that utilize plastics, including
food packaging, structural materials for automotive and aerospace
transportation, and lightweight electronic devices. Nature uses charged polymer
films at interfaces to control lubrication, to limit biofouling, and to aid in
keeping surfaces wet. This research seeks to develop and understand stable,
sustainable surface structures that undergo controlled interactions with
soluble, synthetic or biological materials. Through development of new chemical
components and process strategies, this research could lead to better materials
for biomedical devices, environmental and medical sensors, and environmentally
friendly coatings.