* 1306784
* Photoinduced Charge Transfer at Quantum Dot-Molecule-Semiconductor Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Watson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

David Watson at the University at Buffalo (UB) is supported by an award from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program to study photoinduced
charge-transfer processes at quantum dot (QD)-molecule-semiconductor interfaces.
The research involves basic science to tether QDs to semiconductor substrates or
to each other via small molecules, and to characterize charge transfer at the
resulting interfaces using time-resolved spectroscopy and photoelectrochemistry.
One research initiative involves elucidating the influence of interfacial
chemistry and properties on the mechanisms, dynamics, and yields of charge
transfer at QD-molecule-TiO2 interfaces. Specific aims are to increase the
stability and inertness of interfaces while maintaining high charge-transfer
yields and promoting long-lived charge separation, to measure charge-transfer
dynamics at complex interfaces, and to engineer interfacial properties to
promote long-distance charge-transfer between QDs and TiO2. A second research
initiative involves covalently tethering QDs to each other via carbodiimide
chemistry and exploring the photoinduced charge-transfer reactivity of the
resulting assemblies. Goals are to establish synthetic methods and to synthesize
Type-II interfaces that promote the separation of photogenerated charges. A
third research initiative involves tethering QD-molecule-QD assemblies to
electron- or hole-accepting semiconductor substrates, towards the goal of
promoting photoinduced vectorial charge transfer.

Semiconductor QDs have unique size-dependent electronic and optical properties,
which make them intriguing harvesters of light and donors of energetic electrons
and holes for solar energy conversion. QD-based solar cells and photocatalysts
require (1) the controlled placement of QDs on nanostructured surfaces and (2)
the existence of mechanisms through which photogenerated electrons or holes can
be extracted from QDs before recombining. This research project involves basic
science to establish syntheses of stable and inert QD-containing interfaces and
to discover how the structure and properties of such interfaces govern the rates
and efficiencies of charge-transfer reactions. The research addresses two basic
challenges in materials chemistry: (1) to assemble materials interfaces
precisely and (2) to establish structure-property-reactivity relationships
involving charge transfer at complex interfaces. This award supports outreach
programs involving collaboration between researchers at UB and students and
teachers at Buffalo Public Schools. Outreach activities involve mentoring high
school students and teachers in hands-on research projects. Goals are to
introduce participants to the nature of scientific research, to increase teacher
content knowledge, and to develop expanded mentoring networks. Research and
educational initiatives are intended to benefit society by yielding new
fundamental knowledge pertaining to solar energy conversion while broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups and advancing discovery and
understanding.