* 1306171
* A Stronger Atom-Light Interface and Enhanced Spin Squeezing Through Quantum Control
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Poul Jessen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This project has as its main objective to develop new methods that strengthen
the quantum interface between atoms and light, and to use this as a tool for
enhanced control of the quantum mechanical spin associated with a collection of
atoms. The central idea is that by preparing certain non-trivial states of the
internal atomic spins, one can greatly increase the sensitivity of a laser probe
to quantum uncertainty in the collective spin. In that situation, using the
laser probe to perform an accurate measurement of the spin will reduce, or
squeeze, quantum noise on the spin below currently achievable levels. Further
control of the internal spins can convert such spin squeezing into forms that
improve the performance of atomic clocks, magnetometers, or matter-wave based
inertial sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributes to the knowledge
basis of quantum metrology and quantum information science. Short-term
applications include future generations of quantum-limited clocks and sensors,
while long-term applications are possible in quantum memories and other hardware
required for the nodes in quantum communication networks. Graduate students are
involved in all aspects of the project, including training, research, and the
dissemination of results. The project is a cornerstone of the NSF-supported
Center for Quantum Information and Control (CQuIC), co-located at the University
of Arizona and the University of New Mexico. As such, it contributes to the
training of a wider group of future scientists and engineers in the highly
interdisciplinary field of quantum information science.