* 1306247
* Doping Molecular Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Jennifer Swift, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 05/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program of the Division of Materials Research, the
formation of solid solutions is explored as a means to tune the physical
properties (e.g. thermal stability, solubility, hardness) of metastable
molecular crystal phases. Solid solutions of uric acid dihydrate (UAD) and
assorted inorganic, molecular and polymeric components are prepared. The
physical properties of pure materials and solid solutions are analyzed using a
battery of complementary techniques with the overall goal to establish
structure-properties correlations. In situ AFM provides molecular-level insight
into the growth mechanisms of solid solutions. Nanoindentation studies enable
comparison of the mechanical properties of pure UAD, doped UAD and the more
stable anhydrous uric acid phase. The application of solid solution strategies
to a broader class of molecular components known to crystallize in both
anhydrous and hydrated phases enables a fuller understanding of the true scope
of property changes that can be achieved in organic systems through solid
solution formation. X-ray diffraction, thermal analysis, and microscopy methods
are used to compare the physical properties of pure and doped crystalline
materials. Vapor sorption experiments are used to compare the deliquescence
behavior of pure and doped metastable anhydrous phases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
industries such as pharmaceuticals, foods, agrochemicals and energetics rely on
organic molecular crystals. This research aims to increase our understanding of
the relationship between physical properties (e.g. stability, solubility, water
uptake or release, mechanical strength) and the 3D structure of the crystal.
Prof. Swift additionally establishes a collaboration with researchers at a
National Lab facility. This collaborative research provides valuable
interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high
school students.