* 1306630
* Algorithms and Statistical Methods for Personalized Diagnosis and Therapy in Cancer
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Mathukumalli Vidyasagar, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 369,605.00

At present, there are several public efforts under way to generate massive data
sets&lt;br/&gt;derived from all available cancer tissues. Such data is already
available for four forms of cancer: Ovarian,&lt;br/&gt;lung, breast and colon,
and more are on the way. One of the characteristics of these data sets is that
the&lt;br/&gt;number of features that are measured is in the tens of thousands,
while the number of tissue samples for&lt;br/&gt;each form of cancer is in the
hundreds. The main challenge therefore is to extract the most informative
features&lt;br/&gt;that can be used to distinguish one set of cancer patients
from another, for example, those that respond to a&lt;br/&gt;particular form of
therapy from those who do not. Such features, referred to as biomarkers, can
then be used&lt;br/&gt;to develop therapies that are customized to focused
groups or even individual patients. However, almost&lt;br/&gt;all available
algorithms for extracting relevant features from big data sets face a "barrier"
in that the number&lt;br/&gt;of features extracted is bounded below by the
number of training samples. This number, which might be&lt;br/&gt;in the
hundreds, is far too large to be useful in biological applications. In this
project, it is proposed to&lt;br/&gt;develop some novel algorithms for feature
extraction that can break through this "barrier" and identify
far&lt;br/&gt;fewer features than the number of training samples. These newly
developed algorithms will be analyzed&lt;br/&gt;in terms of their statistical
behavior and their optimality; in addition they will be validated on actual
data&lt;br/&gt;sets from lung, ovarian and endometrial
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another important aspect of current cancer therapy
is the widespread acceptance of the need to use&lt;br/&gt;multi-drug
combinations. This is because when a patient is treated with a single drug,
almost invariably&lt;br/&gt;the tumor will grow back even if it shrinks
initially, and the relapsed tumor is often resistant to the drug.&lt;br/&gt;Due
to combinatorial explosion, it is not feasible to try out all possible
combinations of drugs in experimental&lt;br/&gt;settings. Moreover, due to the
complexity of the behavior of cancer cells, it is also not possible&lt;br/&gt;to
develop analytical models for the mechanisms of action of multiple drugs used in
combination. It is&lt;br/&gt;therefore imperative to develop methodologies for
predicting the efficacy of multi-drug combinations while&lt;br/&gt;making almost
no assumptions about the mechanism of action of each drug. In this project, it
is proposed to use&lt;br/&gt;the so-called "maximum entropy method" to develop
such a prediction methodology. The maximum entropy&lt;br/&gt;method was
developed about fifty years in the context of deriving equilibrium statistical
mechanics&lt;br/&gt;from information theory, and is widely accepted as one of
the best methods to be used when it is desired to&lt;br/&gt;minimize the number
of a priori assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Currently
available algorithms for classification and regression such as LASSO,
elastic&lt;br/&gt;net, and Dantzig have the feature that the number of key
features extracted is roughly equal to the number&lt;br/&gt;of training samples.
However, even this number is too large to be of practical use in biological
situations.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary investigations on a new algorithm invented by
the PI show that it does not have this limitation.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, this new
algorithm has shown promising performance on two types of cancer data
sets:&lt;br/&gt;endometrial and ovarian. If a sound theoretical foundation can
be established for the observed behavior of&lt;br/&gt;this algorithm, as well as
for another that is still in the conceptual stage, that would be a very
significant&lt;br/&gt;contribution to statistics and to machine learning theory.
On another front, if it can be established through&lt;br/&gt;theory and
experiment that the maximum entropy method can be used to predict the efficacy
of multi-drug&lt;br/&gt;combinations, that would greatly advance both the theory
of the method and the practical applicability of&lt;br/&gt;multi-drug
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Cancer is the second leading
cause of death in the USA, in other industrialized countries,&lt;br/&gt;and also
in newly industrializing countries. It is widely accepted that cancer is the
most "individual" of diseases&lt;br/&gt;in that no two manifestations are alike.
Therefore personalized therapy is the way forward. However,&lt;br/&gt;there are
very few methodologies for developing personal therapy that are agnostic as to
the type of cancer.&lt;br/&gt;The present project aims to develop precisely such
methodologies. Given the large mindshare of cancer in&lt;br/&gt;the scientific
community and in society at large, it can be safely assumed that if the project
is successfully&lt;br/&gt;completed, then the research findings would be
followed up by the cancer researcher community. To hasten&lt;br/&gt;the process,
the PI will work with several cancer researchers in the UT Southwestern Medical
Center in&lt;br/&gt;Dallas and in the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in
Houston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will entail the training of two
graduate students and at least one undergraduate summer&lt;br/&gt;intern per
year. This would serve to increase the pool of trained manpower and also to
disseminate the&lt;br/&gt;analytical approach to cancer therapy design to a
broader audience.