* 1306741
* Development of a Novel Bioinspired Fiber Reinforced Hydrogel that Recapitulates Developmental Processes to Regenerate the Bone-Ligament Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Tammy Haut Donahue, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2018
* USD 390,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Colorado State University is to study novel biomaterial tissue constructs that
will be able to mimic the native interface between soft tissue and bone. This
award is cofunded by the Biomedical Engineering program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. The Global
Venture Fund program in the Office of International Science and Engineering is
also supporting this project. Although numerous soft-tissue replacement
constructs have been developed previously, less attention has been dedicated in
recreating the interface between the engineered replacement soft-tissue and the
hard bone. The proposed tissue construct will be prepared from a composite
hydrogel reinforced with polycaprolactone nanofibers, and seeded by mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs). In order to mimic the structure of native soft tissue-to-bone
interface, biochemical and biophysical cues will be modulated along the length
of the tissue construct to drive the differentiation of MSCs down the
chondrogenic, fibrocartilaginous, and ligamentous pathways. With this design of
the tissue graft, the end part of the bone tissue will be established by
promoting endochondral ossification of the chondrogenically primed portion of
the construct following in vivo implantation of stem cells. This approach is
unique and innovative in providing a spatially graded engineered tissue grafts
with the capacity to promote the formation of an intermediary soft tissue
template, which will differentiate into appropriate end-stage tissue phenotypes
in response to local environmental cues. This strategy is to recapitulate
different aspects of the developmental process, where all tissues are derived
from soft tissue precursors and specific environmental cues are critical to
determining end-stage differentiation. With respect to educational and training
aspects of the project, this work will involve the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in a broad range of innovative tissue engineering and
biomaterial design techniques. Student exchanges with Ireland and Northern
Ireland are also parts of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings
together experts from the US, Ireland and Northern Ireland to address a growing
problem related to knee injuries using a combined approach that incorporates
materials research, engineering, cell biology and biomaterials. Although
numerous replacements for injured soft tissue structures have been developed,
these techniques typically fail to address the soft tissue-to-bone interface.
This interface is necessary for the proper functionality of the entire joint.
This project seeks to recreate the interface between soft tissue and bone using
a novel biomaterial construct that mimics the structure and function of the
native interface. In addition to innovative research, this grant will use
outreach activities to emphasize the education of students and the general
public. Graduate students and undergraduate students who participate in this
research will learn both biological and engineering techniques and will have
opportunities to attend conferences to disseminate research and strengthen
international collaborations. This work will also provide engineering experience
to pre-college students in encouraging their participation in research.
Additionally, this project will interact with local Native American communities
to encourage their members to participate in science subjects. During National
Engineers Week, Girl Scout groups will be involved in lab demonstrations in
encouraging younger girls to become interested in science and engineering.
Finally, the research will be disseminated to the general public by publishing
results in nationally recognized journals.