* 1306208
* Non-classical Zinc Finger Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Sarah Michel, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Sarah Michel from the University of Maryland-Baltimore
to study the mechanism of action and key structure/function relationships for
three "non-classical" zinc finger (ZF) proteins, (1) the Cleavage and
Polyadenylation and Stimulating Factor (CPSF30), which plays a central role in
pre-mRNA processing in all eukaryotes, and (2) the Neural Zinc Finger Factor-1
(NZF-1) and related (3) Myelin Transcription Factor 1 (MyT1), which play
critical roles in the development of the central nervous system (CNS). A
biochemical and biophysical approach will be taken to characterize the Zn(II)
binding domains of CPSF30 and identify the RNA sequences recognized by the
protein and characterize the Zn(II) binding domains NZF-1 and MyT1 and identify
their DNA target sequences. This work should facilitate a molecular level
understanding of the these protein-nucleic acid
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zinc Finger (ZF) proteins contain modular
domains that coordinate zinc ions using a combination of four cysteine and/or
histidine ligands to fold into specific three-dimensional structures. ZFs have
critically important roles in modulating transcription and translation in all
eukaryotes and show a remarkable capacity for highly selective nucleic acid
recognition. While much is known about the metal-mediated folding and nucleic
acid recognition properties of classical ZF proteins, very little is known about
the biochemical mechanisms of the non-classical ZF proteins to be studied in
this proposal. These studies aim to provide information on why Nature selects
classical versus non-classical ZFs for a particular transcriptional and
translational regulatory role. There is the potential for broader scientific
impact on modes by which metal co-factored regulatory proteins operate in
general. The graduate, undergraduate and high school students involved in the
project will receive interdisciplinary training at the chemistry/molecular
biology interface. There is a significant outreach component, particularly
directed toward encouraging women to enter the STEM disciplines. This includes
interaction with girls from a local high school and women from a local women's
college, as well as female graduate students on the project. A "zinc finger lab"
for high school girls enrolled in AP Biology is being developed.