* 1306065
* CDS&amp;E: From Weakness to Strength in Bio-Composite Materials by Multiscale Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Xianqiao Wang, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 209,380.00

The research objective of this award is to hierarchically design bio-composite
materials that have outstanding mechanical properties through the paradox of
?strength? from ?weakness? inspired by how natural bone is made. The researchers
will therefore seek a more fundamental understanding of these natural materials?
intricate hierarchical structures, scale-bridging mechanics, and material
components through this award. This will be accomplished through the following
research activities: (i) developing an atom-based continuum modeling tool that
enables concurrent multiscale modeling and simulation of materials from atomic
building blocks to macroscopic systems; (ii) determining a systematic
understanding of mechanical behaviors at the interface between proteins and
minerals in the collagen fibrils; (iii) establishing the multiscale structure-
property relations in bone materials through the concurrent atomistic/continuum
investigation of fibril arrays and the osteons structures. By establishing the
precise relation between the structural hierarchy and the mechanical properties,
and based on the design strategies extracted from bone materials, this research
will establish guidelines for bottom-up hierarchal design of engineered bio-
composite materials to have high strength, high stiffness and high
toughness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
advance the understanding of bio-inspired composites and provide transformative
ideas to achieve the goal of synthesizing bio-inspired materials by design,
thereby addressing current limitation of synthetic composites. It will also
bring new concepts to the fields of materials science, mechanical engineering,
and mechanics of materials at various length scales. The results will provide a
unique opportunity to establish a multidisciplinary learning and training
program that transcends the traditional boundaries between academic disciplines
and offers undergraduate and graduate students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, an integrated approach of team research and career
development. Moreover, the results will be integrated to improve and enrich
existing engineering courses at University of Georgia.