* 1306011
* Geometric and Topological Phenomena in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Stone, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Summary

This award supports theoretical research and education on topological
insulators. The PI will show whether crystal symmetries effect a refinement of
the ten-fold way classification of the bulk bands. A large portion of the
research efforts will be directed at exploring the analogies between the bulk-
surface connection in topological insulators and their particle and
gravitational physics analogs. In particular, the solid-state systems suggest
new ways of thinking about chiral and gauge anomalies in quantum field theory.
This will lead to an alternative method for calculation of transport
coefficients in quark-gluon plasmas. In particular some curious relations
between the coefficients in anomaly polynomials and those appearing in the well-
known Sommerfeld's expansion will be explored. A key ingredient in this
exploration is a set of tools developed for the description of the dynamics and
quantum topology of a quantum spin as a classical mechanical system. This study
will show whether these "classical" tools can be extended to derive the solid-
state version of the gravitational anomaly which can be used to calculate the
coefficient of the thermal analogue of the quantum Hall effect.

The proposed research program will have impact beyond the field of theoretical
condensed matter physics by providing guidelines for building a future
generation of solid-state electronic devices that might lead to quantum
computers and by allowing exploration of the speculative particle physics at a
much lower cost than building large accelerators. The PI will develop a web
portal to expose students and the public to recent developments in condensed
matter physics.

Non-Technical Summary

This award supports theoretical research and education on topological
insulators. A complete understanding of the universe is summarized in the
"standard model" of particle physics. In this model the fundamental bits of
matter interact through gauge fields which are generalizations of electricity
and magnetism. Some of these interactions, the "weak" force, possess the curious
feature that they only affect the left-handed parts of matter. A mathematically
natural way for this handedness to arise is for matter to be trapped on a
surface embedded in some higher dimensional space. This notion sounds as if it
belongs in a science fiction story, but in recent years quite down-to-earth
studies have shown that certain crystalline insulators containing heavy elements
behave in exactly this way. These "topological insulators" are only insulators
on their insides. On their surfaces, electrons are free to move and conduct
electricity, but they do so in a manner that forms a precise analogue of the way
that quarks interact. These conducting states are of great interest, partly for
practical reasons in building new generations of solid-state electronic devices
that might lead to quantum computers, but also because the analogy with particle
physics allows exploration of speculative particle physics at a much lower cost
than building large accelerators. The PI will develop a web portal to expose
students and the public to recent developments in condensed matter physics.