* 1306638
* Macroscopic Quantum Tunneling in Ultracold Quantum Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2017
* USD 233,839.00

Tunneling through a potential barrier is one of the most basic and extraordinary
features of quantum mechanics. It plays a key role in important technologies
such as tunneling diodes and superconducting quantum interference devices
(SQUIDs), both used in common devices ranging from electronics to biological
measurements. Atomic, molecular, and optical theory has a long history of
exploring fundamental questions in physics in tabletop experiments, from limits
on the standard model of particle physics in studies of basic symmetries of the
universe to time variation of fundamental physical constants in cold molecules.
We will push the limits of quantum mechanics and disparate notions of what is
macroscopic, in practical realizations in ultracold quantum gases. We focus on
macroscopic quantum tunneling (MQT), i.e., tunneling of many particles at once,
where very many outstanding problems remain unanswered. Bose-Einstein
condensates and ultracold quantum gases provide an ideal context in which to
explore MQT because they are highly tunable and controllable macroscopic quantum
systems in which theoretical ideas can be realized directly in present
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have a multi-faceted approach to meet
broader impact goals. First, we will continue to organize national and
international workshops and conferences including the recent cold molecules
program in Spring 2013. Second, we will work with large numbers of undergraduate
researchers via the Colorado School of Mines' (CSM) senior design / senior
thesis program, CSM's combined BS/MS programs, and the NSF Research Experience
for Undergraduates program. Third, we will continue to foster an accepting,
diverse environment within our research group to support underrepresented groups
in physics. Finally, the training of students in rigorous numerical techniques
and high-performance parallel computing is key to success in a number of arenas
in society, from the space program to global climate change. We will train such
students, and support a PI involved in that effort from the undergraduate
through post-doctoral levels.