* 1306734
* KINETICS OF FLUCTUATIONS IN NANO-DEVICES
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Alex Kamenev, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on the effect of nonequilibrium fluctuations on nanodevices. Recent
advances in technology enable the controlled fabrication of nanostructured
devices. A variety of novel nanodevices utilizing mechanical, electrical,
magnetic, optical and other principals have been fabricated and studied. These
devices have found a broad spectrum of applications and have stimulated
fundamental questions. The nanodevices are driven far from equilibrium by
applied currents, optical pulses or magnetic fields. As a result, their behavior
is governed by strong nonequilibrium fluctuations. The main objective of this
research is to elucidate the consequences of the nonequilibrium environment in
nanodevices for dynamical bistability or quantum tunneling. The PI will combine
developing novel theoretical methods and their application to engineered
nanodevices. Collaboration with experimental groups from University of
California at Irvine and University of Minnesota will provide testing grounds
for theoretical predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate
students and postdocs involved in the research will learn modern computational
and theoretical techniques. Collaboration with experimentalists will broaden
students intellectually. Research results will be disseminated through
scientific publications, conference proceedings, and presentations at national
and international conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental theoretical research and
education on nanodevices that operate far from the steady state of equilibrium.
Advances in nanotechnology have led to the fabrication and study of a variety of
mechanical, electrical, magnetic, optical and other kinds of nanodevices.
Operation of these ingenious machines is often based on principles fundamentally
different from macroscopic devices. In many instances they are so small that
thermal and possibly quantum mechanical fluctuations of their mechanical,
magnetic degrees of freedom cannot be ignored. This requires development of a
probabilistic description of device operation. In particular rare but large
fluctuations may completely change the operation of a device. The PI will
develop a new theoretical framework to describe the behavior of nanomachines and
apply it to practical nanodevices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and
undergraduate students and postdocs involved in the research will learn modern
computational and theoretical techniques. Collaboration with experimentalists
will broaden students intellectually. Research results will be disseminated
through scientific publications, conference proceedings, and presentations at
national and international conferences.