* 1306805
* Hadronic Excitations, Glueballs, and Scattering Phase Shifts using Lattice QCD with the Stochastic LapH Method
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Colin Morningstar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2016
* USD 520,000.00

Lattice gauge theory provides the framework to study the excited spectrum of
hadrons. As such, this project will help unravel key aspects of the physics of
quark confinement and hadron formation in quantum chromodynamics, the theory of
the strong interactions and one of the fundamental forces of Nature. In fact,
understanding the physics of confining gluons is an important intellectual
challenge and was recognized as one of the seven so-called Millenium Prize
problems announced by the Clay Mathematics Institute of Cambridge,
Massachusetts. The masses of excited hadron resonances will be evaluated using
Markov-chain Monte Carlo computer simulations of quarks and gluons on a space-
time lattice. Results of these calculations are relevant to several ongoing
experimental programs, such as the Hall B N* program and the GlueX experiment in
Hall D at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility. It is worth
mentioning that in the past such calculations were performed with
unrealistically large quark masses due to computational limitations. The current
project continues the development of a new methodology to incorporate crucial
multi-hadron operators into computations in order to reduce the quark masses to
nearly their physical values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
incorporates the participation of two graduate students, and possibly one or
more undergraduate students, so the broader impact of this project concerns also
the training of future researchers in the field of lattice QCD. The students are
provided with an unique opportunity to learn and contribute to an important line
of inquiry at the forefront of nuclear theory. Given the high-performance
aspects of this projects, students will also acquire essentials skills in the
use of state-of-the-art parallel computing resources. The broader impacts of the
proposed activities will be strengthened by posting results with simplified
background information on publicly accessible web pages.