* 1306997
* Collaborative Research:  Beta-decay Angular Correlation Measurements with Cold and Ultracold Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Mark Pitt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 105,000.00

This award funds a collaborative research program involving two separate angular
correlation measurements with neutrons. These measurements will enable us to
extract fundamental information concerning the weak interaction which causes
neutron decay, including the axial coupling constant of the nucleon. This
coupling constant appears in a very wide variety of nuclear and particle physics
contexts, from being a critical input to high precision calculations of the
solar fusion rates, to being a target for higher precison lattice QCD
calculations, to placing, together with the neutron lifetime, limits on the
existence of new particle physics interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
experiment, UCNA, measures the beta-asymmetry, or the correlation between the
neutron polarization and the decay beta-particle's momentum. UCNA is the first
experiment to use ultracold neutrons, or neutrons with energies below about 300
neV that can be stored in material bottles, for this kind of measurement.
Ultracold neutrons have advantages both for neutron polarimetry and neutron-
generated backgrounds, key sources of systematic error in existing neutron
angular correlation experiments. The UCNA experiment is currently operating,
with one more run period planned at the neutron densities currently available at
the Los Alamos ultracold neutron source. The targeted precision is below 0.4%,
roughly a factor of 2 more precise than the current world average for the beta-
asymmetry. The second experiment, Nab, uses an unpolarized beam of cold neutrons
(with temperatures near 30K) to measure the electron-neutrino angular
correlation, with a planned sensitivity at about the 0.1% level for the
electron-neutrino correlation. This experiment should also be able to place
important limits on extensions to the standard model of particle physics for
scalar and&lt;br/&gt;tensor couplings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key to the success
of these experiments is the involvement of undergraduate and graduate students,
as well as postdoctoral scholars. These young scientists will receive excellent
training in experimental techniques, particle detectors, and data analysis.