* 1306604
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Abigail Reft, Reft                    Abigail
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2015
* USD 140,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship award to Dr. Abigail Reft is supported by
both the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Office of International
Science and Engineering at the National Science Foundation. During the 24-month
fellowship, Dr. Reft will work on a project titled, "Apical structures and the
molecular mechanics of nematocyst discharge" under the sponsorship of Dr. Suat
Özbek at Heidelberg University in Heidelberg, Germany.

All members of the group Cnidaria (which includes sea anemones, corals, and
jellyfish) produce microscopic stinging capsules called nematocysts. Nematocysts
consist of a tubule enfolded within a capsule. Upon stimulation, the tubule
discharges from the apex of the capsule and exposes spines borne on the tubule.
At the apex of the capsule is one of three different structures, each one
characteristic of different lineages within Cnidaria. The process by which the
apical structure opens and discharge proceeds is known only for one form and
little is known about the protein components or construction of any of the
forms. This project seeks to understand these biologically important cellular
products by documenting the proteins involved in making the apical structure and
documenting discharge in nematocysts bearing each apical form.

This project will provide insight into the construction and evolution of one of
the most complex structures produced by a single cell and will provide
information on mechanics of these biological machines. After identifying the
components in one of the apical forms, the presence of these components in the
other two forms will be evaluated. Furthermore, the impact of different apical
structures in the process of discharge will be determined. Through these
endeavors, the common development, discharge processes, and "toolkit" of
proteins specific to apical structures will be identified, allowing some
inference of the ancestral form and discharge in nematocysts.

Morphological information will be shared on the Morphobank
(http://www.morphobank.org/) to enable collaboration with other scientists
studying the evolution of morphology. Furthermore, previous collaborations with
institutions such as the Field Museum and Shedd Aquarium will be continued to
educate the public and disseminate research results.The PI also plans to engage
members of the host lab, including mentoring of students.

This award provides a unique opportunity for a US scientist to collaborate with
foreign scientists, and utilize the unique facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions available abroad.