* 1306048
* Computational Studies of Entanglement and Thermodynamics of Strongly Interacting Spin Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Rajiv Singh, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 285,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational modeling
of novel phases of matter in materials. From magnets to metals to semiconductors
and superconductors, the properties of these materials are determined by
electrons moving in the intricate crystalline environment of a given material
and cooperating with each other due to the principles of quantum mechanics and
electrostatic Coulomb interactions. New electronic states can emerge from the
correlated motion of electrons. The PI will study phases of electrons in models
for materials that can: (i) provide insight into how new phenomena and
properties emerge as a result of complex cooperative behavior of a large number
of electrons, and (ii) present experimental scientists with possible materials
with properties that can be controlled externally in novel ways, allowing for
various devices and applications. Examples of electronic phases to be studied
include those in high temperature superconductors, systems that are close to
transforming from a metal to an insulator, and materials that exhibit unusual
forms of magnetism. While focused primarily on the study of phenomena in
materials, this project has deep connections with fundamentals of quantum field
theory and even geometry, topology and quantum gravity. Educational components
of this project involve training graduate and advanced undergraduate students in
the areas of Computational Physics, with skills that would be broadly useful
over all areas of science and engineering. It would also involve interacting
with high school students through the California Summer School for Math and
Science program of the University of California, where the PI would develop and
teach courses suitable for these students.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational modeling of
novel electronic phases of matter in materials. Quantum mechanics underlies much
of our understanding of solid state physics. This project deals with exotic
quantum phases that defy conventional paradigms of many-electron behavior.
Strongly competing interactions between electrons and their spins can lead to
frustration and exotic quantum phases, where new degrees of freedom can emerge.
The PI will focus particularly on the existence of novel quantum phases of
matter in real magnetic materials with competing or frustrating exchange
interactions. Such phases can support emergent fields and particles inside the
materials that are not found elsewhere. The PI will pursue systematic
calculations of thermodynamic and spectral properties of appropriate models,
with and without quenched disorder using high-temperature series expansions and
numerical linked cluster expansions. This will help establish the connection
between models and materials. Systems to be studied include quantum spin-ice
materials and Kagome-Lattice Heisenberg systems. The PI will work with
experimental groups to understand such phenomena as unconventional
superconductivity in the iron-pnictide materials, quantum spin-ice behavior and
emergent quantum electrodynamics in rare-earth pyrochlores such as ytterbium
titanate, and quantum spin-liquids in kagome and triangular lattice
antiferromagnets. Another focus of the project is the study of quantum
entanglement in many-body systems. Using series expansion methods, the PI will
calculate ground state entanglement entropies in various lattice-statistical
models. These calculations should be informative about quantum phase transitions
and critical phenomena, Fermi-surface geometry and topological phases of matter.
In addition, this subject also has deep connections with quantum information
theory, quantum field theory, geometry, topology and even quantum gravity.
Educational components of the project involve training graduate and
undergraduate students in methods of theoretical and computational physics that
should be broadly useful in science and industry. In addition the PI will work
with talented high school students through the California Summer School for Math
and Science program of the University of California and with underrepresented
students through the Mentorship for Undergraduate Research Participants in the
Physical and Mathematical Sciences program.