* 1306822
* Methods for Defect Manipulation in Semiconducting Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Edmund Seebauer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The technologically useful properties of a ceramic
material often depend upon the atomic defects contained in its crystalline
structure. The present work seeks to further develop methods to control the
concentration and movement of atomic defects in semiconducting ceramics such as
titanium dioxide and zinc oxide. The methods are based upon manipulation of
chemical bonds at the material surface or illumination by ultraviolet light.
Control via these methods opens new possibilities for manipulating oxide defects
in numerous applications. As specific examples, such control improves the
properties of titanium dioxide as a photocatalyst for environmental water
remediation and hydrogen production for renewable energy by water splitting, and
as a component of catalysts for a wide variety of high-volume chemical
production processes. The use of defect-manipulated catalysts to accelerate
chemical reactions and to provide routes to new chemical products could further
strengthen the competitive edge of the US chemical industry. Uses for high
quality zinc oxide include transparent conducting electrodes for solar cells to
produce renewable energy, and inexpensive green-blue optical emitters for
consumer electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
research project uses a combination of experiments and computations to quantify
and model the mechanisms for surface-based defect manipulation in single-crystal
titanium dioxide and zinc oxide, and to exploit those discoveries more fully in
the synthesis of defect-engineered polycrystalline titanium dioxide for thin-
film applications. Experiments with single crystals focus upon the measurement
of oxygen diffusion as a marker for atomic defect behavior. Parallel experiments
on thin films involve carefully controlled deposition of titanium dioxide by
atomic layer techniques, followed by heating in controlled atmospheres of
specific chemical composition, in some cases under ultraviolet photostimulation.
Computations that support all this work entail refinement of a mathematical
simulator software package for modeling defect behavior in titanium dioxide and
zinc oxide based upon both experimental findings as well as quantum calculations
that give atomic-scale insights. In addition to a graduate student, a
substantial number of undergraduate researchers are involved directly in the
research, providing important skills training in materials synthesis and
characterization as well as chemical reaction measurements. This research is
taking place in parallel with development of an industry-supported laboratory
course for upper-division undergraduates and graduate students called "Chemistry
and Transport in Semiconductor Materials Synthesis." In addition, several
activities to promote the importance of ethics in science and engineering are
being pursued.