* 1306584
* GOALI:  An Investigation Aimed at Correlating the Structure of Non-Wood Lignins with Their Ease of Depolymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Rodolfo Romero, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2019
* USD 82,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professor Raymond C.
Francis at the State University of New York College of Environmental Science and
Forestry and Drs. Rodolfo Romero and Bertil Stromberg both at Andritz, Inc. who
will direct a project to improve our understanding of the differences in lignin
structures amongst monocot and dicot angiosperms with emphasis on the Poaceae
family that includes wheat, corn, sugarcane, switchgrass and Miscanthus. These
differences in lignin structure would be due to biochemical and other natural
chemical processes during lignification. The academic partner (Francis) and
industrial partners (Stromberg and Romero) have been collaborating on two
different projects for more than two years. In this NSF GOALI project, it has
been observed that the lignin in sugarcane bagasse (SCB) depolymerizes to
monomers at surprisingly high yields under mild alkaline pulping conditions. The
other project, dominated by the industrial partners, showed that lignocellulosic
ethanol (LE) production is technically and economically feasible from some non-
woods that are available at low costs. Indeed, Andritz is presently in the
process of designing and building portions of a commercial LE plant and a large
LE demonstration plant for clients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society would benefit
if more energy were to be produced from wood and other biomass (CO2- neutral
sources) and by a reduction in the emissions of sulfur- and nitrogen-containing
compounds into the environment (from crude oil processing). The proposal
addresses one of the challenges associated with the production of LE that is
syntheses of value-added products from the lignin by-product. It is hoped that
favorable results would stimulate increased R&amp;D in the area of LE from wood
and other biomass. Development of new mechanisms, techniques and analytical
tools that can be used by the entire scientific community is also likely to
result from the research. The NSF funding would directly and indirectly help to
educate and train undergraduate students in the critical area of renewable
energy from biomass which is abundant globally.