* 1306058
* Nanoporous ionic circuits and ionic mimic of a neuron
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Zuzanna Siwy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Siwy and her group at the University of
California, Irvine will study ionic and molecular transport through artificial
nanopores of fully controlled geometry and surface chemistry. Research will be
focused on understanding how interactions between passing species and the walls
of nanopores can be harnessed to create interesting systems to guide and amplify
ionic and molecular signals. The research is inspired by properties of
biological membranes in a cell that contain multiple channels of different
functionalities, acting in concert to support physiological functions. Traveling
of the nerve signal down an axon and relay of information between neurons, are
examples of complex processes, which require multiple pores connected in
parallel in nerve cell membranes. The Siwy group will perform fundamental
studies on finding conditions in which transport of ions through one nanopore
influences ionic and molecular transport through a neighboring pore embedded in
the same membrane. They will investigate this issue by systematic varying the
distance between two nanopores from a few nm to a micrometer scale. Connecting
two nanopores with transport characteristics mimicking properties of potassium
and sodium voltage-gated biological channels will result in the preparation of
an artificial ionic neuron membrane. The research will use previous findings
from the Siwy group on the influence of surface charge and surface charge
patterns on the pore walls on ionic and molecular
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide interdisciplinary
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in surface
chemistry, nanofabrication, biophysics and biotechnology. The students will
learn state of the art fabrication tools to prepare nanopores with an opening
diameter as small as 1 nm, tuning chemical properties of nanopore walls, and
characterizing the structures electrochemically. The project will also lay
fundamental grounds for the formation of synthetic equivalents of biological
systems such as neuron, which could be directly applicable in building an
artificial cell. The performed research will provide fundamental understanding
of the formation of ionic circuits applicable in biological sensors and lab-on-
the chip systems. The award has an outreach program that will be realized in
collaboration with the Laboratory Experience in Physical Sciences (LEAPS)
initiative, created at the University of California, Irvine in spring 2012. A
hundred middle and high school students each year will be given an opportunity
to visit UC Irvine and the Siwy group to perform experiments visualizing
importance of nanotechnology in everyday life.