* 1306349
* Collaborative Proposal:RUI: Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Nanopores for Motion Control of Biologically Important Molecules and Ions and Undergraduate Training in Nanopore Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mark Ellison, Ursinus College
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 191,466.00

Dr. Mark Ellison from Ursinus College and Dr. Michael Strano from MIT are
supported by an award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry to investigate the motion of ions and
biologically relevant molecules through single-walled carbon nanotubes. Using
nanotube nanopore devices fabricated at MIT, they are conducting experiments to
study fundamental properties of these systems and to assess their usefulness for
the nanoscale detection and control of the flow of ions and molecules. This
research extends the knowledge of motion through nanopores to several important
areas, including amino acids and small neutral molecules. The research also
enhances our understanding of the role of nanopore properties, such as the
effects of functional groups at the pore mouth and nanopore surface charge on
the motion of ions and molecules through nanopores. The results of this research
provide foundational knowledge of nanotube nanopores and take an important step
toward utilizing them in practical devices.

The undergraduate researchers at Ursinus College involved in these projects
attain a variety of scientific skills. First, they obtain significant experience
conducting experiments in nanoscience. They also develop their abilities to
formulate, test, and revise scientific hypotheses. Additionally, the Ursinus
students significantly benefit from the collaboration with MIT, which includes
visits to MIT to conduct experiments with the high-grade research
instrumentation there. Students involved in this research will emerge as well-
trained young scientists with the tools to approach a wide range of scientific
questions.