* 1306226
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Mark Kaemingk, Kaemingk                Mark           A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 10/31/2015
* USD 159,056.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship award to Dr. Mark A. Kaemingk is supported
by both the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Office of International
Science and Engineering at the National Science Foundation. During the 24-month
fellowship, Dr. Kaemingk will work on a project titled, "Recruitment Dynamics of
Galaxias maculatus in the Oceanic Phase: Addressing the 'Uncharted' Patterns of
Larval Dispersal" under the sponsorship of Dr. Jeffrey Shima at Victoria
University in Wellington, New Zealand.

Galaxias maculatus, a fish species of cultural and economic importance to the
people of New Zealand, are experiencing declining populations. Much of the
current knowledge of this fish pertains to its freshwater life stage. There is
limited information during the 2-3 months when the fish larvae and juveniles
inhabit the ocean. This research aims to enhance the understanding of the early
life stages by investigating mortality rates, growth rates, and potential
factors influencing the dispersal patterns during the marine life stage. The
fish species will be sampled as larvae as they exit the rivers and streams into
the ocean, and as juveniles when they return from the ocean and re-enter the
rivers and streams. Otoliths, or ear stones, will be removed from both larval
and juvenile fish and examined to determine important parameters (e.g., age,
growth, mortality, duration of ocean life stage, natal stream or river) that
will provide a better understanding of this fish species' life history in a
marine environment.

As part of this research, Maori and Pacific undergraduate students (under-
represented groups within New Zealand) will be trained on this project. Research
results on G. maculatus population dynamics will also be shared within the local
Maori groups through informational presentations. The results from this research
has the potential of improving the care and management of this important fish
species. There is also a potential that knowledge gained from this research can
be used to inform the management of similar fish species (like salmon found in
the Northwest).

This award provides a unique opportunity for a US scientist to collaborate with
foreign scientists, and utilize the unique facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions available abroad.