* 1306017
* Using Neural Activity to Predict Behavior in Response to Persuasive Messages
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Emily Falk, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 10/31/2013
* USD 211,206.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various advocacy groups bombard
citizens with messages via email, print ads, and television broadcasts. Some of
these messages are meant to persuade citizens to perform a political action
(e.g., sign petitions, contact their congresspersons, etc.), some are meant to
pursuade them to buy certain products or subscribe to various services. Although
research has shown that persuasive messages can change people's self-reported
attitudes or intentions to perform certain actions, self-reports do not
necessarily predict change in behavior-suggesting that some processes are not
accessible to self-report measures. This project examines the extent to which
neural responses can predict persuasion-induced human behavior beyond what is
predicted by self-report measures. This project uses functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to determine the extent to which brain activity can
predict real-world behavior in response to persuasive messages, and to study the
underlying mechanisms that lead to effective persuasion. With the cooperation of
political advocacy groups, this project conducts a field experiment to validate
that messages predicted to be persuasive by brain data in the lab are in fact
effective at persuading a large number of citizens in the real world.
Ultimately, thee information provides basic scientific knowledge about the
mechanisms of persuasion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on previous
work showing that neural activity in the brain can predict individual and
population behavioral change in response to health communications. This project
examines the extent to which activity in brain regions implicated in self-
related and/or reward relevant processing predicts behavior, and provides basic-
science insight about common and divergent mechanisms leading to persuasion in
different domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the project's contribution to the basic science of social influence,
the study stands to make immediate and broad impacts. Execution of the research
will have broad impacts on the training of a next generation of scientists. As a
first generation Filipino immigrant and as the first person to receive a
doctorate in his family, the PI has a commitment to broadening participation by
underrepresented groups in the fields of political science and cognitive
neuroscience. During his postdoctoral training, the PI will mentor undergraduate
researchers from diverse backgrounds, work with groups that broaden civic
participation in underrepresented groups, and present the research findings to a
wide range of academic and nonacademic audiences.