* 1306942
* Experimental Nuclear Physics and Fundamental Interactions at Indiana University
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Joshua Long, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Edmundo Garcia-Solis
* 03/31/2017
* USD 5,543,998.00

The research supported by this award investigates: (1) How the spin of the
proton is distributed among its parts. Particles emitted when high-energy beams
of spin-aligned protons collide in the STAR detector at Brookhaven National
Laboratory's Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider can reveal how much of the proton's
spin is carried by its gluons or by different types of quarks and anti-quarks.
The group will search for the gluon contribution to the spin of the proton and
explore spin differences among antiquarks. They will also measure how polarized
quarks turn into mesons and baryons and search for indications that strongly
interacting matter breaks mirror symmetry;(2) The properties and interactions of
neutrinos. Neutrinos can change from one form to another, but all the evidence
doesn't quite fit at low energies. They will study the reasons for the larger-
than-expected neutrino interactions they have measured; (3) How strong the weak
force really is. They will gain new insights by observing the angular
distribution of the particles created when a neutron decays, and by testing
whether nature respects mirror symmetry as neutrons get captured in hydrogen;
and (4) What are the properties of the early universe. They will sharpen
theoretical predictions of the amount of helium left over in the Big Bang by
measuring the decay rate of the neutron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their research
activities educate the next generation of skilled PhD scientists for jobs in
research and teaching universities, industry and national labs, and medical and
computer technology. They redirected their cyclotrons to form the Midwest Proton
Radiotherapy Institute, which has treated more than 1000 cancer patients. They
co-organize and lecture at summer schools. They participate in the NSF REU
program. They mentor their postdocs to facilitate their future entry into
teaching and research institutions and the scientific community. They develop
undergraduate laboratories emphasizing nuclear technology, bring undergraduates
on field trips and assist with programs that encourage pre-college participation
in the Indiana University science curriculum. They engage bright young
undergraduates in science through jobs or projects which develop the research
skills they will need for success in graduate school. They reach out to the
local community through a variety of activities to awaken the interest of
students in our local public school system by visiting local high school science
classes, acting as judges in local science fairs and for the State Science
Olympiad, and presenting physics demonstrations at the Indiana State Fair. They
actively recruit female and minority applicants for positions at all levels
within the group and the physics department by serving on selection committees
for faculty searches and research fellowships for women. They work to make their
activities known to the public at large through laboratory tours and Open House
presentations, science cafe discussions, radio interviews, and press releases in
the local media.