* 1306647
* Interacting Quantum Mixtures of Lithium and Ytterbium Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Subhadeep Gupta, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 419,957.00

This award provides support for an experimental research program to study
quantum matter in a table-top setting using the precise tools of atomic physics.
Collections of atoms will be cooled to about one-billionth of room temperature
and confined in electromagnetic traps in order to isolate its quantum
properties. Studies of interactions between atoms at the few-particle and many-
particle level will be carried out using mixtures of lithium and ytterbium
atoms. These studies will probe the fundamental yet complex three-body problem,
which abounds at all length scales from atomic binding to celestial mechanics.
Additionally, experiments with atoms trapped in optical lattice geometries will
be carried out, shedding light on condensed matter phenomena such as phase
transitions and pattern formation.

Concurrent with the research component, related education and outreach will be
actively performed. Graduate and undergraduate students will gain valuable
research experience in the course of the project, preparing them to join the
work force in academics and industry as the next generation of scientists and
engineers. The research program will also be leveraged to encompass outreach
activity. This will involve periodic lectures and lab tours for local community
college, middle and high school students, as well as summer research internships
through the NSF-Research Experience for Undergraduates program.