* 1306550
* Flavor Physics at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Mike Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports a new program of research by the MIT group of Mike Williams
on the LHCb Experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider, Geneva, Switzerland.
The primary function of LHCb is to search for physics beyond the Standard Model
(BSM) by studying rare and CP-violating decays of b and c hadrons. For at least
the next five years, LHCb will be the premier flavor-physics experiment in the
world. Williams has been one of the principal architects of the high-level
trigger (HLT) for LHCb in the recent past. This trigger allowed LHCb to collect
a nearly 100% pure b-bbar sample during experimental operations in 2011 and
2012. The PI wrote this trigger, making MIT uniquely qualified as a group to
prepare the experiment to handle future running conditions, including a
collision energy of 13-TeV and significantly higher luminosity.

MIT has a strong record in outreach, and PI Williams will build upon this
tradition with links to the LHCb program. Over the past 6 summers, undergraduate
students from the NSF-supported REU program at Hampton University have
participated in the MIT Summer Research Program (MSRP). These students are
supervised by members of the MIT Laboratory for Nuclear Science (LNS) and
interact with various LNS faculty, staff and students. This program provides a
unique opportunity for minority students to experience life at a large research
institute. Beginning in the summer of 2013, students from this program will be
able to do flavor-physics research using LHCb data.