* 1306877
* Evolution of substrate specificity and chemical mechanism in thiamin diphosphate dependent enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael McLeish, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 367,400.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Michael McLeish from Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis to study how enzymes evolve to choose their substrate
and products. Many enzymes use thiamin, in the form of thiamin diphosphate, as a
cofactor to help them speed up biological reactions. Several of these enzymes
use pyruvate as a primary substrate, but have evolved to convert it to different
products. This project will use directed evolution to generate new thiamin
enzymes that use pyruvate. A combination of steady-state kinetics and 1H NMR and
CD spectroscopy will be used to determine rate constants for the individual
chemical steps in the reactions of these new enzymes and X-ray crystallography
will be used to determine the structures of the evolved enzymes. The kinetics of
the new enzymes will be compared to those of their naturally-occurring
counterparts and related to any structural differences between these two types
of enzymes. The goal of the project is to attain a fundamental understanding of
the principles guiding the evolution of substrate and reaction
specificity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most enzymes are very specialized and have
evolved to recognize only one or two reactants and form one or two products.
This project will explore the way in which an unusual group of enzymes is able
to operate in the same manner using the same reactant, but turn the reactant
into different products. Understanding this process is significant because this
group of enzymes can be used in industrially important reactions. The study will
require the evolution of enzymes with altered substrate specificity, and will
allow undergraduate and graduate students an opportunity to explore both
chemical and biological processes. They will receive training in microbiology,
molecular biology, enzyme kinetics, NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography.
Importantly, they will also be able to integrate these studies with an outreach
component that includes developing a teaching unit and a hands-on enzymology
project for middle school students.