* 1306311
* Development of a New Class of Thermal Transducers Through Phase-Change Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Nelson Sepulveda, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2017
* USD 360,001.00

The objective of this program is to enable a new micro-actuation technology
through the successful integration of vanadium dioxide thin films in micro-
electro-mechanical structures. To demonstrate the advantages of the new
technology, specific vanadium dioxide-based devices will be developed; including
monolithically integrated programmable micro-actuators capable of exerting
repeatable forces well beyond the theoretical limits of current technologies,
and micrometer-sized biomimetic fins. The intellectual merit is the development
of a new technology that will create a different approach for micro-actuation
and establish new paradigms in the field. The fundamental mechanism that will be
used relies on the large stress changes that occur during the solid-to-solid-
structural phase transition of vanadium dioxide thin films. Preliminary results
show that the devices to be developed will be capable of larger strain energy
densities, higher reversibility and repeatability, increased switching speeds,
and due to the strongly coupled mechanisms during the phase-change of vanadium
dioxide enhanced multifunctionality. The broader impacts are to transform the
field of thermal transducers by translating a recently observed fundamental
phenomenon into a new operating principle for micro-actuators, and to understand
how to make the best use of this new technology in related fields such as micro-
robotics, -surgery, - manipulation, and energy harvesting. The outreach
activities include experimental demonstrations to visiting pre-college students,
who will have the opportunity to manipulate micro meter-sized objects. The
program will integrate underrepresented groups in the planned research and
educational activities.