* 1306878
* Tailoring Light-Matter Interaction in Plasmonic Nanostructures based on Epitaxial Metallic Films: From Classical to Quantum Regime
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Chih-Kang Shih, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 775,919.00

Technical Description: The field of plasmonics is a vibrant frontier in
photonics which aims at manipulating light-matter interaction well below the
diffraction limit by utilizing plasmonic resonances in metals or heavily doped
semiconductors. One outstanding challenge relevant to practically all plasmonic
applications is the high loss introduced by either absorption or scattering due
to grain boundaries and surfaces roughness. Among the commonly used materials,
silver (Ag) has the best characteristics and the lowest loss in a wide
wavelength range. The objective of this project is to investigate atomically-
smooth epitaxial Ag films, as well as nanostructures either fabricated from such
films or placed in their close proximity, as a new platform for plasmonic
applications. The specific aims include: (i) Characterization of optical
constants and measurement of surface plasmon polariton propagation distances in
epitaxial Ag films. By minimizing scattering from grain boundaries and surface
roughness, how intrinsic processes such as electron-electron and electron-phonon
scattering determine the optical properties of metallic films will be examined.
(ii) Investigation of exciton-plasmon interaction in hybrid nanostructures, and
particularly the quantum dynamics of individual semiconductor emitters near the
epitaxial thin films and plasmonic nanostructures fabricated from such
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: This research project is
on light-matter interactions at atomically-smooth epitaxial silver films in both
the classical and quantum regimes. The research is significant because epitaxial
metal films provide many exciting opportunities in fundamental science and
applications. Improved understanding of how to shape light-matter interaction
using the highest quality metallic films may lead to discoveries of new
optoelectronic devices. The project provides extensive training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate student. In addition, the PI plans to implement
"flipped classroom" for improving instructional effectiveness in large
introductory physics courses, and also to establish a bridge program in
collaboration with the University of Texas at El Paso to recruit and mentor
minority students.