* 1306992
* Deformation spaces of geometric structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Richard Canary, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2017
* USD 236,618.00

Prof. Canary proposes to study deformation spaces of geometric structures
arising from representations of hyperbolic groups into semi-simple Lie groups.
Many of these investigations are motivated by the classical study of the
Teichmuller space of hyperbolic (or conformal) structures on a surface. For
example, the Hitchin component of the space of (conjugacy classes of)
representations of a closed surface group into PSL(n,R) has been shown to have
many striking resemblances to Teichmuller space. Prof. Canary, in collaboration
with Bridgeman, Labourie and Sambarino, has recently developed a mapping class
group invariant metric on each Hitchin component which restricts to the Weil-
Petersson metric on the Fuchsian locus. Prof. Canary proposes to investigate the
properties of this metric and use it as a tool to understand the geometry of the
Hitchin component. More generally, he proposes to study metrics on spaces of
Anosov representations of word hyperbolic groups into semi-simple Lie groups.
Prof. Canary also proposes to study the topology and geometry of deformation
spaces of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. The Ending Lamination Theorem provides a
classification of the manifolds in these deformation spaces, but as the
invariants in this classification are not continuous, it does not provide a
parameterization. Recent work has shown that the topology of these spaces has a
rich structure and many intriguing questions remain to be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Canary will study deformation
spaces of geometric structures on manifolds. A 2-dimensional manifold is a space
which looks locally like the 2-dimensional plane, e.g. the surface of a
basketball or a pretzel. A geometric structure gives a way of measuring
distances and angles on the manifold. It is natural to then study spaces of
geometric structures (or shapes) on a fixed manifold. The classical Teichmuller
theory studies all hyperbolic geometric structures on a fixed surface.
Teichmuller theory has played a central role in several mathematical fields,
e.g. complex analysis and dynamics, as well as in physics, especially in string
theory. Similarly, a 3-manifold is a space that looks locally like 3-dimensional
Euclidean space. The universe we live in is an example of a 3-dimensional
manifold. Professor Canary proposes to study deformation spaces of hyperbolic
geometric structures on 3-manifolds. More generally, Prof. Canary will study
both the geometry and the topology of deformation spaces of geometric structures
arising from representations of groups into semi-simple Lie groups. In addition,
Prof. Canary will continue his commitment to undergraduate education, by
continuing his involvement with curriculum development in courses using inquiry-
based learning techniques, and his work mentoring graduate students and
postdoctoral assistant professors.