* 1306573
* CDS&E: Matrix-Free Algorithms for Large-Scale Hydrodynamic Brownian Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Edmond Chow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2017
* USD 515,247.00

Brownian dynamics (BD) is a computational method for macromolecular simulation
with a myriad of applications in multiple areas including biology and chemical
engineering. Currently, many BD simulations ignore the effect of the long-range
hydrodynamic interactions (HI) between particles in a fluid. This choice is made
to reduce the computational cost of these simulations, although it is now
appreciated that HI is responsible for much of the dynamic behavior of
macromolecules that we observe in reality. This project will develop matrix-free
algorithms and software to enable the modeling of hydrodynamic interactions in
large-scale BD simulations. Further, although BD has been a staple technique, it
is not able to accurately model HI in high volume fraction systems, such as the
crowded environment inside biological cells. A solution is to use Stokesian
dynamics (SD). A drawback of SD is its high computational cost, but this cost
can also be reduced for large systems using a matrix-free approach. New matrix-
free free approaches for SD will be developed that are more efficient than those
currently available, and that are also applicable to BD. The high computational
cost of HI is due to the construction and manipulation of a large hydrodynamic
mobility or diffusion matrix. This project's approach is to replace this
mobility matrix by an operator applied with a FFT-based particle-mesh Ewald
summation, thereby asymptotically reducing the computational complexity and
storage requirements compared to commonly used methods. Since the mobility
matrix is no longer available, this approach requires the use of matrix-free
algorithms for computing Brownian displacements. The algorithms will be
implemented in a high-performance software library for multicore nodes and GPUs.
The library can be used by other researchers to add fast HI capabilities and
also SD functionality to their existing BD codes. Data analysis tools to handle
long and large trajectory output files will also be developed. The software
tools will be demonstrated on large-scale biological simulations to study the
mechanisms behind diffusion in the E. coli nucleoid. BD simulation is the main
tool used in biology for studying intra-cellular transport and the diffusive
mechanisms that lie behind almost all cellular processes. This work will pave
the way for other researchers to perform much more realistic BD simulations at
large scales. Furthermore, the algorithms developed here may be applied to a
wide range of other particle simulation methods in mechanical and chemical
engineering and materials science where Brownian particles interact through
long-range forces. The results of this work will be disseminated to both the
application and computational science communities. Software implementing the new
algorithms will be released in library form under an open-source license, and
educational materials on particle simulations, accessible to computer science
and mathematics students, will be made freely available on the Web.