* 1306420
* RUI: Investigation of Organic and Biological Multilayers Adsorbed on Elongated Metal Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Patrick Desrochers, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2018
* USD 95,000.00

Professor Donald Perry of the University of Central Arkansas is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry to investigate the catalytic and thin film growth properties of small
organic and biological molecules on elongated metal nanostructures (EMNs) formed
by oblique angle deposition (OAD). The long term goals of the project are to
develop transformative methodologies of growing EMNs using OAD over a range of
metals for applications in surface-enhanced vibrational spectroscopies, and to
demonstrate the versatility of EMNs by exploring their catalytic properties and
characterizing how an array of EMNs composed of different metals can alter the
intermolecular forces in thin organic/biological films.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide new methodologies for growing
metal nanostructures and will influence a range of applications in chemistry,
biochemistry, physics, and engineering where the interactions of metal
nanoparticles with organic and biological molecules are important. Undergraduate
students will also be impacted by exposing them to new developments in
nanotechnology and the possibilities of a research oriented career in a Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) field. Involvement of
undergraduates in research will also motivate students to choose careers in
Arkansas where only 20% of the population has a four-year college degree.