* 1306938
* Layered Inorganic Solids as Building Blocks for Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Thomas Mallouk, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 432,000.00

This project explores the chemistry of layered transition metal oxides in order
to better understand catalyst-support interactions and to develop improved
materials for electrochemical energy storage. Both aspects of the research
exploit the fact that nanosheets, as two dimensional crystals, are good building
blocks for materials with designed structures and emergent properties. One part
of the project builds on the discovery that nanoparticles of certain metals and
metal oxides have anomalously high stability when supported on metal oxide
nanosheets. Calorimetry, electron microscopy, and X-ray scattering and
absorption are being used to characterize the interfacial bonding. The primary
goal of this part of the project is to map the periodic trends in bonding
between late transition metal/metal oxide nanoparticles and early transition
metal nanosheets. A second part of the project explores new synthetic routes to
electroactive transition metal oxides. Topochemical reactions produce anhydrous,
three-dimensionally bonded oxides in the form of nanoplates, which can be
synthesized in the presence of graphene sheets to make a shuffled deck of
conducting and electroactive "cards." Metal ions in the composites are in close
contact with both the conducting graphene layers and the electrolyte that
permeates them, and thus the materials have very good cyclability as
supercapacitor and battery electrodes. These materials are being studied by a
combination of X-ray scattering and absorption, electron microscopy, and
electrochemical techniques.

This project focuses on the synthesis of new materials that exploit the
synergistic properties of nanoparticles. Understanding and controlling the
stabilization of metal nanoparticles can have an important impact in
heterogeneous catalysis. New synthetic routes to composites of oxide nanosheets
and conducting graphene can also inform the development of secondary batteries
that use more abundant, less expensive materials and have much longer cycling
life. These research projects are integrated with the training of graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as with outreach programs that provide hands-on
research experiences for high school teachers and for K-12 students from
disadvantaged school districts.