* 1306921
* Development of a Hydrogen-Lyman-alpha Microscope and Interferometer
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Tom Milster, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2016
* USD 377,542.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new type of microscope and
interferometer that&lt;br/&gt;uses the hydrogen Lyman-alpha (HLA) line at
121.6nm as the source wavelength. This&lt;br/&gt;wavelength is convenient,
because it is short enough to provide transverse
resolution&lt;br/&gt;improvement of 5X above visible light microscopes and,
although it is in the vacuum ultraviolet&lt;br/&gt;(VUV) portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum, it has an atmospheric transmission window
of&lt;br/&gt;up to several centimeters in dry air. Therefore, samples do not
need to be in vacuum. Subnanometer&lt;br/&gt;vertical resolution is expected
from the interferometer configuration. The intellectual&lt;br/&gt;merit is a
first demonstration of imaging and interferometry at the HLA wavelength for a
variety&lt;br/&gt;of objects, like graphene, silicon nanophotonic circuits and
metamaterial structures. Potential of&lt;br/&gt;this technology will be
investigated with advanced optical designs, and an attempt will be
made&lt;br/&gt;to measure auto-fluorescence of biological structures, like
electrospun fibrinogen fibers. The&lt;br/&gt;broader impacts of this technology
are numerous, where the instrument transforms the range of&lt;br/&gt;practical
optical microscopy into the VUV. Many researchers are now studying nano-
devices&lt;br/&gt;and structures, and evolution of this instrument will enable
characterization on this scale, which&lt;br/&gt;is between optical microscopy
and electron microscopes or atomic-force microscopes. As the&lt;br/&gt;source
technology improves, this system could enable sub-nanometer transverse
resolution by&lt;br/&gt;application of stimulated emission-depletion ideas for
fluorophore-tagged proteins in biological&lt;br/&gt;membrane samples. With
respect to commercial interests, this technology provides a
potentially&lt;br/&gt;useful tool for inspection of wafers and masks in the
semiconductor industry.