* 1306897
* Hamiltonian Theory of Fractionally Filled Chern Bands, and Disorder in Quantum Hall Ferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Ganpathy Murthy, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education aimed to investigate
novel states of electrons. Electrons are generally thought to be indivisible
which is true at room temperature and under the conditions under which solid
state devices normally operate. Most important to this research are the quantum
Hall states, which occur in a two-dimensional sheet of electrons, usually at an
artificially engineered interface between semiconductors, cooled to temperatures
less than one degree from absolute zero, and placed in an a very strong magnetic
field perpendicular to the sheet. In the simplest such state the electron can be
thought of as "split" into three objects known as composite fermions. Each
composite fermion has a charge one-third that of the electron along with other
exotic properties. The charge and other properties of the excitation depend on
the particular state. Some of these states offer possible platforms for quantum
computing.

Conventional, semiconductor quantum Hall states need extreme conditions. In the
past decade a new way of potentially realizing such states has been proposed
where the environment inside some materials can generate the equivalent of very
strong internal magnetic fields. The PI aims to study both conventional quantum
Hall states and these newly discovered possibilities, known as topological band
materials.

The PI will investigate whether topological band materials can support states
that have not been discovered before, even in traditional quantum Hall systems.
A main goal of the research is to understand the properties of such states in an
approximate analytical way where the underlying physics is clear. This will
enable understanding the similarities and the differences between conventional
quantum Hall states and those in topological band materials. The PI will also
utilize this approach to investigate conventional quantum Hall materials
subjected to elastic strain.

Any real material contains lattice imperfections, substituted atoms, and
defects, collectively known as disorder. The PI will develop a controlled
approach to investigate the role of disorder where experiments on some quantum
Hall states suggest that the effect of disorder is important.

The PI will also contribute to the organization of Winter Schools in India and
will participate in the reorganization of the University Honors Program which
provides a mechanism for students to learn about many disciplines and benefit
from experimental learning.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education aimed to investigate
quantum Hall states and topological states in materials. It has recently been
established that materials with strong spin-orbit coupling can form new types of
insulators, known as topological insulators, because of the topological
properties of the band structure. When such bands are full, they have a
quantized Hall conductance. With partial filling and strong electron-electron
interactions fractional quantum Hall-like states form.

The research has two major thrusts:

1. Investigating novel states in fractionally filled topological bands: The PI
will use an analytical approach to investigate Composite Fermion states in
topological bands. (a) Ground state energies for gapped states at the principal
fractions and collective excitations will be computed in the Hamiltonian
approach developed for the fractional quantum Hall effect. (b) Transitions
between principal fraction states of different spin will be investigated using
ground state energy crossings. (c) Two different possibilities for the half-
filled state, an electron fluid and a Composite Fermion fluid, will be
investigated. The nature of the phase transition and low-energy excitations near
the phase transition will be studied. (d) Edge states of fractionally filled
topological bands will be studied using a conserving approximation. This is
relevant for determining whether the topological band materials have excitations
other than those of conventional fractional quantum Hall states. (e) Two time-
reversed copies of topological bands are a model of a time-reversal invariant
topological insulator. Fractionally filled states of strongly interacting
electrons will be studied in this model. (f) Tilted fields or strain in the
conventional fractional quantum Hall effects produces an anisotropy which has
been measured. The PI will develop an analytical theory of such anisotopic
states, and potential phase transitions into nematic-like states.

2. Elucidating the role of quenched disorder in quantum Hall ferromagnets: The
prototypical system is the filling 1 bilayer, where experimental observations
pose numerous challenges to theory, and where disorder seems to be essential.
(a) The PI and collaborators will, at the first stage, mimic the nonperturbative
effects of disorder by imposing a strong periodic potential on the quantum Hall
system. Hartree-Fock and effective low-energy theories will be used to determine
the generation of topological charges in response to the potential. (b)
Collective excitations will be computed to derive an experimental signature in
light scattering of such states. (c) A low-energy field theory will be
constructed near the phase transitions between different arrangements of
topological charge. (d) Weak disorder will be put in at this stage and
renormalization group techniques will be used to determine the low-energy long-
wavelength behavior near the transitions.

The PI will also contribute to the organization of Winter Schools in India and
will participate in the reorganization of the University Honors Program which
provides a mechanism for students to learn about many disciplines and benefit
from experimental learning.