* 1306542
* SusChEM: Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Iron Oxysulfide for Terawatt Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Meng Tao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

Technical Description: The objective of this project is to synthesize and
investigate iron oxysulfide, in particular sulfurized hematite, with the goal of
replacing critical components in the current solar cell technologies for next-
generation photovoltaics. Sulfurized hematite, with an appropriate concentration
of sulfur, will potentially meet the cost and efficiency requirements for
terawatt photovoltaics. The scientific tasks of the project include: 1) First-
principles studies of iron oxysulfide and copper oxysulfide as solar
photovoltaic materials; 2) Development of deposition and sulfurization methods
for sulfurized hematite; 3) Investigation of its electrical and optical
properties as a function of sulfur content; and 4) Development of solution-based
n-type and p-type doping methods for hematite. The major innovations in this
project include: 1) the use of three Earth-abundant elements, iron, oxygen and
sulfur, for bandgap engineering to create a semiconductor better suited for
solar photovoltaics; 2) the use of largely solution-based processes for film
deposition and doping to ensure low-cost solar cells in the end; and 3) a
multidisciplinary approach, where first-principles studies and experimental
studies are joined to push forward the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: The success of this project will enable a sustainable
solar cell technology, which is capable of low-cost, high-efficiency and most
importantly terawatt-scale deployment, allowing solar electricity to become a
major source of energy in our future. In addition, this project includes a
targeted effort to increase the representation of American Indians in science
and engineering as well as increase the awareness of local Arizona tribes on
photovoltaic technologies. The principal investigators work with entities such
as the American Indian Science and Engineering Society and Arizona Department of
Commerce to promote photovoltaic technologies in remote tribal communities,
provide research opportunities to American Indian science and engineering
students, and engage and interest American Indian youth about science and
engineering in general. This project also provides synergistic support to the
newly-established U.S. Photovoltaic Manufacturing Consortium (PVMC) for its
mission to facilitate a robust domestic solar cell industry. The success of this
project will provide a technology pipeline for PVMC, while PVMC provides
industrial connections for this project.