* 1306932
* RUI: Photophysics of Small-Molecule and Polymeric Fullerene-Transition Metal Organometallic Supramolecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Keith Walters, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 165,000.00

RUI: Photophysics of Small-Molecule and Polymer Fullerene-Transition Metal
Organometallic Supramolecular Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program supports Professor Keith A. Walters of
Northern Kentucky University for the synthesis and spectroscopic behavior of
organometallic systems that combine fullerenes and transition metals. Relatively
simple Diels-Alder reactions have allowed for the functionalization of these
molecules and provided an opportunity to incorporate fullerene into pi-
conjugated ligand structures and ultimately to form complexes with various
transition metals (e.g., Rhenium and Ruthenium). Spectroscopic analysis of the
ensuing systems indicates the presence of multiple excited states and decay
pathways. Stark absorption spectroscopy is being used to confirm that charge
transfer is taking place. In this work, the researchers will continue these
investigations with several goals: 1) to investigate other reaction
methodologies to improve the yields of the reactions, including the use of
microwave-assisted reactions; 2) to explore other polyaromatic moieties (e.g.,
coronene and corannulene) in analogous systems to better understand the role of
the organic subunit in the observed photophysics; 3) to modify the linkages
between the transition metal and fullerene to possibly increase their excited
state interaction; and 4) to expand efforts beyond small molecules and prepare
poly(phenylene-ethynylene)-type polymers containing the substituted fullerene
building blocks and transition metal chromophores. The research will expand
knowledge in the field of organometallic supramolecular chemistry and provide
new structures for use in various molecular device applications, for example in
solar energy conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Over the past two decades, there
has been keen interest in the design of molecular devices for use in energy
conversion (e.g., solar cells) and charge transport (e.g., molecular wires).
This approach has evolved from purely organic polymeric systems, which require
considerable redesign to modify the system?s properties, to organometallic
systems that utilize transition metal chromophores to tune the organic polymer.
The Walters research group has been interested in these systems for some time,
where both the synthetic challenges and system characteristics upon light
excitation are explored. This work is centered upon methods developed by
undergraduate researchers that attach a simple chemical handles to fullerene.
Organometallic systems bringing together these modified fullerenes and
transition metals have exhibited complex behavior following light excitation
that suggests charge does move between portions of the molecule, a necessary
component in the desired molecular devices. Moving forward, this research seeks
to further understand how these molecules interact with light. The acquired
knowledge will also be applied in the creation of polymeric systems, an
essential evolutionary step in the use of these materials in the desired new
molecular devices. In addition, undergraduate researchers will work with other
department instructors and with the chemistry student group at Northern Kentucky
University in their outreach activities to advance the importance of alternative
energy and nanoscale materials through presentations and other demonstrations.