* 1306367
* Theoretical Problems in Soft Matter and Quantitative Biology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* David Nelson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education at the
interface between materials science, statistical physics and biophysics. The PI
will study dislocation-mediated elongation and bending of rod-shaped bacterial
cell walls, and related phenomena in colloidal particle assemblies adsorbed on
cylinders. In the case of bacteria, remarkable glycan strand extension machinery
powers systematic dislocation climb, leading to growth dynamics with few analogs
in conventional materials science. Dislocation trajectories should be influenced
by long-range elastic interactions and by external stresses and turgor pressure
via the Peach-Kohler force. Glide dynamics dominates for colloids on solid
cylinders. Because isolated dislocations with Burgers vectors along the cylinder
axis behave like compact grain boundaries, separation via glide may be able to
mediate transitions between different phyllotactic particle packings.

In another thrust, the PI will use the tools of non-equilibrium statistical
dynamics, population genetics and probability theory to address issues related
to migrations, competition and cooperation. These phenomena have played a
crucial role in the history of many species, on both solid surfaces, as in
migrations of invasive species, or bacterial invasions of animal tissue, and in
liquid environments such as the ocean, where photosynthetic organisms such as
cyanobacteria and phytoplankton compete in the presence of fluid advection. With
range expansions in mind, the PI will study how mutualistic competitions between
microorganisms play out in solid environments in two and three dimensions, with
a particular emphasis on the effect of front undulations combined with
inflationary dynamics. Because much of earth's evolutionary history took place
in rivers, lakes and oceans, the PI will also study fixation times and
probabilities for discrete organisms that reproduce and compete subject to
advecting fluid flows, including high Reynolds number turbulence. Especially
interesting phenomena arise for microorganisms whose doubling times are in the
middle of a Kolmogorov-like cascade of eddy turnover times.

This project provides an unusual interdisciplinary environment to educate and
train students in modern condensed matter theory, materials theory, statistical
physics, and biological physics to bring theory to bear, in part, on problems
related to the environment, sustainability, and biologically inspired materials.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education at
the interface between materials science, statistical physics and biophysics.
Cooperation among microorganisms is at the heart of many complex systems. For
example, gut bacteria can help animal hosts digest cellulose. On an ecosystem
level, plants often rely on fungi to receive important nutrients. Even human
societies are products of cooperation between individuals. Despite the apparent
advantage and pervasiveness of mutualism, its existence is often difficult to
explain: Cooperation can succumb to cheating and to stochastic number
fluctuations. A detailed theory of how microorganisms on solid surfaces and in
dynamic environments such as the ocean compete and cooperate will lead to a
better understanding of the ecology of our planet and living matter with
implications for advanced materials inspired by biological organisms. This
research is also important to advance understanding of how cell walls endow
growing microorganisms with a shape and strength. Of particular interest are
gram-negative bacteria, whose cell walls consist of a thin meshwork of soft
strands composed of large chain-like molecules. An improved understanding of
growth mechanisms could lead to more efficient antibiotics, and better
remediation of human and animal diseases.

This project provides an unusual interdisciplinary environment to educate and
train students in modern condensed matter theory, materials theory, statistical
physics, and biological physics to bring theory to bear, in part, on problems
related to the environment, sustainability, and biologically inspired materials.