* 1306437
* o-Phenylenes: Controlled Folding and Directed Oxidative Planarization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Christopher Hartley, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 382,000.00

Professor C. Scott Hartley of the Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry at
Miami University (Ohio) is supported in an award from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program for research focusing on the ortho-
phenylenes (o-phenylenes). These form a simple class of conjugated polymers that
have recently been shown to spontaneously fold into conformations similar to
alpha-helices, with aromatic stacking interactions in place of hydrogen bonding.
Methods are being developed in this work to control and exploit this folding to
give molecules with complex, functional three-dimensional structures. Further,
the o-phenylenes are being used as substrates for the synthesis of graphene
fragments. Synthetic methods developed as part of this goal should be of broad
interest in the bottom-up preparation of graphene nanostructures, and the
specific target compounds have been identified as a new class of liquid crystals
with board-like structures.

The o-phenylenes, as investigated in this project, link disparate but important
areas of organic materials chemistry and nanotechnology. First, non-biological
molecules that fold analogously to protein subunits have long been sought
because of their potential in areas such as catalysis and energy conversion.
Because of their structural simplicity, o-phenylenes may be an important
platform to address the challenge of deriving complex, functional structures by
assembling smaller folded pieces. Second, graphene is arguably the most
important single material under development for future applications in
nanoelectronics. Structurally well-defined graphene pieces are important to
understanding the basic properties of graphene and have their own applications;
in this project, the targets are members of an unusual class of liquid crystals
with potential in organic electronics and high performance light valves. Broader
impacts of this project include the training students in organic synthesis,
liquid crystals characterization, computational chemistry, and various forms of
spectroscopy, as well as fundamental concepts in molecular design,
conformational analysis, self-assembly, and electronic structure. Some
experiments have been designed to have significant pedagogical value for less-
experienced researchers; the project includes an outreach effort to get high
school teachers involved in the research experience.