* 1306269
* The catalytic activity and mechanical stability of hollow nanoparticles (nanocages) of different sizes, shapes and shell structure
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 280,000.00

Prof. Mostafa A. El-Sayed from Georgia Institute of Technology is supported by
an award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program to
study catalytic activity and mechanical stability of hollow metal nanoparticles
(nanocages). These come in either single or double shells and exhibit more
efficient catalytic properties than solid nanoparticles. The suggestion that
this enhancement arises from confinement effects is being investigated. There
are several objectives in the research: 1. To compare the cage effect in gaseous
reactions with those in solution. 2. To develop a plasmonically enhanced SERS
technique to detect transient reaction intermediates in reactions occurring
within the cavity of gold or silver nanocages. 3. To study the effects of
roughening the nanocage surface and changing its shape or size on the reaction
rate. 4. To explore the catalytic properties of the double shell hollow
nanoparticles through developments in synthesis, comparison of electron transfer
reactions with those on core-shell nanoparticles, and investigations of the
alloying effect (intra-atomic diffusion between the two metallic shells).
Semiconductor-metal hybrid double shell nanoparticles are being used to study
photocatalysis and ultrafast electron transfer dynamics using femtosecond pump-
probe techniques. 5. The mechanical stability of the nanocages having plasmonic
nanoshells is determined using the group's ultrafast lattice coherent
oscillation method as a function of the metals used, shell thickness, degree of
the alloying process

Catalysis is a $900 billion field and is responsible for the more efficient
production of over 90% of consumer materials. Nanocatalysis is a rapidly
expanding field and could have important impacts on numerous technical fields
such as chemical production, sustainable energy, and materials chemistry. The
research proposed here has the potential to find new catalysts of industrial
importance. The research will not be limited to nanocatalysis research, but will
include introducing a new technique based on femtosecond dynamics to measure the
mechanical strength of the nanocages used. This work is being carried out by
their Laser Dynamics Lab, which frequently provides collaboration and help to
other scientists and engineers needing to measure ultrafast dynamics in
nanoparticle systems. The lab is very active in educating postdoctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students. Usually half of the
undergraduates, including those in the NNIN and/or REU summer program, are
females or minorities. The group maintains good relationships with the faculties
at these neighboring minority-serving schools and the PI regularly gives
seminars there, while the Laser Dynamics Laboratory is on the Georgia Tech list
of laboratories that are open to visiting groups of students and teachers from
the local community.