* 1306074
* RUI: Cutting-Edge Nuclear Physics Research (Collaborative and Interdisciplinary) at Hope College
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Paul DeYoung, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2017
* USD 299,106.00

The Hope College Nuclear Group is studying neutron-rich unstable nuclei near the
drip-line with the Modular Neutron Array (MoNA) and Large area multi-
Institutional Scintillation Array (LISA) at the National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) and is applying a variety of nuclear techniques
(e.g. Particle Induced X-Ray Emission, Rutherford BackScattering, Nuclear
Reaction Analysis, and Ion Beam Induced Luminescence) to a range of
interdisciplinary questions with the Hope Ion Beam Analysis Laboratory (HIBAL).
In addition, work to harvest isotopes with medical and stewardship applications
is moving from development to production. This award supports two faculty in
both of these efforts, each of whom will include undergraduate researchers in
all aspects of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students and
faculty are investigating unstable neutron-rich nuclei to refine the theoretical
understanding of light, neutron-rich nuclei. The group is measuring the excited
states of 9He and the ground state of 13Be with the MoNA/LISA/Sweeper system at
the NSCL. The interdisciplinary portion of the research involves developing
techniques to harvest isotopes of strategic and medical interest at the NSCL and
future Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) and examining, with HIBAL,
metalloprotein stoichiometry, forensic characterization of layered automotive
paints, forensic comparison of auto glass fragments, and luminescence studies of
feldspars and carbonates. Collaborators include other Hope researchers
(characterizing structured nanomaterials) and groups outside Hope College (metal
contamination in sediment, river sediment origins, and flame retardants). All of
these initiatives are important for the specific science result they yield and
for possible far-reaching impact on the analytical techniques used in many
areas. The Hope College Nuclear Group has demonstrated its ability to carry out
similar research for a number of years, and the new experiments are designed to
match our interests and abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, this
project has a significant impact on a large number of undergraduate researchers.
Experience shows that undergraduate research enhances a student's education and
better prepares the student for graduate work or for a wide variety of STEM
careers in either industry or academia.