* 1306845
* Studies of Molecules in Strong Laser Fields Using Harmonic Generation and Ion Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* George Gibson, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 359,999.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using high-intensity ultra-fast laser
pulses we can now control both the bond length and orientation of diatomic
molecules. This gives us a unique opportunity to directly probe the structure of
molecular orbitals and ask fundamental questions; such as, is there coherence
between the different orbitals and how do relativistic orbitals differ from
regular orbitals? In addition to probing molecular structure, we will also use
our ability to manipulate molecules in order to generate highly excited states
of the molecular ions with the ultimate goal of creating population inversions
in the vacuum-ultraviolet spectral region. Finally, we will test our hypothesis
that certain configurations of the molecule may be highly susceptible to
generating harmonic radiation driven by an intense fundamental laser. Moreover,
we have developed a new phase-matching technique that greatly enhances the
efficiency of harmonic generation, in general. Coupling these two techniques
together may provide a new source of intense short-pulse vacuum-ultraviolet
radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
phase-matching techniques may lead to a new class of coherent, ultra short pulse
VUV radiation sources. The strong field techniques developed in this award may
lead to important insights into molecular structure useful for physical
chemistry. More broadly, interest in high-harmonic generation, attosecond
physics, and short-pulse x-ray free electron lasers has exploded over the past
decade, and this award contributes towards understanding important aspects such
as inner-orbital ionization, excitation, and vibrational coherence. Finally,
this award provides hands on research training in state-of-the-art laser and
optical technologies and prepares them for academic or high-tech career paths.