* 1306227
* Hadron Structure Through Exclusive Reactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Tanja Horn, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2017
* USD 350,539.00

The fundamental goal of nuclear science is to understand all forms of nuclear
matter, e.g., the origin and structure of the nucleus at core of the atom, and
the nucleons and their quark and gluon constituents which account for nearly all
of the mass of the visible universe. Over the last decade, hard exclusive
reactions have emerged as a class of processes providing novel information on
the parton (quark and gluon) distributions in hadrons - the particles sensitive
to the strong force. Factorization theorems allow for expressing amplitudes in
terms of the Generalized Parton Distributions (GPDs), which are expected to
provide a universal description of nucleon structure in both momentum and
coordinate space. Experimentally, access to the transverse spatial structure
relies on asymptotic freedom, allowing the hard interaction of the experimental
probe with one parton to be unambiguously separated from the residual soft
interaction of the struck parton with the rest of the hadron. In a kinematic
regime where hard-soft factorization applies, exclusive measurements of a photon
or meson originating from the struck parton can be used to create a tomographic
image of the nucleon. This project plays an important role in these studies,
specifically through the PI's exclusive photon and meson production experiments
at Jefferson Lab, which will be essential for a reliable interpretation of the
results from the GPD program at both 6 GeV and 12 GeV.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Young scientists, graduate students, and undergraduate
students play an integral part in this project, which provides them with
opportunities to further their training and education. These will include the
opportunity to gain experience in the design, assembly, and testing of modern
instrumentation for the detection of radiation and subatomic particles, fast
signal processing electronics, and scientific data analysis. Furthermore,
learning to work in a large international scientific community will prepare
young scientists and students for the modern work environment at academic
institutions, national laboratories, and industry. The PI's research projects
have contributed significantly to the education of graduate and undergraduate,
and, over the past three years, ten high school students. She has considerable
experience working with minority students, and by providing a female role model,
she could encourage women to pursue advanced studies in physics.