* 1306262
* Polypeptide Hybrid Particles and Their Constituents
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Paul Russo, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2015
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research activities will
develop and explore submicron particles having synthetic polypeptide shells atop
silica cores, sometimes with magnetic inclusions. The polypeptide shells render
the particles responsive to temperature and good sensors of molecular asymmetry,
while the silica cores make it possible to direct these functions to a
particular location. Whole particles and their individual polypeptide and silica
components will be studied. Specifically, the following work will be performed:
1) The effects of core radius, shell polymer coverage, and shell polymer
molecular weight on a thermally driven coil-to-helix transition will be assessed
by small-angle X-ray and neutron scattering, static and dynamic light
scattering, optical rotatory dispersion, and NMR; 2) The particles, acting as
very large monomers, will be polymerized into nearly uniform chains by using a
magnetic field to align them perpendicular to a striped optical pattern that
will initiate a photochemical crosslinking reaction originally developed for
proteins; 3) Better understanding of silica core structure, including newly
discovered variants, will be achieved by chromatography with fractionation and
scattering of X-ray or visible radiation; 4) The stiffness of a water-soluble,
uncharged polypeptide will be determined by combined chromatographic and
scattering methods; 5) A big difference between the mobility of rigid rods and
polypeptide semiflexible filaments will be explored by an optical tracer method;
6) A long-standing problem with the measurement of rigid rod diffusion using
pulsed-gradient NMR will be re-assessed using a very high-field-gradient
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of nature's most important building blocks
and functional engines are made of proteins. Synthetic polypeptides, which can
be made in large amounts by simple methods, borrow the protein structure and
retain many protein-like features, such as the ability to rotate light and
respond to thermal or chemical changes in the environment. The problem is that,
even though they are very large molecules, polypeptides are still very small
things. This makes them hard to manipulate. The proposed work marries the
functionality of bio-inspired polypeptides to the easy manipulation of larger
particles using gravitational or magnetic fields. This will be accomplished by
placing the polypeptides onto colloidal silica, essentially little balls of
glass, resulting in core-shell particles. By adjusting the temperature, the
shape of the polypeptide shell will be altered. This will provide information on
shape transitions similar to those used by influenza virus to penetrate the
human body. Chains of particles crosslinked by the action of light will result
in nearly uniform filaments that bring polymer science into the visible regime
for easier inspection, while facilitating the creation of even larger
structures. Studies on a particularly attractive water-soluble polypeptide will
lead to improved understanding of the kinds of polymers used to make high-
strength fibers, such as those woven into bullet-proof vests. In terms of
societal impact, a middle school chemistry competition will be further expanded
in minority-serving districts, thanks to successful attempts to woo professional
educators to this cause. New outreach initiatives with a public science &amp;
technology middle school will ensue, integrated with real world experience and
laboratory research.