* 1306398
* Nano-focused multimodal imaging, control, and interaction dynamics: ultrafast spectroscopy reaching the single molecule level
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Markus Raschke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2017
* USD 401,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Markus Raschke and his group at the University of
Colorado at Boulder extend ultrafast spectroscopy and coherent control to the
nanoscale. Femtosecond plasmonic nanofocusing on a tip will be used to
investigate the ultrafast electron dynamics of single quantum systems
(molecules, quantum dots) in non-homogeneous environments. Studying the infrared
vibrational dynamics and control via optical antenna coupling will push IR
spectroscopy to the homogeneous sample size and single molecule limit. Via the
demonstration of nanoscale near-field pump-probe and its extension to
multidimensional spectroscopy, the group will gain insight into nano-scale
charge and energy transfer in thin films of model molecular semiconductors,
phase segregated polymers, and device relevant bulk heterojunction materials.

Imaging methods that can record details below the conventional resolution limit
(~200 nm) are needed to study the interplay between intermolecular coupling and
morphology that often dictates the function of important natural and engineered
multi-component molecular and nano-materials, such as semiconductors. The
investigation of the femtosecond dynamics on nanometer length scales provides
insight into the mechanisms that determine their structure, charge-, and energy-
transfer. That understanding on the nano- and intermolecular scale will
ultimately allow for the systematic design of functional materials such as
membranes, polymers, or organic photovoltaic systems as well as control of their
performance. This highly interdisciplinary research program also provides a
broad learning environment for graduate and undergraduate students. As part of
this effort, the Prof. Raschke is making the chemical nano-spectroscopy
techniques developed broadly available through industry collaborations and at
user facilities at National Labs.