* 1306709
* AGEP-BPR Interpersonal and intrapersonal mechanisms in improving mentoring relationships for URM students in STEM fields
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Ozlem Ayduk, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 498,710.00

The University of California-Berkeley proposes to conduct an AGEP Broadening
Participation Research in STEM Education project entitled Interpersonal and
Intrapersonal Mechanisms in Improving Mentoring Relationships for
Underrepresented Students in STEM Fields. The purpose of the project is to
understand how students can develop positive mentor-mentee relationships and the
psychological barriers that may undermine positive mentor-mentee relationships.
The researchers will examine whether targeting socio-emotional processes at the
interpersonal and intrapersonal levels can enhance effective mentoring for
underrepresented minority students in STEM. The research focuses both on the
lack of interpersonal trust and warmth, that has been shown to characterize
intergroup interactions (inter-individual processes), and the egocentric
perspective and the heightened sense of threat that often accompany such
interactions (intra-individual processes). The project will provide
theoretically and empirically informed insights about the nature of the
mentoring relationship by contributing to the understanding of how
underrepresented students' identification with and success in the university and
their majors can be improved. The results could prove to be transformative and
significant for all STEM disciplines.