* 1306170
* RUI: Photoelectronic Properties of DNA-Chromophore Hybrids and Porphyrin Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Walter Smith, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 09/30/2019
* USD 240,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1306170 PI: Smith, Walter ORG: Haverford College

Title: RUI: Photoelectronic properties of DNA-chromophore hybrids and porphyrin
nanowires

Technical: Self-assembled molecular circuits hold the promise of dramatic
reductions in manufacturing and energy costs compared to conventional
lithographic techniques, as well as the possibility of completely new
functionalities. Creation of complex self-assembled circuits requires an easily
programmable and sophisticated recognition capability; this can be provided by
DNA. For electronic devices, the DNA must conduct charge. However, for distances
longer than 50 nm, the conductivity of DNA is poor, especially in the dry state.
In this work, methods for increasing the conductivity of DNA will be explored
and characterized. The specific objectives of this work are: (1) Investigate
methods of imparting long-range conductivity or photoconductivity to DNA by
forming DNA/chromophore hybrids of two types, one with porphyrins intercalated
into the base stack and one using modified bases that absorb in the near UV. (2)
Refine techniques for selectively attaching the DNA/chromophore hybrids to
specific electrodes, a requirement for the development of complex circuits. (3)
Test predictions of a model for the photoelectronic properties of porphyrin-
containing self-assembled nanowires, using 4-probe measurements, measurements
under ultrahigh vacuum and variable O2 concentration, and measurements using
circularly-polarized light. (4) Develop methods of creating three-terminal
junctions in the DNA-chromophore hybrids, and also test for cross-talk between
crossing hybrid strands. The work also focuses on nanowires self-assembled
solely from porphryin molecules. These may have applications in molecular
electronics, including light harvesting. Furthermore, probing the porphryin
nanowires can give important insights about fundamental mechanisms in the
DNA/chromophore hybrids.

Non-Technical: The results of this work will help to lay the foundations for an
eventual true revolution in self-assembled molecular electronics. This field is
at the stage where a deeper understanding of the basic science is needed to make
progress. This work will provide pioneering insights into the physics of
conductivity (as opposed to transfer of single charges) in DNA-chromophore
hybrids. This research will include the first measurements of the effects of
circularly polarized light on the photoelectronic properties of a self-assembled
nanofilament. Results from this work will motivate researchers in physics,
physical chemistry, and biophysics. Fifteen undergraduates and three high-school
students will get an intense, cutting-edge research experience, including
training in careful scientific practice as well as subfield-specific training.
About 40% of these will be from groups underrepresented in physics (women,
African-Americans, and Latinos). Each student will create a web page including a
video interview to present his/her research to the general public. The PI will
use his experience from mentoring 79 undergraduate research students to create a
website/wiki devoted to mentoring physics undergraduate researchers, with
sections devoted to each subdiscipline of physics. The PI will host the
condensed matter portion of the website, will recruit other faculty to host the
other sections, and will publicize the site by methods including annual contacts
with all coordinators of physics 'Research Experience for Undergraduates'
programs. This website will be consulted by many research mentors each year, and
will provide at least a 10% improvement in the research efficiency of their
students, corresponding to thousands of work hours for all the students put
together in a single year. Further, the habits instilled in these students
should persist through graduate school and beyond.