* 1306933
* Design and Implementation of a Nonlinear Interferometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Mary Jane Shultz, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 02/28/2017
* USD 431,447.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurements and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Mary Jane Shultz of Tufts University will conduct
a research program that seeks to develop and implement a versatile, generally
applicable, nonlinear interferometer. The interferometer is based on nonlinear
spectroscopy, sum frequency generation (SFG); a potentially powerful, surface-
specific vibrational spectroscopy. Currently tapping the power of SFG is
thwarted by the nonlinear nature of SFG, challenging spectral interpretation.
Recently developed techniques hold promise for linearizing the spectrum, but are
hampered by instrumental complexity and protocol implementation resulting in
large uncertainties. Based on similar linear interferometers, the new design is
expected to result in a three orders-of-magnitude accuracy improvement. Improved
accuracy is particularly critical of aqueous solution interfaces. Thus, the new
instrument will be applied to three systems: acetonitrile-water, ammonia-water,
and ice-air. These three systems are each of interest in their own right:
Acetonitrile-water is a common chromatography solvent, ammonia is the only
significant basic atmospheric gas and is the source of particulate matter for
cloud condensation nuclei via neutralization of acidic gases, and ice literally
shapes the world. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will construct a new
instrument that allows unprecedented resolution for probing weak but important
hydrogen-bond interactions. Understanding these interactions is essential for
understanding the complex interplay between water and a variety of interfaces
including cell membranes and other biological materials, atmospheric pollutants,
and minerals in the Earth's crust. The project will be performed with the
assistance of a post-doctoral associate accompanied by undergraduate students
including women and members of underrepresented minorities. All will receive
technical training in cutting-edge spectroscopic tools. In addition to these
activities, the Shultz group is an active participant in the departmental COOP
(Chemistry Organized Outreach Program) designed to both bring front-line
research to local secondary schools and to bring promising secondary students to
the University for hands-on experience.