* 1306372
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Luke Powell, Powell                  Luke           L
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2016
* USD 207,000.00

A competition experiment between wintering Redstarts and resident Yellow
Warblers in Jamaican mangrove forest

In the Caribbean, the winter influx of billions of migratory songbirds coincides
with low arthropod abundances, and food shortages can limit wintering songbird
populations. Despite recent progress in understanding migratory bird ecology,
the question remains: how do so many ecologically similar migrant and resident
species coexist during the most resource-poor time of year? All available
evidence suggests that food-based competition allows coexistence of migrant and
resident birds in Jamaican mangrove forests, yet no published study in any
system has experimentally demonstrated that interspecific competition for food
exists between migrant and resident birds. The primary objective of this study
is to perform a reciprocal removal experiment to determine whether interspecific
competition exists between resident Yellow Warblers (Dendroica petechia) and
wintering American Redstarts (Setophaga ruticilla). This study will quantify and
compare: 1) resource use (three-dimensional territory size, foraging behavior),
2) fitness indices (body mass change, spring departure date), and 3) density of
Yellow Warblers and ecologically similar American Redstarts on control
(unaltered) and experimental (one species removed) mangrove plots.

This project seeks to determine if food-based competition drives coexistence
between resident and migrant birds, providing much needed insight into the
processes that maintain migratory bird populations throughout the annual cycle.
The study will maximize interactions with Jamaican and Caribbean/Hispanic
students by recruiting field technicians from underrepresented groups and hiring
at least one Jamaican field assistant each year. In collaboration with the
University of the West Indies, two five-day field courses will be run for
undergraduate- and graduate-level Jamaicans.