* 1306449
* Magnetoelectric Coupling in Low Symmetry Multiferroics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Ratna Naik, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 307,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore the
physical basis for the concurrent magnetic and ferroelectric order that arises
in multiferroic materials. The development of multiferroic order in materials is
typically very tightly constrained by the symmetry of the lattice, which
determines the transformation properties of the magnetic structure and the
associated ferroelectric order. However, in low-symmetry crystals, the relative
directions of the magnetic and ferroelectric structures are not restricted by
symmetry, and expected to be determined only by the microscopic interactions.
This project will focus on probing the microscopic interactions in multiferroics
by studying the magnetic and ferroelectric order in iron vanadate, which is a
low-symmetry material. These studies will use thermodynamic, magnetic, and
electrical techniques to characterize the properties of iron vanadate samples,
specifically the details of the magnetoelectric coupling. The microscopic
interactions will be tuned by substitutional doping. This project will support
the education and training of a PhD student, along with a number of
undergraduate and high school studies. These students will be trained in a range
of materials science techniques, including sample preparation, and sample
characterization at low temperatures. Beyond the specialized training for these
students, this project also included outreach efforts to introduce area high
school students to current physics research topics as well as contributions to
the development of a new Master's program in materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Materials having
magnetic properties, such has conventional disk drives, and materials having
electrical properties, such as transistors, both have integral roles in modern
electronic devices. Recently, researchers have identified a new class of
materials that have both magnetic properties and a special kind of electrical
property called ferroelectricity. These materials, called multiferroics, offer
the potential for developing entirely new types of electronic devices, like
magnetic storage that can be controlled using voltage pulses, or non-volatile
computer memory that will maintain information even with the power switched off.
This project will investigate how these simultaneous magnetic and electrical
properties develop in a specific iron-based multiferroic. This will be
accomplished using thermodynamic, magnetic, and electrical measurements, all at
very low temperatures, with additional detail on the magnetic properties
provided by neutron scattering studies. This project will clarify how these
joint magnetic and electrical properties can be controlled, with the goal of
eventually designing materials that can be incorporated into consumer devices.
Along with furthering our basic understanding of these multiferroic materials,
this project will provide important training for students. One PhD graduate
student, three undergraduate students, and three high school students will learn
about preparing materials and electrical and magnetic studies at low
temperature. This project will provide a strong background for these students as
they prepare for careers in advanced scientific research and technology
development.