* 1306869
* CDS&amp;E:A large-scale data discovery framework for understanding intermittent, performance-critical phenomena in simulations of offshore wind turbines
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Scott Baden, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,005.00

CBET 1306869&lt;br/&gt;S. Sarkar (PI), S. Baden (co-PI) and Y. Bazilevs (co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;UC San Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large scale simulation data sets
that describe spatial and temporal variation of physical phenomena over a
multitude of scales often contain characteristic flow features that are
infrequent but critical to understanding the natural phenomenon or engineered
system in question. The research will lead to a novel data discovery framework,
to flexibly identify, extract and interrogate features of interest in space-
time, leading to both a reduction in size of stored data sets and identification
of time periods where high-fidelity simulation of the system is necessary. The
data discovery framework will provide algorithmic and data structure
optimizations to enable the user to flexibly query the data over space and time.
It will be implemented on Gordon, a new data-intensive platform with non-
volatile storage - flash memory. The proposed research will bring together
investigators with expertise in computer science, fluid mechanics and structural
mechanics to advance computational and data-enabled science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The motivating engineering application is
offshore wind turbines. The wind turbine simulations proposed here are ambitious
and will couple computation of flow-structure interaction at the temporal
resolution of seconds with simulations of realistic atmospheric turbulence. Such
simulations of a full-scale wind turbine are unprecedented and will be enabled
by a computational framework that brings together the following components:
advanced large eddy simulation for atmospheric flow, isogeometric analysis for
fluid-structure interaction, and a finite element method with weak boundary
conditions for the blade aerodynamics. Atmospheric conditions in a marine
boundary layer, particularly under conditions of stable stratification, lead to
intermittent bursts of wind shear and pressure that can have an unusually large
effect on the rotor blade structural response. Quantification and understanding
of such large-impact events using the data discovery framework will enable
better and more cost-effective blade design, better operational performance, and
more accurate wind resource forecasting. There will also be better understanding
of extreme atmospheric events that lead to wind turbine blade failure. The data
discovery framework to be developed here will have broad impact since it can be
employed in any field involving multi-scale, time-dependent data containing
dynamically important objects of lower-order complexity. Some examples are
cardiovascular imaging and modeling, hurricane prediction, epidemiological
modeling, and cloud dynamics.