* 1306862
* Evolution of silencing proteins in yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Laura Rusche, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 07/31/2017
* USD 670,984.00

Intellectual Merit The advent of new DNA sequencing technologies and a wealth of
sequenced genomes have intensified the need to develop innovative approaches for
extracting functional insights from these data. Although homology is a useful
principle, homologous proteins sometimes have different functions across
species, and these differences can reconfigure regulatory pathways governing how
organisms respond to environmental changes. Consequently, extrapolating function
from model species can be misleading. To understand how proteins acquire new
functions and the biological consequences of these changes, this project focuses
on a group of proteins named Sir2 deacetylases, which are found in all kingdoms
of life. These enzymes are proposed to coordinate life-cycle transitions with
nutrient availability. Importantly, Sir2 deacetylases display varied modes of
action and may enable species-specific responses to nutritional conditions. This
project employs a combination of genome-scale and classical functional studies
to investigate the evolutionary history of Sir2 in genetically tractable yeast
species. The first part of the project examines how Sir2 orthologs have evolved
new functions by acquiring interactions with a variety of protein complexes that
repress gene expression, and the second part explores the consequences of such
changes as they relate to the physiology of cells. To elucidate the steps by
which Sir2 acquired its function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the functions of
Sir2 orthologs will be compared in species at appropriate evolutionary distances
from S. cerevisiae, namely in Candida lusitaniae, a representative species of
the Candida clade, and in the yeast Kluyveromyces lactis. As these species have
different responses to nutrient levels in terms of specific aspects of their
physiology, this project has the potential to elucidate the roles of Sir2 in
such responses. Broader Impact This project will provide training opportunities
for two graduate students, several Duke undergraduate students conducting
independent studies, and summer students participating in two programs designed
to encourage disadvantaged students to pursue careers in science. The Duke
Summer Research Opportunity Program (SROP) targets undergraduates, and the North
Carolina Section Project SEED program supports high school students. In
addition, this project will promote the recruitment and retention of female
scientists by supporting the careers of a graduate student and the principal
investigator, who are both women. Finally, the development of additional yeast
species, such as K. lactis and C. lusitaniae, as model organisms will greatly
facilitate future studies in molecular evolution by enabling researchers to test
their hypotheses using multiple experimentally tractable yeast species that are
separated by hundreds of millions of years of evolution.