* 1306117
* RUI: Selection and assessment of biomimetic templates for mineralization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Aren Gerdon, Emmanuel College
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2017
* USD 240,086.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1306117 PI: Gerdon, Aren ORG: Emmanuel
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: RUI: Selection and assessment of biomimetic
templates for mineralization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The purpose of this
proposal is to support and mentor undergraduate students pursuing research in
mineralization and biomimetics. Biomineralization of calcium phosphate and other
solid materials in vivo exists at the interfaces between inorganic chemistry,
biochemistry, and materials science. This interface is central in research areas
ranging from diatomaceous silica production in our oceans to materials
production for advanced technologies. Practical relevance is also found in the
prevalence of degenerative bone disease and dental caries, which suggest a need
for the development of new restorative medical procedures. While knowledge of
the bone formation and regeneration process is incomplete, research has
identified hydroxyapatite (Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2; HAP) as a material with potential in
healthcare applications due to its close resemblance to the mineral phase of
bone and teeth. This research aims (1) to elucidate the kinetics of HAP
formation by developing integrative analysis methods that provide real-time
quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) mass analysis, optical microscopy, and
controlled microfluidic solution dynamics, and (2) to improve the availability
of biomimetic templates by combinatorial identification of unique and
conformational DNA aptamers that can enhance nucleation, growth, and
crystallinity of mineralization. In working toward these goals, this project may
yield: (1) the identification of a high affinity HAP-binding DNA aptamer, (2) a
new template for HAP biomineralization, and (3) new analysis tools for
biochemistry and bioengineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical: The purpose of this proposal is to support and mentor undergraduate
students pursuing research in mineralization and biomimetics. All research
proposed here will be completed by undergraduate science students at a liberal
arts institution with a record of training women scientists. A primary focus
will be on mentoring and training undergraduate students as they enter into
research at the freshman or sophomore level and on ensuring that these students
contribute to and integrate with the larger scientific community. Students
involved in research will be trained in numerous instrumental methods (QCM,
optical and electron microscopy, FT-IR, and others), biochemical methods (PCR,
electrophoresis, and others), and general research methods. This will broaden
their opportunities to enter into the industrial workforce or graduate studies.
The proposal will have a significant positive impact on sustainable research and
the infrastructure of the science and education departments at Emmanuel College
due to the cross-disciplinary nature of the project and by encouraging
collaboration between the principle investigator and other faculty as well as
between research students across the campus. Findings from this research will be
made available on campus and off campus through local and national conference
presentations and peer-reviewed publication. This work will impact high school
students that come to the campus for Biomedical Research Symposium workshops
related to this research and run by undergraduate researchers. One promising
high school student will also be recruited to join the research group and work
side-by-side with the undergraduates. Work in the summer will carry forward to
impact first-year science students as they engage in a research experience lab
in their general chemistry course, led by undergraduate researchers, with the
goal of using research and discovery to engage and attract first year students
to STEM education. Collectively, these studies have transformative potential for
undergraduate students and will develop our understanding and control of the
mineralization process.