* 1306495
* U.S.-Sweden Planning Visit: Research on the Dynamics of Complex Systems with Ion Storage Rings
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Michael Fogle, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 04/30/2014
* USD 21,511.00

The goal of this catalytic project is to strengthen a U.S.-Swedish collaboration
between Principal Investigator Michael Fogle of Auburn University, in Alabama,
and Richard Thomas at Stockholm University. Together, they will examine the
dynamics of molecular dissociation under well controlled energy states and
experimental scattering conditions. Their research plan involves conducting
studies at the new double, electrostatic, ion storage ring facility in
Stockholm, known as DESIREE (Double ElectroStatic Ion Ring ExperimEnt). The
DESIREE facility is a unique ion storage ring that allows simultaneous storage
of both cation and anion species, thereby permitting detailed investigations of
many processes involving molecular ions. Results from the team?s early studies
of dissociation dynamics in this system should contribute to broader
understanding of similar processes in more complicated systems, with relevance
to atomic and molecular physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration engages
a U.S. graduate student and builds upon the PI?s research in electron-driven
dissociation dynamics and his Swedish partner?s expertise in dissociation
dynamics and interaction-specific rate constant measurements, particularly for
astrophysics. By using the new ring facility to explore electron-driven dynamics
in ion-ion charge exchange processes, the researchers expect to gain preliminary
insights into negative ion chemistry in the upper atmosphere. Subsequent work at
the DESIREE facility with its sensitive detectors is expected to help define
direction for follow-on projects that can have broader impacts by adding to our
basic understanding of change exchange mechanisms related to atmospheric
chemistry, a wide array of complex carbon systems and biomolecules, as well as
astrophysics. Furthermore, by participating in the initial ion-ion and ion-
electron experiments at DESIREE, this timely developmental project should help
to reinforce beneficial Europe-U.S. partnerships and open opportunities for
future cooperative experiments at world class European facilities such as
DESIREE and the Cryogenic Storage Ring, under construction in Germany.