* 1306898
* Arbitrary Optical Waveform Generation Using Molecular Modulation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Deniz Yavuz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this award is to construct an arbitrary optical waveform generator
that utilizes coherent vibrations and rotations in molecules to produce a broad
Raman spectrum of light. This will generate several millions of wavelengths
simultaneously, covering the spectral region from infrared, visible to the
ultraviolet. Furthermore, the spectrum will be in the continuous wave domain.
The intellectual merit of this work is, through the understanding of the
complex, nonlinear interactions in the molecular Raman process, to transform the
concept into a working device, capable of delivering new research discoveries.

Constructing such a light source has been one of the biggest challenges in
optical science since the invention of the laser in 1960. Once constructed, such
a device will have important applications in a broad range of areas and will
have the potential for a large impact on society: (1) By combining all of the
different-colored lasers, flashes of light whose duration is shorter than a
femtosecond (a billionth of a millionth of a second) can be created. Such short
pulses are necessary to probe and to understand the ultrafast electronic
processes that occur on these time scales. With this new understanding, new
ultrafast electronic devices may be constructed. (2) By using all these lasers
with different colors, a large number of atomic and molecular species can be
investigated simultaneously. Such a capability is necessary to better understand
the structures of complex molecules, including biological molecules such as
proteins. 3) A device that produces millions of lasers could be used to control
certain chemical reactions with unprecedented precision. As a result, specific
chemical products (such as pharmaceutical drugs) may be synthesized much more
efficiently. The research provides human resources training. Graduate students
and undergraduate students participate in research that is at the forefront of
optical physics and laser sciences. They will acquire skills that are critical
for the future high technology workforce.