* 1306366
* RUI: Scanning electron microscopy and multiscale modeling of mesoscopically rough faceted ice
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Steven Neshyba, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2017
* USD 230,987.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professor Steven Neshyba at
the University of Puget Sound. The research project supports laboratory and
theoretical studies into the surface morphology of rough crystalline ice. It is
known that when ice crystals in atmospheric clouds (such as cirrus clouds)
develop rough surfaces, the clouds tend to reflect more light. Critical details
about this roughening remain elusive. This Research in an Undergraduate
Institution (RUI) award will grow ice crystals inside a variable pressure
scanning electron microscope, which will allow characterization of surface
morphology at a resolution not possible using light microscopy. These
investigations will assess the response of roughening to variations in
temperature, vapor supersaturation, and impurities at the ice-vapor interface,
and will provide the basis for modeling the shortwave scattering properties of
such crystals. In terms of theory, an integrated molecular dynamics and
reaction-diffusion approach to simulating the dynamics of viscinal ice-vapor
interfaces will be developed. These simulation results will be used to test
hypotheses about the mechanism of formation, morphological properties, and
light-scattering consequences, of rough ice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates at the University of Puget Sound, as well
as science teachers from Sammamish High School, will be engaged in the research
as co-investigators and co-authors of scientific publications, and through
collaboration with researchers at the Institute for Organic Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic. High school
teachers will be funded to do research in Dr. Neshyba's laboratory. This will
help them to develop problem-based learning modules in their classrooms.