* 1306760
* AGEP-T-Collaborative Research: California Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Douglas Rees, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 02/28/2018
* USD 288,000.00

The California Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate was created
in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 12-554) for the AGEP-Transformation (AGEP-T)
track. The AGEP-T track targets strategic alliances of institutions and
organizations to develop, implement, and study innovative evidence-based models
and standards for STEM graduate education, postdoctoral training, and academic
STEM career preparation that eliminate or mitigate negative factors and promote
positive practices for URMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California AGEP is a
collaboration between four doctoral degree granting institutions in California,
the University of California at Berkeley, the University of California at Los
Angeles, Stanford University, and California Institute of Technology. The vision
of the California AGEP is to establish an alliance to ensure that
underrepresented minority (URM) PhDs from alliance institutions, in much larger
numbers, aspire to and populate the ranks of the postdoctoral population, the
faculty at competitive research and teaching institutions, the federally funded
national laboratories, and scientific think tanks. The California Alliance
focuses on increasing diversity in the academic fields with the greatest URMs:
the mathematical, physical, and computer sciences; and engineering
(MPCS&amp;E).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the California AGEP is to
significantly increase the movement of URM students into the most competitive
research and teaching careers in the MPCS&amp;E fields to systematically address
ethnic underrepresentation in the particular STEM fields and at the institutions
where it is most severe and remains seemingly intractable nationally. The
California Alliance defines URMs as African Americans, Chicanos, Latinos, Native
Alaskans, Native Pacific Islanders, and American Indians. CA-AGEP participants
are US citizens who are enrolled as doctoral students, who are URMs, and who are
in the MPCS&amp;E fields at the alliance institutions during the award period,
including those who graduate during the award period, and URM postdoctoral
fellows who are US citizens in the MPCS&amp;E fields at the alliance
institutions during the award period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
California AGEP include:&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1. Create an unprecedented
community of practice across the four institutions that include graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, faculty, and key
administrators.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2. Engage faculty as mentors to advance URM
students' careers across these four institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3.
Develop, implement, evaluate and set new standards for professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 4. Promote URM PhD advancement to faculty and
postdoctoral ranks in STEM through new partnerships and using new tools, and in
partnership with federally funded national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 5.
Conduct research that leverages the architecture of the California Alliance to
identify which of the specific programs and initiatives that are in effect in
research universities working to increase diversity are most impactful in
ensuring URM students' success and professional ascension in the MPCS&amp;E
fields, and more generally within STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities that
contribute to the model for this alliance are many and quite varied; they
include: &lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Hold an annual retreat, with both discipline-
specific and cohort-specific sessions. Introduce students, postdocs and faculty
to each other using in-person sessions, web site and new media. Create
recruitment opportunity for faculty, departments, and national
labs.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: The Internal Steering Committee (ISC) and the
Implementation Team (IT) make faculty aware of California AGEP (CA-AGEP). Invite
and stimulate alliance-wide faculty advisement and mentoring of CA-AGEP students
&amp; postdocs. Include substantial presence of faculty at the annual retreat.
Engage faculty in development of professional development sessions. Engage
faculty in recording and streaming of professional development activities on the
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: Develop and institute a complete collection of
professional development sessions &amp; provide cross-alliance access to all CA-
AGEP students. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 4: Develop and market new joint California
Alliance postdocs. Offer postdoc opportunities to California Alliance students.
Encourage departments to create further postdoc opportunities where strong
applicant pool warrants this. Link all 4 CA-AGEP universities to the University
of California President?s Postdoctoral Fellowship Program (PPFP) for
professional development and networking in an extended national postdoc
community. Create database of CA-AGEP scholars and access at annual retreat to
graduating PhDs for direct recruitment by CA-AGEP and other university
department representatives and national labs.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 5: Conduct
annual surveys of students with measures related to well-being, identification
with the university, attitudes, experiences, perceptions, and performance.
Conduct semi-structured interviews with students, postdocs and faculty. Collect
and analyze mentor reports. Use of dismantling strategy in
research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CA-AGEP includes a social science research
study that employs a dismantling treatment strategy to link exposure and
utilization of the various initiatives and services offered to students through
the CA-AGEP with individual and group outcomes. Individual student level
attitudinal assessments draw primarily from the social-psychological and
educational literature on factors that relate to achievement, both population-
general (e.g., self-esteem) as well as measures of variables that specifically
tap into URM students' experiences (e.g., experiences relating to racism).
Institutional assessments focus on the qualities of the institutional programs
and structures, and these measures tap into sociological-level variables.