* 1306209
* New Phases and Phenomena in Orthogonal Bent-Core Liquid Crystals and Their Relationship to Molecular Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Noel Clark, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 732,500.00

TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;The study of bent-core molecules is currently a principal
driving force in the advance of the basic science of liquid crystals, uncovering
a host of exotic new soft matter structural themes and unexpected behavior,
including the appearance of spontaneous polar ordering and chirality. This
project, suppported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Condensed
Matter Physics Programs will first pursue an important emerging new direction
for exploration of the bent-core theme: orthogonal ferroelectric smectics, in
which the liquid crystal molecules are oriented perpendicular to the layer
planes in lamellar phases. The work focuses on design, synthesis, and
characterization of new bent-core smectics, with the long-term goal of
developing an understanding of the molecular structure-supramolecular property
relationships in this highly interesting self-assembling soft matter system.
Based upon the history of the liquid crystal field, the discovery of new soft-
matter phenomena in the course of this research could lead to new applications
with significant impact on the economy and jobs creation. Education and training
of undergraduates and graduate students is also an important aspect of the work,
and a strong K-12 and undergraduate outreach activity is integrated into the
program. In all of these education and outreach activities, a key focus is
increasing diversity (gender and ethnic) at the undergraduate, graduate, and
faculty levels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystal
science has revolutionized modern society, driving the creations of critically
important, and perhaps the most visible, components of smart phones, other
portable computers, and televisions. The liquid crystals themselves are mixtures
of organic molecules with carefully selected combinations of properties,
enabling the magic of modern flat panel screens. Perhaps the most fundamental
scientific issue in this regard is the relationship between the structure of the
molecules, and the properties of the liquid crystal phases, which are
necessarily composed of large numbers of molecules, and which self assemble to
form useful materials. This project seeks to understand these structure-property
relationships in a liquid crystal system at the frontiers of the field, allowing
the creation of new materials enabling innovation of advanced devices such as
holographic projectors and ultrafast switches for the internet.&lt;br/&gt;Based
upon the history of the field, the discovery of new liquid crystal phenomena in
the course of this research could lead to such new applications, with
significant impact on the economy and jobs creation. Education and training of
undergraduates and graduate students is also an important aspect of the work,
and a strong K-12 and undergraduate outreach activity is integrated into the
program. In all of these education and outreach activities, a key focus is
increasing diversity (gender and ethnic) at the undergraduate, graduate, and
faculty levels.