* 1306984
* Asymmetric Wave Propagation in Non-Hamiltonian Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Fred Ellis, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 165,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education to
develop new concepts for the control and management of wave propagation, for
example radio or light waves, in efficient and reconfigurable ways. Gain
mechanisms boost signals and help to transfer information, whereas loss is
generally considered to degrade performance and so is to be avoided. The goal of
this project is to develop new materials and circuit designs that carefully
balance gain and loss and are based on fundamental theoretical concepts from
seemingly unrelated areas of physics that have not been expressed in this
context to control wave propagation. The PIs will explore the interplay of gain
and loss and the unusual and unexpected phenomena that emerges. In the process,
the research will result in new electronic circuit and media design strategies
for efficient manipulation of electronic, optical, or more generally
electromagnetic signals. The research team, consisting of both theoretical and
experimental faculty and students, will equally engage computational methods
with experimental realities helping to guide the focus and language of the
theory as it develops. The experimental component revolves around exploring
theoretical concepts within the context of conceptually straightforward
electronic analogs. In addition to generating sound theoretical results, a
steady stream of engineering based, yet theoretically savvy physicists will be
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop the fundamental physics of elemental building blocks that are uniquely
capable of inducing reconfigurable asymmetric wave transport as either stand-
alone devices or as duplicated units of arrays. This will be achieved via the
interplay of strategically introduced non-Hermitian elements that can include
nonlinearities and time dependence. The proposed strategies are based on
variations of space-time reflection, or PT symmetry. Originally developed within
the realm of quantum mechanics, were its usefulness is dubious, the ideas have
had groundbreaking applicability to classical wave mechanics, although
experimentally accessible avenues remain a challenge. This research group will
use an experimental approach within the realm of equivalent electronic analogs
in a tight-knit theoretical-experimental collaboration to develop several new
aspects, including : (i) non-Hermitian, time-dependent scattering, exhibiting
directional-dependent invisibility or mode-selective gain in multimode arrays,
(ii) high figure of merit directional scattering from non-Hermitian nonlinear
systems where the transmittance intensity of the fundamental frequency is
enhanced, rather than diminished; (iii) the use of perfect impedance-matched
isolation and unidirectional absorption in linear systems induced by gyro-active
structures; and (iv) rapid state manipulation where PT-symmetry allows for
directionally dependent accelerated pseudo-Hamiltonian dynamics. The strategies
developed will allow for efficient prediction of the behavior in more
complicated applications such as active antenna arrays, electro-acoustic
integration, or complex metamaterial arrays, as they inevitably migrate into the
realm of active elements inherent in non-Hermitian systems. These ultimate
applications will become significantly less challenging if the fundamental
theory and consequent design approaches are well grounded within this more
transparent electronic context.&lt;br/&gt;The research team, consisting of both
theoretical and experimental faculty and students, will equally engage
computational methods with experimental realities helping to guide the focus and
language of the theory as it develops. In addition to generating sound
theoretical results, a steady stream of engineering based, yet theoretically
savvy physicists will be produced. Both undergraduate and graduate students will
acquire flexible and transferable skills in analytics, numerical computation,
and experimental methods, in addition to forming international collaborative
prospects through the team's established network.