* 1306538
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Kevin Kocot, Kocot                   Kevin          M
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship award to Dr. Kevin M. Kocot is supported
by both the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Office of International
Science and Engineering at the National Science Foundation. During the 24-month
fellowship, Dr. Kocot will work on a project titled, "Evolution of
Biomineralization in Aculiferan Molluscs" under the sponsorship of Dr. Bernard
Degnan at the University of Queensland in Brisbane, Australia.

Biomineralization is the process by which organisms secrete mineralized
structures such as skeletons or shells. The goal of this research is to study
the process of biomineralization in a group of evolutionarily important molluscs
using a genomic approach. High-throughput DNA sequencing will be employed to
survey the genomes of aplacophorans (sclerite-covered, worm-shaped molluscs) and
chitons (slug-like molluscs with 8 shell plates) and identify genes involved in
biomineralization. Where and when these genes are 'turned on' (expressed) in the
various types of cells involved in biomineralization will be investigated and
visualized using in situ hybridization. Also, non-mineral compounds incorporated
into mineralized structures will be identified using mass spectroscopy.
Additionally, a secondary goal of this research is to contribute to the paucity
of knowledge on the diversity of Australian aplacophoran molluscs including
formal description of unnamed species.

Mollusca is the second most species-rich group of animals and includes many
economically, ecologically, and biomedically important taxa. The great success
of molluscs can be attributed, at least in part, to their ability to secrete
calcified structures that provide them with physical support and defense.
Because of their beauty, intrigue, and diversity, biomineralized structures
(especially shells and pearls) produced by molluscs such as snails and bivalves
have long been valued by humans. This work focuses on the less familiar
aculiferans (aplacophorans and chitons) because recent genetic studies have
shown that they comprise an evolutionary important group, distinct from all
other molluscs. Additionally, recent paleontological studies indicate that
aculiferans have retained ancestral characteristics that have been modified or
lost in other molluscs. As molluscs are one of the first animal groups to appear
in the fossil record, this work will have important implications for
understanding of early animal evolution in general. In addition, this work will
inform studies on economically important molluscs such as pearl oysters and
abalone.

Dr. Kocot will train undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds on this
research. He will continue to be an active curator of invertebrates for The
Encyclopedia of Life and an active contributor to Wikipedia articles in my
field. In addition, he will continue to serve as a mentor to undergraduate and
early-career graduate students through MentorNet.

This award provides a unique opportunity for a US scientist to collaborate with
foreign scientists, and utilize the unique facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions available abroad.