* 1306785
* Understanding the Role of Grain Boundaries in Limiting the Critical Current Density of Pnictide Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Eric Hellstrom, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 543,962.00

NONTECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Pnictide superconductors, which contain arsenic, one
of the pnictogen elements in the periodic table, are scientifically and
technically interesting materials. They are scientifically interesting because
they also contain iron, which, until the pnictide superconductors were
discovered, was thought to prevent superconductivity. They are technically
interesting because they are one of the very few superconducting materials that
have properties that may make them suitable for practical applications. The most
important property for practical applications is the ability for the
superconductor to carry enormous amounts of current and for this current to go
across grain boundaries in polycrystalline round wires. The pnictide
superconductors have unexpectedly high current transport across grain boundaries
and they can be made as round wires, which is the preferred form for practical
applications. This research investigates the factors that control current
transport across grain boundaries with the goal of increasing it even further.
Wires made with these pnictide superconductors may help improve the performance
and decrease the operating cost of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) systems and
they may be used in very-high field magnets that are used to unravel the
structure of protein molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
research investigates the role that synthesis and doping play in determining the
microstructural and superconducting properties of untextured polycrystals of
clean, well-connected pnictide superconductors. The grains and grain boundaries
are modified by changing the dopant ions that induce superconductivity and
varying the heating schedules. The electromagnetic properties of the
polycrystalline samples are measured and the grain boundaries are investigated
using scanning and transmission electron microscopy. The pnictides have the
potential to transform high-field magnet technology because their untextured,
round-wire form is far preferable to the highly-textured yttrium barium copper
oxide (YBCO) coated conductors that are currently seen as the breakout
technology for high-field magnets. This research is done by a graduate student
and undergraduate students. During the summers there are K-12 teachers (NSF-RET)
and summer undergraduate students from other universities (NSF-REU) who do
relevant, hands-on research projects. This work has productive collaborations
with research groups in the US, Europe, Asia, and Australia.