* 1306514
* Plasmon-Exciton Energy Transfer in Metal Nanocavities
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2016
* USD 479,865.00

Technical Description: This project investigates, experimentally and
theoretically, mechanisms of energy transfer between metal nanoparticles and
laser dye molecules when both are photoexcited. Under these circumstances, metal
excitations (plasmons) can interact with molecular excitations (excitons) to
produce exciton populations with sufficient density (gain) to exhibit lasing.
Both nanoparticle arrays and isolated nanoparticles are of interest in these
studies, as both define optical cavities that can localize light to enhance gain
and reduce the threshold for lasing. The effect of position and orientation of
molecular emitters near the metal structures are being studied to determine
which optical cavities optimize population inversion at the microscopic and
nanoscopic levels and the lasing threshold at the macroscopic level. Theoretical
models are being developed which couple electrodynamics calculations to the rate
processes which govern exciton photophysics to simulate experiment. This work
builds on an established experiment-theory track-record on understanding light-
matter interactions in a range of nano-plasmonic systems. It extends passive
structures considered previously to active and hybrid plasmonic architectures
for applications in lasing, enhanced gain properties, and
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: This work develops a
new class of lasers having subwavelength dimensions in at least one dimension,
which will provide new opportunities for making ultrasmall optoelectronic
devices. Such devices can have a direct and substantial impact on high-speed
optical communication, high-density information storage, and nanolithography.
Coupled with this basic research is a program in middle/high school and
undergraduate curriculum development aimed at bringing leading-edge scientific
activities in nanofabrication and manipulating light in the nanoworld. All the
curricula are available online and through the Materials World Modules site.
Also, a program of outreach on publication practices and ethics is aimed at
producing better scientific papers and ultimately better science.