* 1306737
* Meson Physics at Arizona State University
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Barry Ritchie, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 530,000.00

Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a program of research in
experimental hadronic physics by the Arizona State University Meson Physics
Group which will yield information crucial to achieving a better understanding
of how hadrons are composed of quarks by providing a large data set detailing
the excitation spectra of key two- and three-quark systems. In particular, the
Meson Physics Group at Arizona State University will study the excitations of
the nucleon, Cascade, and Omega baryons, as well as the excitations of gluonic
flux tubes within mesons. The polarization data that the group will provide for
the nucleon are essential for addressing one of the NSAC/OMB milestones for
hadronic physics, and the ASU group is uniquely positioned to provide that data.
The group is also participating in a conditionally approved experiment that will
use the CLAS12 detector under construction at Jefferson Lab to produce and
discover excited baryon states of the Cascade and Omega using quasi-real
incident photons. The data to be obtained will further detail the excitations of
three-quark systems and complements work being done by the group on excited
nucleons. The Meson Physics Group at Arizona State University also will work
with the GlueX detector, currently under construction in Hall D at Jefferson
Lab, in order to search gluonic excitations within mesons of masses up to 2.5
GeV. The ASU group will assume primary responsibility for building a triplet
polarimeter to directly measure the Hall D photon beam polarization. The results
of these investigations will be broadly disseminated through conference
presentations and refereed publications, and will be archived in public
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader significance and
importance:&lt;br/&gt;No comprehensive theoretical description of how the
nucleus of the atom is built from quarks can be achieved without a solid
knowledge of the excited states. The data obtained from Arizona State University
Meson Physics Group will further inform and test theoretical models used to
understand the structure of matter that is comprised of quarks. In addition to
potential discoveries in, and advancement of, the understanding of nuclear
physics, the work to be supported will provide instruction and mentoring in
science and technology to undergraduate and graduate students, as well as to a
postdoctoral research associate. The triplet polarimeter to be built will
enhance the precision reached for experiments conducted in Hall D at JLab as
well as those using the photon beam at Mainz, resulting in important
improvements in the infrastructure of those laboratories.