* 1306903
* Gatekeeper Residues Control Peroxidase Activity of Cytochrome c in Apoptosis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Bruce Bowler, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Bruce Bowler from the University of Montana to test a
structure-based hypothesis on the factors that control the peroxidase activity
of cytochrome C required in the early stages of apoptosis. In particular, the
project will test the role of the steric bulk of residues at positions 72, 81
and 83 of the sequence of both yeast and human cytochrome C in modulating the
accessibility of an alternate conformer of the protein required for peroxidase
activity during apoptosis. The effect of mutations at these positions on
population of this alternate conformer will be assessed using pH jump and
conformationally-gated electron transfer kinetics methods, room temperature
X-ray crystallography, peroxidase activity assays and binding affinity for
cardiolipin nanodiscs. The distribution of conformers on cardiolipin nanodiscs
will also be determined using conformationally-gated electron transfer methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure-function paradigm, which indicates that
proteins have a unique structure designed for a single function, dominates
biochemistry textbooks. Recent work indicates that many proteins can access more
than one structure allowing them to carry out multiple functions. Cytochrome C
is involved in both the electron transport chain, the primary energy storage
pathway in aerobic organisms, and in apoptosis (programmed cell death) a key
process in the growth and development of higher organisms such as mammals. This
research will provide a molecular level understanding of how the transition
between the two structures needed to carry out these two functions is controlled
in cytochrome C. Undergraduate and graduate students will receive specialized
training in the preparation of protein variants, in high resolution X-ray
crystallography and in methods to measure the relative stability and rates of
transition between alternate cytochrome C structures. As part of this project,
Dr. Bowler will work with the Native American Research Laboratory, the Sloan
Graduate Indigenous Partners program, and the Payne Family Native American
Center at the University of Montana to involve Native American students in
research in his and other biochemistry laboratories at the University of
Montana.