* 1306475
* Self-Organization in Model Cu Alloys for High-temperature Irradiation Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Robert Averback, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 06/30/2018
* USD 600,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs utilize self-organization reactions to
obtain materials that are intrinsically stable under high-temperature
irradiation environments. Conventional materials degrade through embrittlement,
segregation, creep, and swelling in such environments, caused by the unbalanced
flow of point defects to sinks. In order to overcome these detrimental
evolutions, self-organization reactions are used here to introduce a high
density of stable point-defect traps, thus enhancing recombination. Two separate
self-organization mechanisms are considered, involving the competition between
ballistic mixing and thermal decomposition, and intra-cascade precipitation. By
activating both mechanisms simultaneously, complex core/shell nanostructures are
expected with vastly improved stability under irradiation at homologous
temperatures as high as 0.80 and with improved mechanical properties. Model Cu-
W-X ternary alloys (X = Ag, Fe, Ni) are used to test and validate the approach.
Thin films of these alloys are characterized before and after ion irradiation
with a combination of techniques, including XRD, TEM, atom probe tomography, and
in situ electrical resistivity. Atomistic simulations, including kinetic Monte
Carlo simulations that include the creation, recombination and elimination of
point defects, are employed to identify the conditions for compositional
patterns to remain dynamically stable at elevated temperature and under
irradiation. The impact of the program is broadened by developing a new module
for a senior laboratory course, highlighting nanoscale precipitation and
ordering in thin films, by providing research experience for undergraduates, and
by promoting faculty-student interactions and outreach activities through our
departmental Material Advantage Chapter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed design for the future generations of
advanced nuclear power systems rely on materials that need to operate at
elevated temperatures and under prolonged irradiation. Current materials cannot
operate safely, reliably, and economically in such harsh environments. The
present research program proposes to utilize self-organization reactions to
design materials that will produce complex nano-scale precipitates. By judicious
choice of alloying elements, these nano-precipitates will be optimized to
stabilize the microstructure and the mechanical properties of these materials.
The resulting high-strength, high-temperature materials will also be of interest
for other energy production systems. The research will provide education for two
graduate and two undergraduate students, with an emphasis on advanced materials
synthesis and characterization techniques and atomistic modeling. Special effort
will be made to recruit female and underrepresented minority students. Outreach
activities aimed at encouraging high-school students to pursue STEM careers will
be initiated and coordinated with our departmental Material Advantage student
chapter.