* 1306387
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Benjamin Parker, Parker                  Benjamin       J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2015
* USD 156,777.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship award to Dr. Benjamin Parker is supported
by both the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Office of International
Science and Engineering at the National Science Foundation. During the 24-month
fellowship, Dr. Parker will work on a project titled, "Variation in the outcome
of an insect-symbiont association: a role for host genotype" under the
sponsorship of Professor H Charles Godfray at the University of Oxford in
Oxford, England.

Animals host complex communities of microbes that play an important role in
health and disease. In recent years, scientists have determined that there is a
great deal of variation in the types of microbes that inhabit different
individuals, and in what effect these microbes have on their hosts. The goal of
this research is to use a simple model system to learn about the ecological and
evolutionary forces generating variation in animal-microbe interactions. Pea
aphids host a species of bacteria that protects them from a natural fungal
pathogen. Recent work has shown that some aphids are better protected from this
fungus by bacteria than others. This project will combine next-generation
sequencing and immunological techniques to determine the role that hosts are
playing in shaping their associations with beneficial bacteria, and why hosts
differ in these associations.

By learning about this simple animal-microbe system, this work will contribute
to a broader understanding of how ecology and evolution shape associations with
microbes in more complex individuals. In addition, aphids are invasive
agricultural pests, and fungal pathogens are used as a way of controlling aphid
populations. Developing an understanding of how crop pests resist biocontrol
agents is important to agricultural management. This project will also involve
the development of a series of classroom exercises that use aphids to expose
students to natural history. The exercises will have students set up and monitor
natural communities of aphids, which are found commonly throughout the US, and
will explore how pathogens and predators influence populations.

This award provides a unique opportunity for a US scientist to collaborate with
foreign scientists, and utilize the unique facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions available abroad.