* 1306326
* Enforced Stacking of Shape-Persistent Macrocycles: A Molecular Approach for Tuning the Structures and Functions of Nanotubular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Xiao Cheng Zeng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 499,955.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Bing Gong of the State University of New York
at Buffalo and Xiao Cheng Zeng of the University of Nebraska at Lincoln will
develop a general strategy for the controlled synthesis and assembly of shape-
persistent macrocyclic molecules into functional organic nanotubes containing
sub-nanometer pores. Because the interior and exterior of the macrocycles may be
functionalized independently, both the diameters and inner surfaces of the
nanopores may be modified in a controlled manner. The nanopores, eventually,
will be incorporated into membranes and allow for the selective transport of
water across the membrane. The broader impacts involve cross-disciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students, incorporating research into
teaching, outreach to students at primarily undergraduate institutions, and the
potential long term impacts of water purification technology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Pores of various diameters are found in a range of synthetic and
natural objects. For example, water purification technologies utilize porous
membranes that permit the selective passage of water over the other salt and
organic components. In biology, cell membranes contain protein pore structures
that select for the transport of specific molecules and ions and contain active
functions that are far more advanced than synthetic pores. This research project
will enhance our understanding of how to prepare and assemble molecules into
pores that permit the transport of one type of molecule, such as water. The
research will impact our fundamental knowledge of chemistry in this area, yet
may have direct application to various technologies that utilize porous
materials, such as water purification. This project also will provide mechanisms
to educate undergraduate and graduate at the frontiers and interfaces of
molecular, biological, and physical sciences.