* 1306644
* Synthesis and Mechanistic Studies on the Reactions of Photoactive Nitrosyl Hydride (HNO) Precursors with Biological Reductants
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Alexander Seed, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2018
* USD 429,112.00

With this award the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Dr. Nicola
Brasch and Dr. Paul Sampson from Kent State University to synthesize and study
the reactivity of two new classes of HNO donors with the goal of rapidly
generating HNO via photocleavage of an O-protecting group followed by facile HNO
elimination. There is an urgent need for HNO donors which rapidly generate HNO,
given that HNO reacts rapidly with biomolecules in addition to reacting rapidly
with itself. Although it is well established that HNO reduces biomolecules, the
redox potential of the HNO,2H+/NH2OH couple suggests that HNO could also be a
versatile oxidant. The plan is to utilize laser flash photolysis for HNO release
from these precursors to study the kinetics and mechanism of reactions between
HNO and three important classes of biological reductants. This proposal brings
together an interdisciplinary team of researchers with expertise in kinetics and
mechanism, organic synthesis, and laser flash photolysis.

HNO (nitrosyl hydride) is attracting increasing attention as a species
potentially formed in biological systems, and also shows potential in treating
cardiovascular disease. However, understanding the chemical and biological
properties of HNO is hampered by the fact that HNO itself is not stable,
requiring the development of compounds that decompose to release HNO; HNO donor
molecules. In this research novel HNO donor molecules are being targeted, with
the goal of achieving the rapid release of HNO upon exposure to laser light. If
successful, this research will provide masked HNO-precursors as tools for the
Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry communities. The research will provide
multi-disciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students as part of
this multi-faceted research team. A new seminar course for junior undergraduate
Chemistry majors will also be developed in which students will learn to
critically evaluate scientific literature and give effective oral presentations.