* 1306154
* Lipid Nanoparticle-Mediated Amplified Detection of Active Extracellular Triple Helicases
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2013,12/31/2016
* D. Srivastava, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2016
* USD 340,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
South Dakota State University is to study peptide/substrate-decorated liposomes
for detection of peptide-cleaving active enzymes [matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) and the disintegrin class of metalloproteinases (ADAMs)] that are
associated with cancer tumor growth and metastasis. This award is cofunded by
the Particulate and Multiphase Processes program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. This award would develop a
complementary strategy to determine the catalytically active forms of these
enzymes that hydrolyze triple helical peptides. The commercially available test
kits using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) measures the total
concentrations of these enzymes (i.e., both catalytically active and inactive
forms). To determine the active enzyme concentration, this research will use
liposomes to harbor highly selective, triple helical lipo-peptide substrates on
their surface, and the horseradish peroxidase (HRP) enzyme will be encapsulated
in the aqueous liposome lumen. Hydrolysis of the lipo-peptides by the cognate
enzymes will destabilize the liposomes lipid bilayer, releasing HRP, and
bringing it in contact with a chemiluminescent substrate in the external buffer.
Subsequent oxidation of the substrate catalyzed by HRP will generate and amplify
the luminescent signal. Hence, the proposed methodology will not only amplify
the signal like ELISA, but also will detect and quantify the catalytically
active forms of the enzymes. Mechanistic studies to optimize the lipo-peptide
substrates, the destabilization of the liposomes and the amplification of the
signal generated are parts of this research project. Graduate and undergraduate
students will work in this project and will be trained on peptide synthesis,
molecular biology, biophysics and analytical chemistry. Visits to the Native
American tribal community colleges in North Dakota to recruit and train
undergraduate students are part of this project. Additionally, during the summer
months, high school students will be trained in this interdisciplinary research
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many enzymes contribute to the invasion of the
cancer cells and their metastasis. Several kits are commercially available to
determine the amounts of these enzymes. However, these kits measure the total
amounts of these enzymes and not the concentrations contributing to the
metastasis. This research project will develop new strategies to determine the
concentrations of active forms of of these two enzymes. As part of this project,
lipid vesicles will be prepared that will 'recognize' the active metastasis-
causing enzymes that in turn will release another enzyme from the interior of
the vesicles and this in turn will result in luminescent signal. This sequence
of events will generate and amplify the signal as a function of time, and would
quantify the active form of the circulating enzymes. Hence, the method will be
very selective, sensitive and quantitative. The proposed research is
collaboration between a Chemist and a Biochemist, and the team will train
graduate students in various techniques of molecular biology, peptide synthesis,
and biophysical and analytical chemistry. The investigators plan to visit the
tribal community colleges in the nearby Native American reservations of North
Dakota to recruit undergraduate students to be trained in the PIs' research
activities, and will be mentored to pursue graduate education. As part of the
North Dakota Governor's School program, the research team will train high school
students in this project during the summer months. The results from this
research will be disseminated through publications and presentations in
scientific meetings as well as in the Native American community colleges.