* 1306510
* Collaborative Research: Coherent Manipulation and Transfer of Quantum Information amongst Single Spin Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Nitin Samarth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The emerging area of "quantum information
science" has seen rapid advances in exploiting the coherent control of single
spins in defect centers in diamond and SiC, opening up a new pathway toward
qubits that function at room temperature. This proposal aims to extend these
remarkable developments toward the coherent manipulation and full state transfer
of quantum information in heterogeneous systems built from disparate materials
whose individual quantum properties are already well understood. The ultimate
goal is to achieve quantum-coherent communication between physically distinct
quantum systems at the single spin level and at room temperature. The PIs will
combine spatio-temporally resolved single spin spectroscopies with the design
and fabrication of model systems that couple single spins (such as defects in
SiC) with ensemble spins in low dimensional communication channels (such as
2DEGs and nanowires). The proposed research offers advanced technical training
in quantum materials and measurement and provides ideal training for future
careers in academics and industry. The PIs will also enhance the diversity and
excellence of undergraduate research through institutional programs and by
collaboratively teaching a cross-disciplinary undergraduate course on the
Practice of Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract***&lt;br/&gt;Modern information technology relies on devices such as
lasers, flash memory and magnetic tunnel junctions that exploit the quantum
mechanical aspects of the natural world. Such device technologies still do not
make use of the full technological potential of quantum mechanics, restricting
their functionality to control over the amplitude of quantum mechanical waves
and ignoring their phase. The emerging area of "quantum information science"
seeks to redress this limitation by exploring the technological possibilities of
the more non-intuitive aspects of quantum mechanics, namely quantum coherence
and quantum entanglement. A key challenge for quantum information processing is
the development of pragmatic scenarios that will allow the exchange of coherent
quantum information between disparate parts of a system. This proposal aims to
demonstrate such phenomena in heterogeneous systems built from disparate
materials whose individual quantum properties are well understood. The ultimate
goal is to achieve quantum-coherent communication between physically distinct
quantum systems at the single spin level and at room temperature. The proposed
research offers advanced technical training in quantum materials and measurement
and provides ideal training for future careers in academia and in industry. The
PIs will also enhance the diversity and excellence of undergraduate research
through institutional programs and by collaboratively teaching a cross-
disciplinary undergraduate course on the Practice of Science.