* 1306167
* SPRF-IBSS: Applying structural equation modeling to populations undergoing economic transition
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Hannah Wilson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2016
* USD 207,161.00

Economic transition is occurring rapidly in developing countries and resulting
in a myriad of social, behavioral and biologic changes. This research focuses on
immune function's relationship to behavioral, psychosocial and community
factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research question focuses on whether
physical activity/sedentary behavior is a mediating influence on the
relationship between lifestyle incongruity (an indicator of psychosocial stress)
and immune function in indigenous Siberian adults. The second research question
is whether community level market integration in indigenous Amazonian children
and adults predictive of biological outcomes. The third research question is
whether in community level market integration over a five year period predictive
of biological outcomes in indigenous Amazonian children and adults.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These complex
relationships require advanced bio-statistical techniques to properly analyze.
This project focuses on learning structural equation modeling (SEM) and applying
the versatile statistical method to questions regarding the biological outcomes
of transition in indigenous populations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
questions are assessed using data from a sample of Sakha (Yakut) adults of
Siberia in 2009 and the Tsimane Annual Panel Survey in Bolivia in 2002-2009. The
mediating effect of physical activity and sedentary behavior on the relationship
between lifestyle incongruity and biological outcomes in Yakut adults will be
assessed using SEM path analysis. The influence of community market integration
and five year change in community market integration on biological outcomes in
Tsimane? adults and children will be assessed using multi-level
SEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes multi-disciplinary techniques
to: 1) provide insight into the pathways through which psychosocial stress
influences immune function; 2) advance understanding of the community influence
on biology. The research team succesfully exploits the pairing of advanced
statistical training and biology to advocate for quantitative approaches to
measuring the effects of economic transition on physical health. Additionally,
the proposed activities are interdisciplinary to the extent that the research
draws from and speaks to issues that are pertinent within several fields
including human biology, anthropology, sociology, health economics, physiology,
demography, and behavioral ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving the research goals and disseminating the
findings to researchers and local populations increases understanding of the
impacts of economic and social transition on biological outcomes in the
developing world. It also increases awareness of the usefulness of advanced
biostatistical techniques within human biology and bioanthropology research. In
addition, this Fellowship project integrates research and education at many
different levels.