* 1306482
* Substrate Independent, Spatially Resolved, Stable Polymer Coatings for Studying Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells (hMSCs)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Padma Gopalan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research is
a three-year plan of integrated research, education, and outreach on a polymeric
coating for studying human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). This award is
cofunded by the Polymer program in the Division of Materials Research. Earlier
studies strongly indicate that hMSC phenotype is strongly influenced by ligands
derived from the natural cellular microenvironment, including cell adhesion
peptides, heparin-binding peptides, and growth factor-mimetic peptides. This
proposal is to develop polymer coatings based on copolymers of poly(ethylene
glycol) with at most 10% of crosslinkable groups, which can be crosslinked into
30 nm mats for immobilization of peptides. These mats are chemically-defined for
stable presentation of two putative pro-osteogenic peptides over an extended
timeframe, and to explore in depth the effects on hMSC differentiation into
osteoblasts. These polymer coatings with peptides present a stable cytophobic
slate, and hence one can truly investigate the effect of the relevant peptides
on hMSCs during the entire time course of osteogenic differentiation.
Importantly, these coatings are thin films that can be applied to virtually any
underlying substrate, which will lead to broad impact on cell culture studies
and future design of biomedical devices. Because of the thin-film nature, the
proposed use of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy will quantify precisely the
peptides presented on the polymer coatings. Further, this proposal will study
the first systematic analysis of chemically defined, nanometer-scale
presentation of a growth factor-receptor binding ligand, and it may lead to
broad impact in view of the importance of receptor dimerization/clustering in
virtually all growth factor signaling systems.

The technological broader impact of this proposal would be in developing a new
class of ultra-thin biomaterial coatings with unique set of properties for stem
cell growth. In order to clearly understand the effects of micro environmental
signals on stem cell behavior, there is a critical need for experimental systems
that present specific signals, and complex signal combinations, to stem cells.
The proposed platform may lead to widespread use of the proposed approaches by
cell biologists in general. Ultimately, this line of research could result in
identification of signals that promote lineage-specific stem cell
differentiation, leading to development and optimization of substrates that
promote stem cell differentiation in vitro and in vivo. More generally, the
proposed adaptable and chemically tailorable thin films would be applicable to a
broad range of fundamental questions in cell biology in which stable, controlled
presentation of peptide ligands is desirable. As part of this grant, this
project will: 1) develop Interdisciplinary Curriculum Development of two courses
in two departments, one based in Materials Science & Engineering, and the second
one based in Biomedical Engineering; 2) carry out dissemination and outreach
activities by the development of hands-on exhibits on Stem Cells and Tissue
Engineering that would provide case study materials for a Science and Social
Media course; and 3) recruit and mentor female and underrepresented minority
graduate and undergraduate students in research activities.