* 1306392
* Order from Disorder: Tuning Long-Range Magnetic Ordering by Chemical Doping in Strongly Correlated Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Young, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;An experimental investigation of the
electronic and magnetic ground states in novel intermetallic systems is
proposed. Emphasis will focus on the synthesis and characterization of small
band-gap semiconductors, including, a series of compounds related to FeGa3 and
the alkaline earth and rare earth hexaborides. The properties of these strongly
correlated electron materials depend sensitively on parameters such as sample
stoichiometry, carrier density, temperature, chemical/physical pressure, and
magnetic field. The long-range magnetic order induced by chemical doping in the
non-magnetic semiconductor FeGa3 will be studied. A ferromagnetic quantum
critical point (FM-QCP) was recently discovered which points toward a novel
structural feature driving the criticality - the density of mixed valent Fe-Fe
dimer "singlets". Second, this project will investigate the possibility of
raising the ferromagnetic ordering temperature in doped Kondo insulators. FeSi
is the classic example, and shows similar properties to that of FeGa3.
Measurements of the anomalous Hall effect have shown to be an excellent
parameter in predicting a material's potential for spintronics applications.
Finally, an irradiation study of high quality single crystals of hexaboride
materials is proposed in an effort to verify the mechanism of the high-Tc weak
ferromagnetism. In this case, the disorder in the system stems from vacancies in
the boron sublattice. This experimental research will provide post-doctoral
associates, graduate, and undergraduate students with valuable experience and
training in the areas of materials synthesis, structural characterization,
measurement of physical properties as a function of temperature and magnetic
field, and data acquisition and analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-
Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research will focus on the
synthesis of materials that possess very unique physical properties.
Semiconductors and magnetic materials, for example, are at the heart of many of
today's advanced technologies and devices. This project will investigate how
intentionally disordering a material, either chemically, or with defects, can
result in enhanced physical properties, such as high temperature magnetism. This
proposed research program will aid in the understanding of strongly correlated
electron systems in general, and may result in new materials for applications,
such as in the emerging field of spintronics (spin-based electronics), which
could revolutionize the computer memory industry. Post-doctoral associates,
graduate, and undergraduate students will gain valuable experience in the areas
of materials synthesis, structural characterization, measurement of physical
properties, and data acquisition and analysis. A major component of this
research project is in materials synthesis, which provides a natural bridge
between teaching and research, especially for undergraduates. They are able to
make real contributions in a relatively short amount of time, utilizing a
variety of solid state physics and chemistry techniques. Furthermore, the
synthesis of new materials is vital to the United States remaining competitive
in the race for advanced technologies.