* 1306157
* RUI: Application of Plasmonic-Metal Nanoparticles to Increase the Efficiency and Photostability of Luminescent Solar Concentrators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Bruce Wittmershaus, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 226,568.00

Title: RUI: Application of Plasmonic-Metal Nanoparticles to Increase the
Efficiency and Photostability of Luminescent Solar Concentrators Principal
Investigator: Wittmershaus, Bruce P. , Pennsylvania State Univ. University Park

Research Objectives and Approaches: The objective of this research is to design
and fabricate highly efficient and photostable luminescent solar concentrators
with usable lifetimes of at least 10 years. The approach is to use metal
nanoparticles to cause metal-enhanced fluorescence from organic dyes thereby
increasing fluorescence yield and photostability. Different shapes and sizes of
nanoparticles will be tested in single and multiple-dye luminescent
concentrators.

Intellectual Merit: Photodegradation is a major and often overlooked problem of
luminescent concentrators preventing their commercialization. Metal-enhanced
fluorescence is a unique solution greatly improving photostability by increasing
a dye?s radiative rate. It also increases fluorescence yield. Infra-red dyes
with poor yield can be made into viable materials for concentrators. This
improves concentrator efficiency by extending the range of converted sunlight
beyond the visible. Improving both the photostability and yield of fluorescent
materials will benefit other important applications such as dye-sensitized solar
cells, biological fluorescent labels, and light-emitting diodes.

Broader Impacts: The potential development of affordable solar energy conversion
will benefit our society through less reliance on fossil fuels. Necessary
training is provided to undergraduates on performing and presenting
interdisciplinary research in the critical target areas of nanotechnology and
solar energy. Outreach programs for middle and high school students inform the
public about our work and get students excited about solar and nanotechnology
research. Our research presentations to student organizations and participation
in college mentoring programs encourage underrepresented students to consider
study in STEM fields by showing that it is accessible to them as undergraduates.