* 1306397
* Tunable Continuous Wave THz Source Based on a Room Temperature Quantum Cascade Laser
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Manijeh Razeghi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 05/31/2016
* USD 359,409.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to create a compact, efficient, and
tunable continuous wave THz light source at room temperature. This will be
accomplished by creating a monolithic, two-frequency, mid-infrared, tunable
laser with a built-in nonlinearity. High power, tunable THz radiation will be
emitted via difference frequency generation, and the packaging will be optimized
for thermal management and collection of phase-matched THz
output.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this project
lies in developing the core technologies and integration processes necessary to
produce a multi-functional monolithic THz emitter. The various research topics
necessary include modeling of intersubband gain, nonlinearity, and transport ,
thermal management, laser cavity nonlinearities, and efficient free space
coupling of THz radiation. Successful integration onto a common platform will
play a transformative role in the further development of multi-functional mid-
infrared and THz optoelectronic integrated circuits. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The broader impacts of this work will impact both scientific infrastructure and
education. First, the small size of this source and potential for mass
production may represent a future enabling technology for widespread access to
the THz spectral region. This type of THz source has numerous applications in
basic science, as well as in explosive and drug detection, security screening
(T-ray imaging), astronomy/ astrophysics, and medical imaging. Progress in
source development will be published and accessible to the general scientific
community. Finally, aspects of the research will be used as classroom examples
at Northwestern University and provide secondary research opportunities for
undergraduates and local high school students.