* 1306506
* AGEP-BPR:  An Exploratory Examination of STEM Graduate Programs between the United States and England:  Comparative Designs and Patterns for Select Minorities
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Aurolyn Luykx, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 04/30/2015
* USD 209,335.00

Pennsylvania State University will implement an AGEP Broadening Participation
Research in STEM Education project entitled "An Exploratory Examination of STEM
Graduate Programs between the United States and England: Comparative Designs and
Patterns for Select Minorities". Researchers will conduct a three-year mixed
methods exploratory comparative study of the participation of minority students
in STEM disciplines in the United States (U.S.) and England in order to
comprehend salient factors contributing to successful entrance, matriculation,
and completion of STEM graduate degrees. The research objectives are to (1)
document the enrollment, matriculation and graduation rates of graduate STEM
programs in select U.S. and English universities; (2) identify and compare
factors impacting the participation in graduate STEM education of African
American and Hispanic students in the U.S. to those affecting African English,
Caribbean English, and Pakistani English students in England; (3) analyze how
written and voiced university policies in the two nations may affect the
entrance and degree completions of diverse populations in STEM fields; (40)
examine the interaction of policies with various dimensions of student
diversity, such as class, gender, and race; (5) articulate the potential
opportunities for urban/metropolitan universities in both countries to more
effectively recruit, retain, educate, and graduate future minority STEM
professionals; and (6) present a critical examination of cross-national lessons
regarding ?minority students? that can be gleaned by comparative analyses.

The study is undergirded by three conceptual frameworks that will provide the
basis for country-specific and cross-national lessons beneficial to U.S. and
English universities. Ultimately, the project will elucidate models that U.S.
urban doctoral universities might undertake to promote policy and programmatic
options for underrepresented groups in STEM fields.