* 1306853
* Seed-mediated co-reduction: a versatile route to architecturally-controlled bimetallic nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Sara Skrabalak, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2016
* USD 405,000.00

Sara Skrabalak from Indiana University is supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry to conduct
research into rational syntheses and characterization of bimetallic
nanoparticles with high structural monodispersity. Like their monometallic
counterparts, bimetallic materials often display dramatic changes in their
physicochemical properties at the nanoscale. To realize the full potential of
bimetallic nanostructures, samples with structural monodispersity on-par with
the best monometallic examples are needed; however, it remains a grand challenge
to achieve structural and compositional control during the synthesis of
bimetallic nanostructures. This challenge arises from reliance on co-reduction
techniques to nucleate and grow a defined bimetallic phase, but the Skrabalak
laboratory has demonstrated seed-mediated co-reduction as a strategy to overcome
the limitations of co-reduction techniques by coupling them with the advantages
of seeded methods which provide structurally defined crystals for bimetallic
deposition. The aims of this project are i) to identify the synthetic parameters
which govern morphology development during seed-mediated co-reduction and
quantify their effects on the kinetics of co-reduction and crystal growth, ii)
to identify the symmetry relationships between seed structure and the final
morphologies of branched bimetallic nanocrystals prepared by seed-mediated co-
reduction and quantify the effect of lattice mismatch between seed and
overgrowth metals to morphology development, and iii) to identify the synthetic
conditions which enable seed-catalyzed co-reduction of metal precursors and
quantify the kinetics of this surface-mediated process via in situ synchrotron
X-ray diffraction techniques. Collectively, the experiments being carried out
are to identify and quantify the synthetic parameters which contribute to
morphology development during seed-mediated co-reduction and enable new
architecturally-controlled bimetallic nanostructures to be achieved.
Additionally, the optical and catalytic properties of the unique nanostructures
synthesized are being studied to understand how composition and architecture
compound to impart new functionality. General design criteria for the synthesis
of new bimetallic nanoarchitectures by seed-mediated co-reduction are being
pursued, as well as the advancement of co-reduction techniques in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bimetallic nanostructures represent exciting
multifunctional platforms with the potential to address critical needs in
catalysis (e.g., in fuel cells), energy sustainability, chemical sensing,
medicine, and beyond. However, predictably achieving architecturally-controlled
bimetallic nanostructures has met with only modest success on account of the
limitations of current synthetic strategies. This project is to obtain general
design criteria for new bimetallic nanostructures and to move the nanosynthesis
community closer to the predictive, on-demand synthesis of nanostructures with
defined composition and architectures. This research also has the broader
impacts of i) forging links between scientific disciplines that include
nano/inorganic/solid-state chemistry and colloidal/surface/material sciences,
ii) enhancing graduate/undergraduate education through multidisciplinary
research and outreach activities that reinforce learning via teaching, iii)
introducing nanoscale concepts to non-scientists and connecting undergraduates
to their home communities through their research activities; iv) enabling the PI
to serve the scientific community as an educator, journal and grant reviewer,
and promoter of diversity in higher education; and v) generating and
distributing new knowledge based on the proposed research through peer-reviewed
publications and presentations.