* 1306738
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* James Schnable, Schnable                James          C
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2016
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2013. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to James C Schnable is "A Comparative Genomics Approach to
Studying C4 Photosynthesis" The host institution for the fellowship is the
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Thomas
Brutnell.

Plants create chemical energy in the form of sugars using sunlight, carbon
dioxide, and water. While this process (photosynthesis) is responsible for
supplying the vast majority of energy used by life on earth, it is also
remarkably inefficient. C4 photosynthesis brings together a number of structural
and biochemical innovations to allow plants to more efficiently capture carbon
dioxide, making plants more productive while at the same time increasing the
efficiency with which they use water and nitrogen. C4 photosynthesis has arisen
independently in different families of plants including multiple independent
origins in the grass family. This project will identify genes and regulatory
sequences co-opted into the regulation of C4 photosynthesis. Data on sequence
conservation, gene expression patterns, and epigenetic modifications will be
generated from multiple grass species representing independent origins of C4
photosynthesis as well as a closely related non-C4 grass species. Candidate
genes and regulatory approaches identified using in silico approaches will be
experimentally validated in the model C4 grass species Setaria virdis.

Training objectives include plant genetics, comparative genomics, epigenomics,
and analysis of novel next generation sequencing datasets. Broader impacts
include capacity-building and advanced training for students from the United
States to engage in interdisciplinary research in plant improvement and
associated sciences such as physiology, quantitative genetics, and computational
biology. In addition, comparative genomics/transcriptomics visualization tools
will be developed that may be employed in studying other novel traits emerging
in multiple species, as well as interspecies datasets which will aid in the
study of other divergent traits among grass crop species.