* 1306883
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Kimberly Sheldon, Sheldon                 Kimberly       S
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2016
* USD 207,000.00

A variable world: Integrating population-level variation and climatic variation
to predict climate change impacts

This project examines how differences in thermal physiology and climatic
variation affect predictions about impacts of climate change on population and
species viability in temperate and tropical regions. Using dung beetles,
variation in thermal physiology will be quantified among and within species
across broad latitudinal and elevational gradients. These detailed physiological
data will be incorporated into a model that alters the magnitude and time course
of climatic variation, allowing for an assessment of how physiological variation
and climatic variation affect predictions about the impacts of climate change.
The model will be applied to assessing population viability in other systems
where the temperature dependence of population growth rate is known or can be
calculated from principles in biological scaling.

Training objectives include becoming fluent in developing and applying
mathematical models to ecological studies. By combining detailed physiological
data with climatic variation, the mathematical model developed during the
fellowship will provide a more realistic assessment of climate change impacts
across latitude. The project will add specimens to beetle collections in the USA
and abroad, providing a locality-based record that can be used for teaching and
research. Working internationally will allow interaction and collaboration with
foreign students and colleagues, offering unique opportunities for teaching,
training and learning for all parties involved. Results will be disseminated
through scientific publications, presentations, and outreach and help guide
national and international conservation efforts by providing an understanding of
which species may be most at risk in a warming world. The third year teaching
option will support the development of effective teaching in undergraduate
classrooms by incorporating and assessing active learning techniques.