* 1306489
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Alex VanDam, VanDam                  Alex           R
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 163,601.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship award to Dr. Alex R. Van Dam is supported
by both the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Office of International
Science and Engineering at the National Science Foundation. During the 24-month
fellowship, Dr. Van Dam will work on a project titled, "New insights into insect
host-plant generalization: population transcriptome sequencing of Porphyrophora
spp." under the sponsorship of Dr. Uffe H. Mortensen at the Department of
Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of
the worlds' crops are attacked by parasitic sap sucking insects, eg. aphids and
scale insects, which lead to crop losses and threaten food security. Among these
insects, there is a wide variation in the number of plants they can attack. This
project aims to describe genes responsible for different scale insects' host
plant preferences by comparing the genes found in generalists (insects that feed
on many different plant species) to specialists (insects that feed on only a few
or single plant species). Besides identifying genes responsible for host plant
preference in scale insects, this project also aims to understand how host plant
preference genes are maintained across populations, and if this has an affect on
the number of plant species they can feed on. Specifically the project aims to
test if large populations are able to better maintain genes that lead to greater
host plant breadth than small populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A practical
application of this research is utility in biological control of invasive weeds,
and control of agricultural pests. This will help in broader societal goals such
as reduction of pesticide use and sustainable farming. Support of this research
will lead to discoveries that will make for a more profitable agriculture
industry. Additionally practical bioinformatics tutorials will be developed that
are open-access and web-based resources aimed at graduate students and
undergraduates. Open-access tutorials on bioinformatics will benefit
undergraduate and graduate student career development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides a unique opportunity for a US
scientist to collaborate with foreign scientists, and utilize the unique
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions available abroad.