* 1306132
* Connecting genes and social behavior in a unique animal model
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Donna Maney, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2015
* USD 201,240.00

Research on the genetic basis of social behavior has proceeded slowly because of
a general lack of interdisciplinary expertise in both genomics and behavior.
This project is a collaboration between a PI trained in molecular biology and
genetics and a co-PI trained in the analysis of social behavior and its hormonal
mechanisms. New high-throughput sequencing methods enable the detailed study of
the genetic basis of social behavior in a variety of carefully chosen species,
even in the absence of a completely sequenced genome. A songbird model, the
white-throated sparrow, is used to characterize genes involved in aggression.
This species exhibits a plumage polymorphism that correlates with many aspects
of social behavior. Individuals with a white stripe (WS) on the crown are more
aggressive and have higher song rates than individuals with a tan stripe (TS).
The plumage polymorphism is linked to a chromosomal rearrangement, presenting a
unique opportunity to study the relationship between genes and social behavior.
This project uses the powerful and exciting technology of next-generation
sequencing to identify genes in the brain that vary in expression with relation
to both plumage morph and aggressive behavior. Once identified, the expressions
of these genes are mapped in the brain to help clarify their role in behavior.
Gene sequences are analyzed to identify variation in protein sequence that is
linked to plumage morph. These results provide extensive information on the
expression, sequence, and distribution of genes linked to aggression.

Intellectual Merit:

Genome-wide association studies have identified a vast array of single
nucleotide polymorphisms that are weakly associated with phenotypes but which
explain very little variation. The link between genetic polymorphisms and
behavioral constructs such as "aggression" is still lacking, largely because of
a failure to consider the intermediary steps that happen at the levels of gene
transcription and protein function. Progress in this field will require an
understanding not only of whether gene sequences contribute to behavior, but how
they do so. The behavioral sciences would thus benefit from the expertise of
researchers trained to address these questions. In this project, a PI with a
background in molecular biology joins a psychology department and integrates
genomics techniques and resources into the study of social behavior.

It is essential that studies intended to elucidate the mechanisms driving social
behavior be conducted in a way that allows animals to interact in their natural
environment. Behavioral studies on laboratory-housed animals often do not
represent naturalistic conditions, and can produce results that are not
biologically relevant. This study links genes and social behavior using animals
that are observed and collected in their natural habitat. Although social
behavior is complex and predicted to involve many genes, only a few genes have
been definitively linked to social behavior. These results greatly contribute to
our knowledge base of gene expression in the brains songbirds, an important
model useful for studying the relationship between genes and behavior.

Broader Impacts:

The PI develops and teaches a course, aimed at psychology graduate students
interested in genetics-based approaches, which emphasizes basic gene function,
the use of genomics databases, and the interpretation of associations between
polymorphisms and behavior. Ultimately the course encourages psychology students
to integrate genetic approaches in to their research in a powerful way. The PI's
other activities include mentoring undergraduates, making presentations at
underserved K-12 schools, and mentoring high school students and teachers from
underrepresented groups.