* 1306386
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Fundamental and Photochemical Processes in Aqueous Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Veronica Vaida, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2017
* USD 629,782.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professors Veronica Vaida
and Rex T. Skodje both at the University Colorado at Boulder in a collaborative
experimental/theoretical effort by their groups that is focused on the study the
photochemical reactions of organic molecules occurring at air/water interfaces
and in small hydrated clusters in the gas phase. These photochemical reactions
can play an important role in the formation and chemical evolution of
atmospheric aerosols with potential important consequences to human health and
climate change. The intellectual merit in the proposed investigation stems from
addressing the basic scientific aspects of sunlight-initiated, water-mediated
chemistry of organic molecules. Using a combination of laboratory and
theoretical studies, the outcome of the work will be an improved understanding
of the mechanisms, dynamics, and rates of photochemical reactions occurring in
clusters and on aerosol surfaces that are of importance in the atmosphere. What
distinguishes this work from other efforts is the emphasis on deriving
molecular-level mechanisms and quantitative models for atmospheric
photochemistry in aqueous environments. It is anticipated that greater
understanding of the fundamental chemistry involved in the photochemistry
occurring in aerosols and more general aqueous environments. An important part
of the proposed work is the direct observation of the photochemistry of
air/water/organic gas phase mixtures using the French CESAM instrument
(Experimental Multiphasic Atmospheric Simulation Chamber). Experiments conducted
in this chamber permit the direct observation of aerosol formation and the
chemical evolution of the mixture under the influence of intense UV/visible
radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, improving the
ability to model atmospheric processes involved in climate change is an
important goal for society and can impact public policy. The treatment of
aerosols in current models is a "weak link" and requires significant attention.
The proposed study of photochemical mechanisms involved in aerosol nucleation
and chemical evolution has the potential to provide improved performance of
these models by incorporating a more correct treatment of the chemistry of
secondary organic aerosols. In addition, the interdisciplinary, international
collaborations proposed will lead to the exchange of students and postdoctoral
fellows, and promote cross-fertilization of ideas between different institutions
in the basic science of atmospheric photochemistry. The proposed research
program contributes to the recruitment, retention and educational development of
graduate and undergraduate students, especially from under-represented groups,
by exposure to a collaborative and interdisciplinary research environment.