* 1306702
* Gravitational Wave Detection and Characterization
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Neil Cornish, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 195,000.00

The LIGO gravitational wave detectors are currently undergoing a major upgrade,
with the goal of improving the broadband sensitivity by an order of magnitude.
The scientific capabilities of the instruments can be further enhanced by
improving the signal processing techniques used to tease faint gravitational
wave signals out of the instrument noise. The research described in this
proposal seeks to develop tools that will enhance our ability to detect and
characterize transient gravitational wave signals. The initial searches for
gravitational waves have taught us that non-Gaussian features in the data, such
as noise transients or "glitches", impair our ability to detect weak signals.
Experience with blind signal injections has taught us the importance of signal
characterization and parameter estimation in assessing putative detections. Our
goal is to develop and implement powerful new techniques that can help separate
gravitational wave signals from instrument artifacts. This will be done in the
framework of the BayesWave algorithm that was developed under a predecessor
award. BayesWave provides a natural framework to develop targeted searches by
incorporating prior knowledge about the signals and glitches. Multi-variate
classifiers and cluster analysis tools will be used to identify glitch families
based on the characterizations provided by the BayesWave analysis. These will
aid in real-time detector studies and noise mitigation efforts. In the event of
a detection, the signal characterization capability will help identify the type
of astrophysical system that could have produced the observed waveform. These
studies will become possible in near real-time using a new technique that speeds
up the computation of the model likelihood by orders of magnitude. The detection
of gravitational waves will allow a host of science questions to be addressed.
Foremost among these will be whether the signals detected conform to the
predictions of Einstein's theory of general relativity. The final component of
this proposal deals with developing robust and generic techniques for
identifying departures from general relativity using LIGO/Virgo
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIGO project presents young researchers and
students with a wonderful opportunity to participate in the birth of a new
observation science that is poised to make discoveries that will revolutionize
astronomy and deliver unique insights into some of the Universe's most exotic
phenomena. The research program outlined in this proposal offers tremendous
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students: the blend of creative
activities associated with the development of sophisticated and innovative data
analysis techniques, combined with hands on exposure to running existing search
pipelines and working with production level computer code will provide excellent
training for the next generation of gravitational wave astronomers. These skills
are transferable and highly sought after in other fields: recent graduates from
the Montana State gravitational wave astronomy group have found employment as
national security intelligence analysts and in the medical research field of
bioinformatics. Our group has been very active in bringing gravitational wave
science to the public through talks, a school lecture program, and the
production of a documentary. For this proposal we plan to produce new web-based
educational resources that illustrate the signal processing and classification
techniques used in our research.