* 1306131
* Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Films Grown by Molecular Layer Deposition as Precursors to Conformal Metal Oxide-Carbon Composite and Porous Metal Oxide Films
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Steven George, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

In this research project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Steven M. George of the
University of Colorado, Boulder, and his students aim to grow novel hybrid
organic-inorganic films using molecular layer deposition (MLD) techniques and
then study the post-processing of these MLD films to form metal oxide/carbon
composite films. Prof. George and his students are developing tin alkoxide films
(tincones) and iron alkoxide films (ironcones) using in situ FTIR spectroscopy
to study the surface chemistry during MLD film growth and the subsequent
spectral changes during pyrolysis to form metal oxide/carbon composite films. In
other studies they grow the MLD films in a hot-wall viscous flow reactor and
then anneal the MLD films under vacuum in a tube furnace to form the composite
films with metal oxide and carbon nanodomains. The electrical conductivity and
electrochemical properties of these composite films are measured using four-
point probe and potentiostat methods.

This research project is focused on: surface chemistry of film growth;
characterization of film growth; thin film processing; and measurement of film
properties. The project consists of the development of new hybrid organic-
inorganic materials and their post-processing to obtain conducting metal
oxide/carbon composites. The resulting new class of nanocomposite films may have
a number of important electrochemical applications for energy storage as Li ion
battery electrodes or pseudocapacitance supercapacitors. This project is
providing laboratory research experience for graduate and undergraduate students
with exposure to state-of-the-art experimental methods and instrumentation. The
students are gaining expertise in vacuum technology, thin film growth, materials
processing, spectroscopic analysis and electrochemical characterization. The
students also have the opportunity to present their results at scientific
conferences and participate in educational and outreach activities.