* 1306806
* Strong Correlations in Environmental Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* John Marston, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 275,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research,
and education on materials and systems relevant to the environment and where
strong correlations play an important role. The PI aims to address problems of
fundamental importance that bear on the quest for a sustainable future.

The research is centered on three problems that arise in the context of the
environment: modeling actinide compounds and complexes in the environment,
exploring a new approach to harvest solar energy, and developing statistical
methods to describe anisotropic and inhomogeneous fluid flows known as
"macroturbulence." Each focus system is characterized by strong correlations,
with the latter two involving systems that are driven far from equilibrium.

Actinides compounds and complexes will be modeled in ways that account for
strong correlations between the f-electrons, with the goal of developing the
ability to make first-principles predictions of properties of actinides such as
uranium and plutonium in the nuclear fuel cycle and as waste products in the
environment.

High-frequency rectification at junctions of doped Mott insulators will be
studied analytically and through numerical simulation. Diodes made of these
materials may be able to operate up to optical frequencies, enabling nanoscale
rectenna designs that could directly convert the electromagnetic field of
sunlight to direct current. The conversion mechanism represents a mechanism that
is fundamentally differs from the mechanism underlying traditional solar cell
technology.

Macroturbulent Jets in anisotropic and inhomogenous fluid flows will be
described statistically by methods that forgo standard approaches based upon
accumulation of statistics during numerical simulation. Instead the flow
statistics will be captured directly by non-equilibrium statistical mechanics
through approximations that are inspired by quantum many-body theory, and that
can be systematically improved.

The research provides an interdisciplinary environmental context for training
students and postdocs. The project will provide a cross-disciplinary learning
experience for students at various levels, enhancing human resources for
theoretical and computational condensed matter physics by training students and
postdocs in cutting-edge methods of quantum many-body and non-equilibrium
statistical physics in problems with potential impact on sustatinability. The PI
will continue to draw the community's interest to solving problems that would
lead to contributions to a sustainable future through the organization of
workshops and conferences, and writing pedagogical articles.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research,
and education on materials and systems relevant to the environment. The PI aims
to address problems of fundamental import that bear on the quest for a
sustainable future. The research will focus on three problems: 1.) developing a
computational method of improved accuracy for chemical compounds involving
uranium and other atoms classified as actinides in the periodic table, 2.)
investigating a key component, a diode, that can operate at sufficiently high
frequency to enable a way to harvest energy from sunlight that operates on
different fundamental principles than a solar cell and is potentially more
efficient, 3.) adapting statistical methods used to describe systems of many
interacting electrons to understand the fundamental principles that underlie
weather and climate.

The research provides an interdisciplinary environmental context for training
students and postdocs. The project will provide a cross-disciplinary learning
experience for students at various levels, enhancing human resources for
theoretical and computational condensed matter physics by training students and
postdocs in cutting-edge methods of quantum many-body and non-equilibrium
statistical physics in problems with potential impact on sustainability. The PI
will continue to draw the community's interest to solving problems that would
lead to contributions to a sustainable future through the organization of
workshops and conferences, and writing pedagogical articles.