* 1306224
* Dealloying Under Conditions of Significant Solid-State Mass Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Karl Sieradzki, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 06/30/2018
* USD 506,902.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This research program examines the kinetics of
dealloying and morphology evolution in alloy systems for which the solid-state
mass transport processes of lattice and grain-boundary diffusion are significant
at ambient temperature. The major control parameters in the work will be the
alloy composition, grain size of the polycrystalline hosts, particle size in the
particulate hosts and temperature. The electrochemical parameters to be varied
include dissolution under conditions of fixed voltage (chronoamperometry) and
fixed current (chronopotentiometry). This will allow for the separate
determination of the dependence of morphology on the applied electrochemical
potential and dealloying rate. In order to examine these issues a combined
experimental and computational approach is used. The alloy systems under study
are Li-Sn, Li-Pb and Li-Cd. These host metals and similar ones are currently
being considered as anode reservoirs in future lithium-ion batteries and have
been chosen for study since they represent variations in the host crystal
structures, tetragonal, face-centered cubic and hexagonal close-packed,
respectively, and have a rich history with abundant thermodynamic and kinetic
data available. Electrochemical methods are used to produce the alloys, measure
dealloying rates and determine associated solid-state mass transport rates.
Dealloying morphologies are examined using focused ion-beam machining and
scanning electron microscopy. Kinetic Monte Carlo simulations are used to model
morphology evolution in dealloying as a function of the electrochemical
potential and dealloying rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This research examines morphology evolution during dealloying
of low melting point lithium alloys. Such alloys are currently being considered
for use in advanced lithium-ion batteries in which the dealloying process
corresponds to that occurring during discharge of these battery systems. The
findings likely to emerge from this research will significantly impact research
in energy storage and particularly the development of new materials for future
batteries. As this country considers its energy options, it will need people
with combined expertise in electrochemistry and materials science to address
current and future energy technologies. The scope of research in this program
will afford undergraduate and graduate students the opportunity for fundamental
training in an integrated materials electrochemistry laboratory environment.
More generally in the area of education and training, the PI will be developing
a new undergraduate course in the "materials science of electrochemical energy
storage and production," and the course together with all materials will be
available for colleagues to use via the worldwide web.