* 1306400
* Topological Insulator Hybrid Structures for Novel Optoelectronic Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 01/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to exploit unique advantages of
topological insulator based structures for optoelectronic applications.
Specifically, the strong magnetoelectric interaction at the topological
insulator-magnetic material interface and subsequent band engineering is the key
focus as they can facilitate tailored response to an optical signal, offering an
ideal environment for previously unattainable performances such as extreme
sensitivity detection. The combined theoretical and experimental effort aims to
achieve synthesis, fabrication, and analysis of novel topological insulator
materials and layered heterostructures as well as demonstration of superior
device functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit is
that the investigation presents a basis for realizable topological insulator
based devices beyond the current state-of-the art. Through the paradigm of
domain matching epitaxy, the effort pursues synthesis of epitaxial topological
insulator/ferromagnetic insulator hybrid structures with atomistic uniformity at
the interface on a silicon compatible platform. The target materials include
both Bi2Se3 and emerging cubic candidates such as inverse perovskite Sr3SnO and
half-Heusler LuPtSb. The investigation also develops fundamental theoretical
understanding of topological insulator properties and photo-response
characteristics of various terahertz detector designs.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The broader impacts are the education/training of graduate and
undergraduate students in addition to advanced device development with
technological importance. Of particular significance is participation and
recruiting of minority students by fostering strong ties to local historically
black colleges and universities. The outreach is also pursued through ASM
Materials Camp, a successful annual summer event for high school students, as
well as the online distance education network.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) and by the
Electronic and Photonic Materials Program (EPM) in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR).