* 1306290
* CDS&E/Collaborative Research: Uncertainty Quantification of an Electromechanical Nonlinear Continuum Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ralph Smith, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 243,821.00

The goal of this collaborative research project is to develop an advanced
materials modeling framework that integrates quantum mechanics into a macroscale
continuum mechanics modeling framework for smart materials. The integration of
fundamental physics of materials at nanometer scales within a macroscopic
material model can have a tremendous impact on understanding the design of
materials as well as create the possibility of quantifying parameter
sensitivities and uncertainties in the models. To address this latter issue,
novel uncertainty quantification methods will be formulated and implemented
using advanced computations in a Bayesian statistical framework. The uncertainty
quantification will provide probability densities of the macroscale parameters
supported by quantum simulations. The deliverables will include homogenized
stress, electric field, and energy relations that utilize both the local quantum
material relations and probability densities that occur when approximating the
model at larger length scales.

It is anticipated that the fusion of quantum-continuum scale material
simulations will have a broad impact on understanding smart materials. These
materials are being investigated for and applied in various biomedical,
aerospace, automotive, and energy fields due to their unique functionality in
solid state structures and devices. The new data analysis and computational
techniques are expected to support this challenge to better understand advanced
materials. This becomes particularly important in advancing the development of
nanomaterials into larger scale structures that cannot be easily simulated
directly with quantum models or approximate continuum theories. The results
developed through this program will be integrated into engineering mechanics and
mathematics courses. The computational methods will also be integrated into
outreach programs at each university. Lastly, the results of this program will
be introduced into an outreach program at a local museum where K-12 children and
their parents learn about various aspects of engineering through monthly hands-
on demonstrations.