* 1306079
* Imaging Defect Dynamics in Organic Semiconductor Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2016
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 09/30/2016
* USD 444,674.00

Technical Description: The goal of this research project is to apply novel
scanning probe microscopy tools to understand how local structure and disorder
influence photochemical stability and charge transfer state formation in organic
semiconductor films. To accomplish this goal, the project uses new experimental
capabilities such as time-resolved electrostatic force microscopy to make direct
nanoscale correlations between local structural disorder and local variations in
photochemical trap formation, doping, and interfacial charge transfer state
energies. These observations can add a unique perspective to our understanding
of how structure and processing affect the photochemistry and photophysics of
organic semiconductors with technological implications for photodiodes and
photovoltaics. The project tackles three challenges related to the overall goal:
(1) using sub-microsecond time-resolved electrostatic force microscopy methods
to study the role of heterogeneity and local disorder on the photochemical
degradation of state-of-the art high-efficiency organic bulk heterojunctions;
(2) understanding the role of local structure and disorder on local carrier
transport, photochemical doping, and the evolution of these photochemical
processes in time using non-contact energy dissipation (quality factor)
measurements; and (3) understanding the role of morphology and structural
heterogeneity on the energetic distribution of charge transfer states in a
spatially and spectrally resolved fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description: Organic semiconductors are currently used in electronic displays,
and are of interest for use as light-weight, low-cost solar cells (for instance
to power and recharge consumer electronics, or eventually harvest solar energy
for the grid). Long term stability is a major challenge for these applications,
and this project seeks to better understand the details of how imperfections and
defects form in these materials at very fine length scales of tens of nanometers
through the application of newly developed scanning-probe microscopy tools. The
possible applications of organic semiconductors in lighting and solar energy not
only have significant direct economic and societal impact, but can be valuable
hooks for engaging students and the broader public in science education. The
outreach component of the project develops new digital and visual media for
large scale public engagements reaching K-12 students and the local community.
In addition to training graduate students at the interface of chemistry,
physics, and materials science, the project directly supports undergraduate
research and seeks to address science education pipeline issues by beginning a
new partnership with the Rainier Scholars program.