* 1306646
* Engineering Protein Assemblies with Stable, Selective and Reactive Metal Coordination Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Faik Tezcan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemistry of Life Process Program, Prof. Akif
Tezcan and his research group aim to establish design principles and
experimental strategies for the construction of a new class of macrocyclic,
multiprotein complexes with functional metal centers. The investigators have
previously established a protein engineering strategy termed Metal-Templated
Interface Redesign (MeTIR), which is inspired by the time-honored method of
metal-templated, ligand synthesis. Using MeTIR, they will construct an array of
oligomeric protein complexes whose stability and flexibility/rigidity can be
modulated through strategically-placed, non-covalent interactions and covalent
linkages. These complexes are designed to serve as tunable macrocyclic metal
ligands, which will allow the examination of fundamental relationships between
scaffold rigidity and the stability and selectivity of metal binding as well as
the construction of interfacial binding sites for catalytically-active metal
centers. The catalytic activity of these synthetic metalloprotein assemblies
toward several model hydrolysis reactions will be measured. Computationally-
guided, active site-directed mutagenesis will be employed in an effort to
improve the catalytic efficiency of the artificial metalloenzymes. The proposed
research will explore the viability and scope of proteins as building blocks for
coordination chemistry with the ultimate aim of providing clues on how nature
has evolved proteins to utilize and harness metal reactivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are nature's premier building blocks for the
construction of metalloenzymes that can be viewed as complex biological devices
or as coordination complexes with diverse metal-based functions. Yet, the
pursuit of the assembly of proteins or their use as synthetic building blocks
for inorganic coordination chemistry has been limited. The investigation
requires use of a wide array of technical skills in coordination chemistry,
molecular biology, protein biochemistry, crystallography, and biophysics. Hence
the graduate, undergraduate, and high school students involved in the proposed
research will gain a broad and interdisciplinary training. The principal
investigator will continue outreach efforts by recruiting members of groups
underrepresented in science through various self-initiated and campus-supported
programs and by participating in science fairs at local elementary schools.