* 1306158
* RUI: CHARGE- AND SPIN-DENSITY STUDY OF EXCHANGE ANISOTROPY IN METAL-ORGANIC QUANTUM MAGNETS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jamie Manson, Eastern Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 276,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on two synergistic
activities; (a) synthesis of model low-dimensional (1- and 2D) quantum magnets,
especially chains and square lattices and (b) examination of charge- and spin-
density in those compounds. We endeavor to learn more about the electronic
distribution and influences thereof, the exchange pathways in selected Cu(II),
Ni(II), and Co(II)-based organic magnets. Our strategy will combine primary
structural components assembled by coordinate covalent bonds (CCB's) between
M(II) or Ir(IV) cations and diazine ligands [e.g., pyrazine (pyz)], with such
ligands being well-known for their good Lewis basicity and ability to act as
bridging functionalities and exchange mediators. Secondary interactions based on
strong hydrogen bonds (e.g., F---H-O and F---H---F) will provide us with further
structural control and an additional magnetic pathway that may dominate M-pyz-M,
thus enabling exchange anisotropy. Initially, we will focus on several of the
polymers recently developed by our group and then shift toward new systems
featuring previously unknown combinations of ancillary ligands. The latter will
allow us to systematically perturb electronic states in order to interrogate the
salient features of charge- and spin-density distributions in a variety of
materials. Undergraduates, from all backgrounds, will carry out the syntheses
and assist with data analysis and characterization of samples, travel to state-
of-the-art research facilities, and attend/present their work at professional
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Metal-organic magnets constitute a major research area in
the condensed matter sciences. Their popularity stems from the many synthetic
variations that can be made which then allows for systematic investigation of
their magnetic properties. Our fundamental research interests lie in using
combinations of particular chemical bonds to design architectures of varying
dimensionalities so as to tune the important magnetic interactions. In this
project, we will utilize X-ray and neutron diffraction methods as well as solid
state NMR to study the electron density distributions in designer magnets in
order to evaluate the efficiency of certain bond types (e.g. exchange
anisotropy) which will depend on the metal ions present. This work could lead to
improved materials design and synthesis protocols in order to more effectively
prepare multifunctional materials, i.e., those that contain multiple physical
properties. Our materials discovery effort will be complemented by extensive
characterization and theoretical work. The highly collaborative nature of this
project makes use of several national and international user facilities and will
provide unique opportunities for undergraduate students to travel with the PI to
partake in many of the planned experiments as well as to attend professional
conferences. Student involvement in the project will stimulate their growth and
enthusiasm, and provide the necessary background to begin graduate work in the
future or to go on to careers in the chemical and physical sciences. Mentorship
and training of undergraduate students is a high priority of this project.