* 1306452
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kevin Brix, Brix                    Kevin          V
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship award to Dr. Kevin Brix is supported by
both the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Office of International
Science and Engineering at the National Science Foundation. During the 24-month
fellowship, Dr. Brix will work on a project titled, "Investigation into the
Genetic Controls of Osmoregulation in Freshwater Fish" under the co-sponsorship
of Professors Dolph Schluter, Colin Brauner, and Chris Wood at the University of
British Columbia (UBC) in Vancouver, Canada.

The invasion of ancient marine fish into freshwater environments represents one
of the most physiologically significant developments in vertebrate evolution,
with multiple invasions occurring over the past 400 million years. A diversity
of processes by which fish maintain salt balance in freshwater has been
identified, but no systematic effort has been made to understand the genetic
factors controlling this diversity. This project will use the stickleback,
Gasterosteus aculeatus, to investigate the genetic control of salt balance in
freshwater fish. Stickleback has independently invaded freshwater multiple
times, providing a powerful model for examining the evolution of salt balance in
fish. Dr. Brix will characterize these processes in freshwater and marine
stickleback populations and then use genetic mapping techniques to identify the
genes controlling differences in salt balance between populations. Stickleback
has become an increasingly valuable genetic model for an array of physiological
and morphological processes. The genes controlling changes in body shape are now
understood and exert control over similar processes in other vertebrates,
including humans. This project will develop a similar level of understanding for
salt balance with the possibility that key genes identified in stickleback may
be important for other fish species and vertebrates in general.

Through this fellowship, Dr. Brix will become a member of the Biodiversity
Research Centre and associated Beaty Biodiversity Museum
(http://www.beatymuseum.ubc.ca/) at UBC, where he will actively participate in
the extensive K-12 educational outreach programs on biodiversity and evolution
using stickleback as a teaching tool. Additionally, through a Science without
Borders grant to Dr. Wood, he will have an opportunity to teach a course at the
National Institute for Research in the Amazon (INPA) in Manaus, Brazil on
integrating fish physiology and the gene mapping techniques.

This award provides a unique opportunity for a US scientist to collaborate with
foreign scientists, and utilize the unique facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions available abroad.