* 1306880
* GOALI:   Synchronously Pumped NMR Oscillator
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Thad Walker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

This award, an Industry-University Collaborative Project between the University
of Wisconsin-Madison and scientists and engineers at Northrop-Grumman
Corporation, demonstrates a new type of nuclear magnetic resonance using noble-
gas nuclei. The essential innovation is to use an integrated atomic magnetometer
to get the best signal-to-noise ratio, while greatly suppressing potential
errors introduced by the magnetometer. The resonator is of fundamental interest
for searches for spin-dependent symmetry violation tests, and of practical
interest in improving the state-of-the-art in NMR gyroscopes. The key to the new
approach is the concept of synchronous spin-exchange optical pumping, wherein
the magnetometer atoms and the nuclei are made to precess at the same frequency.
Estimates of technical noise indicate the system has a potential frequency noise
level of better than 1 nHz/ Hz, with fundamental limits that are much better.
The oscillator will be used to set new stringent limits on the potential
couplings of potential dark matter candidates to nuclei. The resonator will also
be evaluated for use as a precision NMR gyro. While the developments here
represent a substantially new approach to NMR oscillators, the Industry-
University collaboration will allow industrial expertise with conventional NMR
oscillator technology to be leveraged for accelerated development.

In addition to the normal academic research training of undergraduate and
graduate students, the project provides substantive exposure of students to
industrial scientists and engineers working in an R&D environment. Students
benefit from industrial expertise in areas such as electronics, magnetic field,
and thermal design. The work being pursued has both fundamental and practical
applications and the nuclear magnetic resonator will be evaluated in particular
for potential applications to navigation