* 1306977
* Mechanistic Studies of Molecular Recognition of Methylated Lysine and Arginine
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Marcey Waters, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 09/30/2017
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Marcey Waters from the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill to study the fundamental molecular recognition properties of a set
of synthetic receptors for each of the methylation states of lysine (Lys) and
arginine (Arg), which are protein modifications involved in the control of gene
expression. The receptors will be developed using Dynamic Combinatorial
Chemistry, which will allow for rapid identification of a set of differentially
selective hosts. Comprehensive mechanistic studies will be performed in which
both the host and guest are varied that will provide insight into mechanisms for
selective recognition between closely related guests in aqueous solution.
Lastly, these same receptors will be used in indicator displacement assays
coupled with pattern recognition to characterize the enzymes that methylate Lys,
providing new insight into these biological
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular recognition, which involves the
interaction of two (bio)molecules through a set of weak intermolecular forces
called non-covalent interactions, is critical to virtually all biological
function, including the interactions of proteins with other proteins,
biomolecules, and inhibitors. However, the ability to predict the set of non-
covalent interactions that will give rise to a particular molecular recognition
event with a certain binding affinity and selectivity is still not possible.
This work will provide a systematic study of a set of biologically relevant
molecular recognition events to gain mechanistic insight into the features that
provide both affinity and selectivity. This research will educate both graduate
students and undergraduate students in organic, analytical, supramolecular
chemistry, and biochemistry, providing a strong interdisciplinary background,
which is necessary in an increasingly interdisciplinary workforce. This work
will also introduce underrepresented high school and college students to
interdisciplinary research.