* 1306662
* Quantum Hydrodynamics with Multicomponent and Dispersion-Managed Degenerate Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Peter Engels, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 354,800.00

This research program investigates the intriguing physics of nonlinear quantum
hydrodynamics, using ultracold atomic gases such as Bose-Einstein condensates
(BECs) as well-controlled model systems. In the experiments, clouds of atoms are
cooled to temperatures near zero Kelvin, where their dynamics strongly deviate
from the dynamics of classical particles and matter-wave behavior emerges. The
wave nature of the atoms in this extreme regime leads to fluid-like behavior
described by a hydrodynamic model. Capitalizing on the most recent advances and
developments, the program provides much needed benchmark results for the
development of a deep understanding of nonlinear quantum hydrodynamics. Topics
include multi-soliton dynamics, binary quantum turbulence, multicomponent
counterflow and Raman-dressed BECs. The experiments go beyond the realm of
existing theories and provide strong stimuli for the development of a precise
theoretical picture that is needed for future applications.

The results of this research program are relevant in a broad context. Strong
parallels exist between BEC hydrodynamics and the technologically important
propagation of light through optical fibers. For future telecommunication
applications using solitons of light as bits of information transmitted through
optical fibers, a precise understanding of multi-soliton dynamics analogous to
the one found in BECs will be important. Second, Raman-dressed BECs exhibit
spin-orbit coupling which plays a prominent role in advanced condensed matter
systems, e.g. for the spin quantum Hall effect, topological insulators, and
engineering of Majorana fermions with applications to topological quantum
computation. Furthermore, the research program provides new insight into quantum
turbulence and thus aids the development of a better understanding of classical
turbulence, which is often quoted as the most important unsolved problem in
classical physics. This research program also plays an important role for the
education of students. It allows students at all levels to gain experience with
state-of-the-art instruments and techniques while they perform experiments
addressing some of the most pressing open questions in quantum hydrodynamics.
The students will be well prepared for future careers in industry and academia.