* 1307580
* Collaborative Research: C-HetNet - Towards Spectrum and Energy Efficient Next Generation Wireless Access Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yi Qian, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 186,452.00

The objective of this research is to exploit and establish the theoretical
foundations to support the design of next generation cooperative, clean and
centralized heterogeneous wireless access networks, or, C-HetNet. The approaches
include designing novel algorithms for spectrum efficiency, energy efficiency
and quality of service based mobile association, multi-layer interference
management and power control, network wide cooperation and dynamic resource
allocation in the C-HetNet; and seeking the design principles of balancing and
optimizing spectrum efficiency, energy efficiency and quality of service in the
C-HetNet.

Intellectual merit:

The project is expected to significantly advance the understanding in the
heterogeneous wireless networks, which are expected to play a key role in
meeting the future data capacity explosion and energy consumption escalation.
The project will address the unique technical challenges in the C-HetNet and
explore new solutions to spectrum and energy efficiency in mobile association,
multi-layer interference management and power control, and dynamic cooperative
resource allocation.

Broader Impacts:

The C-HetNet research activities have significant potentials to revolutionize
wireless access networking technologies and wireless cross-layer design
approaches. The research will provide a new wireless network paradigm to meet
the ever-increasing wireless traffic demand and to address the needs on network
cost reduction and global environmental protection; and will improve many
application scenarios such as coverage extension, hotspots, and emergency
network deployment for public safety, disaster rescues and medical applications.
The research outcomes will be disseminated through publications and seminars and
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the PIs.