* 1307982
* Distributed and Robust Estimation for Cyberphysical Systems using a Nonlinear Consensus Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* cihan tepedelenlioglu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,999.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to design and
test nonlinear, robust, and power-aware consensus estimation algorithms for
fully distributed cyber-physical systems (CPS). Systems that use a large number
of networked sensors with limited transmission range due to power limitations
are considered. Such systems have a large number of transmitters that are
subject to non-Gaussian impulsive noise and network interference. Robust
decentralized distributed sensing will be considered with joint design of the
sensing and communication systems with low-power
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit is in the novel design of distributed nonlinear consensus
algorithms to solve parameter estimation problems for CPS applications. Proposed
convergence analysis, and variance of the estimators in the presence of these
nonlinearities go beyond existing analyses of linear approaches. The research
will provide power-aware consensus estimation algorithms with minimal
assumptions about the sensing and channel noise through judicious design of
nonlinearities. Algorithms will be tested with photo-voltaic array data and a
testbed will be developed to address and characterize real-time
estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts are on alternative energy, environmental, infrastructure
monitoring, and STEM education. The PIs will design educational software modules
that use sensing as a paradigm to illustrate basic concepts in probability and
communications at the undergraduate level. Dissemination and education efforts
will include computer and mobile-based applications using the award-winning
JAVA-DSP software packages. The investigators will also actively recruit
students from under-represented minorities to work on the project.