* 1307311
* Astrophysics with Very High Energy Gamma Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 583,184.00

High-energy gamma-rays are used to study the most extreme objects in the
Universe, such as pulsars, black holes at the center of active galaxies, and
gamma-ray bursts. Cosmic gamma-rays can also be signatures for new physics
beyond the standard models of particle physics and cosmology. Studies with very-
high-energy gamma rays, above about 100 gigaelectron volt (GeV), require ground-
based detectors with thousands of square meters of collection area. This
research will use the VERITAS imaging Cherenkov telescope array in southern
Arizona to study gamma-rays with energy greater than about 100 GeV. The
sensitivity of VERITAS is more than an order of magnitude better than previous
generation instruments operating in this energy range and has just been improved
further by a substantial upgrade.

With this award the University of California - Santa Cruz group will use VERITAS
to explore the extreme behavior of the two most powerful known classes of gamma-
ray source: gamma-ray bursts and active galactic nuclei. The detail mechanisms
of gamma-ray bursts and the role they play in other high-energy phenomena are
still being explored. Learning whether they are capable of creating very-high-
energy gamma-rays will constrain gamma-ray burst models and properties of the
burst environment. Similarly, measurements of the very-high-energy gamma-ray
emission from active galactic nuclei probe properties of the jets, providing
crucial information about the particles being accelerated and how the
acceleration works. Data from across the electromagnetic spectrum will be
gathered and used to assemble the most complete possible picture of very high-
energy gamma-ray behavior. These data will also be used to study gamma-ray
absorption by collisions with the extragalactic background light, a process that
tests cosmological models of star formation and galaxy evolution.

Broader Impact: Graduate and undergraduate students play an important part in
this research effort. Research experiences will also be made available to
aspiring science teachers in the Cal Teach program and in-service teachers
through a new Lick Observatory Teachers Institute. The researchers interact with
the California State University to foster undergraduate interest in research and
graduate education. There is an important interplay between the VERITAS data and
data from other wavelengths, particularly X-ray and lower energy gamma-ray data
from satellite missions such as Swift and Fermi. More can be learned from both
types of data used together than from either alone.