* 1307247
* Non-Abelian phases and statistics in spin-3/2 hole gases
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Leonid Rokhinson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This project will address topologically non-trivial
properties of degenerate states in low dimensional hole gases. Non-Abelian
phases will be measured in double-ring interferometric devices, where the
contribution of Abelian phases can be minimized. Excitations with non-Abelian
statistics will be studied in 1D semiconducting wires proximity-coupled to a
conventional superconductor. Complementary experiments exploring the energy
spectrum of bound states and phase-energy relation of Josephson junctions will
be performed. Several fabrication approaches are proposed to reduce effects of
localization, the major complication in mesoscopic devices. Finally, an
interplay between non-Abelian nature of the wavefunction and non-Abelian
statistics of excitation will be investigated. This project will support a PhD
student who will be trained in semiconductor physics, fabrication and
measurement techniques, including low temperature high magnetic field
techniques, vacuum technology, low noise electrical characterization, scanning
probe and electron-beam nanolithography. This broad experience will prepare the
student for a successful career in technology or academia. An outreach program
includes development of nanotechnology demonstrations and accompanying materials
for high school students and physics teachers.

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Quantum statistics, spin and symmetry of the
wavefunction are central to the quantum mechanical understanding of the world.
In most systems phases accumulated by a particle along a trajectory are additive
and exchange of two particles amounts to a multiplication by a phase factor.
However, over the last few decades it has been realized that in very special
settings the accumulated phase depends on the topology of the system and
particle exchanges do not have to commute, meaning the outcome of permutations
depends on the order of the particle exchanges. The main objective of this work
is to engineer a new state of matter where exotic particles with non-commuting
properties can exist. New techniques to detect particles with these
unconventional properties will be also developed. If successful, the research
will enable development of a topological quantum bit, a key element of a
revolutionary concept of a fault-tolerant quantum computer, which promises to
increase computational power for some resource-intensive tasks exponentially,
especially for encryption algorithms paramount for national security. The
project will train a PhD student working at the edge of nanotechnology, which is
the best hands-on training in science and engineering for a successful career in
technology or academia. An outreach program includes development of
nanotechnology demonstrations and accompanying materials for high school
students and physics teachers.