* 1307346
* Dynamical Control of Resonant Light-Matter Interaction
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Olga Kocharovskaya, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The project will develop new dynamical methods to control the resonant light-
matter interaction through modulation in time and/or in space of the parameters
of the resonant atomic transition (frequencies and/or line widths) by means of
the strong off-resonant control field. It includes the development of (i) a new
highly efficient method for the formation of the VUV and XUV attosecond pulses
via the spectrum broadening by means of the temporal modulation of the atomic
parameters and (ii) a method to produce and to control optically the photonic
structures in a homogeneous atomic media via special modulation of the
refractive index induced by the strong laser field. A theory of the VUV and XUV
radiation transformation during its propagation through an optically thick
resonantly absorbing atomic medium, dynamically perturbed by a strong IR or
optical laser radiation, will be developed. It will advance understanding and
control of the strong ultrafast light-matter interactions, including
appreciation of the role of the resonant, interference, and cooperative effects
in such interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attosec pulses provide a unique
ultrafast tool for recording and control of the electronic motion in atoms,
molecules, and nanostructures, leading to profound applications in chemistry and
biology, medicine and energetics. Development of the new method of attosecond
pulse formation with the pulse characteristics superior or complementary to
those produced by the current high-harmonic-generation technique will further
push those strategically and fundamentally important applications. Development
of the new method for an optical production of the photonic structures in the
homogeneously distributed atomic ensembles with the widely variable parameters,
determined by the intensity and frequency of the control field, will essentially
extend the applications of such structures for the control and manipulation of
the flow of light. The graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
these interdisciplinary fields of atomic, molecular, and optical science,
learning and developing the methods of coherent control of the light-matter
interaction in the ultrafast strong-field regimes based on the modern laser
technologies. Collaboration with experimental groups will be initiated, aiming
at implementation of the newly developed dynamical methods of coherent control
in the experimental investigations.