* 1307645
* CRCNS: Computational Approaches to Uncover Neural Representation of Population Codes in Rodent Hippocampal-Cortical Circuits
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Matthew Wilson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 923,552.00

Spatial navigation and episodic memory are important for daily activity and
survival in rodents and primates. Episodic memory consists of collections of
past experiences that occurred at a particular time and space, expressed in the
form of sequences of temporal or spatial events. Spatial (topographical or
topological) representation of the environment is pivotal for navigation. The
hippocampus plays a significant role in both spatial representations and
episodic memory. However, it remains unclear how the spikes of hippocampal
neurons might be used by downstream structures in order to reconstruct the
spatial environment without the a priori information of the place receptive
fields. Little is known how the hippocampal neuronal representation might be
affected by experimental manipulation. Furthermore, cortico-hippocampal
interplay and communications are critical for memory consolidation, but many
questions about their temporal coordination during sleep remains unresolved.
This project proposes a collaborative proposal for studying the neural
representation of population codes in rodent hippocampal-cortical circuits. The
investigators and collaborators at MGH, MIT and Boston University will integrate
innovative computational and experimental approaches to explore the neural codes
during various spatial navigation and spatial/temporal memory tasks as well as
during post-behavior sleep---as sleep is critical to hippocampal-dependent
memory consolidation. Notably, due to the lack of measured behavior, it remains
a great challenge to analyze or interpret sleep-associated hippocampal or
cortical spike data.

The important questions central to this project are: how do hippocampal (or
hippocampal-cortical) neuronal representations vary with respect to species (rat
vs. mouse), animal (healthy vs. diseased), experience (novel vs. familiar),
environment (one vs. two-dimensional), behavioral state (awake vs. sleep), and
task (active vs. passive navigation; spatial working memory vs. temporal
sequence memory). The investigators will simultaneously record ensemble spike
activity from two or multiple areas of the rodent brain (hippocampus, primary
visual cortex, prefrontal cortex, and retrosplenial cortex) under different
experimental conditions, and will decipher the population codes using a coherent
statistical framework. In light of Bayesian inference (variational Bayes or
nonparametric Bayes), innovative unsupervised or semi-supervised learning
approaches are developed for mining and visualizing sparse (in terms of both
sample size and low firing rate) neuronal ensemble spike data.

The outcome of this investigation will improve the understanding of neural
mechanisms of hippocampal (or hippocampal-cortical) population coding and its
implications in learning, sleep and memory. The derived findings will shed light
on the links between the variability of neural responses and the animal behavior
(or other external factors), and will provide further insight into memory
dysfunction (such as in Alzheimer's disease). Furthermore, this project has
broader impacts in developing efficient algorithms to decipher neuronal
population spike activity during behavior or sleep, as well as in discovering
invariant topological representation of population codes in other cortical
areas. In addition to the scientific significance, this proposal bears an
educational component for training researchers on advanced quantitative skills
in ensemble spike data analysis as well as for disseminating scientific
resources (by sharing data and software) to a broad neuroscience community.