* 1307778
* Collaborative Research: Power Generation from Fluid-Structure Interaction using Mathematical, Computational  and Experimental Modeling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Earl Dowell, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 169,509.00

Intellectual Merits: The interaction of a flowing fluid and a deformable
structure or solid is one of the richest sources of mathematical challenges and
fundamental physical phenomena with important applications to engineering and
technology including energy harvesting and power generation. The physical
phenomena of interest range from blood flows in arteries, to airflow over an
oscillating tongue that can lead to clinical dangerous and potentially fatal
oscillations, to flow over flexible long span bridges and tall buildings, to
flow over and around flight vehicles over a wide range of scales from micro air
vehicles to modern passenger airliners, to fluid-structural systems whose limit
cycles may be a source of energy harvesting and power generation. It is this
last application that motivates much of the proposed work. While in many
applications the concern is that the limit cycle oscillations will damage the
mechanical integrity of the fluid/structural system, in the energy harvesting
and power generation application these oscillations will be both novel and
beneficial.&lt;br/&gt;The methods that have been proposed to better understand
and exploit these phenomena include theoretical models of high sophistication
including the continuum models of the fluid and the structure. While analytical
solutions continue to be sought and found, computational models that tax the
resources of the most powerful computers also play an important role, as do
scale model experiments based upon a sound fundamental analysis and
understanding of the first principles of the relevant continuum models. Indeed,
it is by exploiting the complementary strengths of each approach theoretical
modeling, computational modeling, and experimental scale models that the deepest
and richest insights can be obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
proposal brings together senior investigators from three major research
institutions covering a wide range of intellectual experience from modern
mathematics to rigorously based computational models to multidisciplinary
experiments to address fluid-structure interaction phenomena. This research will
also provide an opportunity for graduate students and post-doctoral visitors to
participate and learn in this rich environment.