* 1307192
* Synthesis of Janus Hybrid Nanoparticles as Colloidal Amphiphiles
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Jeffrey Pyun, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2016
* USD 354,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis, assembly and
polymerization of a new class of hybrid colloids composed of asymmetric nanorods
with disparate colloidal components and differentially functionalized polymer
ligands will be pursued. These types of hybrid colloids will exhibit Janus-type
structural character, as the inorganic colloidal phase will be composed of a
single semiconductor nanorod (based on CdSe@CdS) conjugated to a single dipolar
cobalt nanoparticle (CoNP). Furthermore, the controllable functionalization of
CdSe@CdS nanorod and CoNP surfaces with (co)polymeric ligands will be achieved.
This Janus nanoparticle is a novel and unique platform that enables selective
and differential functionalization of CoNP and CdSe@CdS nanorod surfaces with
different types of polymeric ligands made from controlled radical
polymerizations of varying hydrophilicity enabling creation of colloidal
amphiphilic nanomaterials. The synthesis and structural variation of colloidal
and polymeric components will be the central focus of the research that will
enable further studies on the assembly of these Janus NPs and conversion via
colloidal polymerization into heterostructured photocatalytic materials. The PI
will investigate the self-organization of these amphiphilic Janus NP in solution
and at oil-water interfaces to form various colloidal assemblies targeting the
formation of linear NP chains with nanorods laterally oriented. Oxidation of the
metallic CoNP phases of the Janus NP colloidal assemblies will then be conducted
to afford cobalt oxide nanowires carrying CdSe@CdS nanorod side chains along
every repeating unit of the cobalt oxide backbone. This methodology affords a
route to spatially and electronically ordered p-n semiconductor junctions that
are energetically aligned for photocatalysis. The composition, morphology, and
electronic structure of these nanomaterials will be investigated via TEM, XRD,
photoelectron and optical spectroscopies, along with photocatalysis studies with
Janus NP colloidal assemblies and solution optical probe molecules upon
irradiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to develop new methods
to prepare novel materials that combine organic polymers and inorganic particles
with control of size, shape and function of the different components. This will
require the development of new synthetic chemistry to prepare these types of
inorganic particles that will be very small in size (i.e., nanoscopic) and
decorated with a shell of organic polymer ligands as a plastic coating. Because
these types of building blocks are very novel, methods to prepare and hybridize
these into a single useful material are lacking, which the proposed research
aims to address. Hence, the research is highly interdisciplinary, but grounded
in basic and fundamental polymer science. Upon development of these synthetic
methods, the preparation of asymmetric nanoparticles will enable evaluation of
these materials for energy related problems, such as, photocatalytic generation
of hydrogen from water. Furthermore, integration of the research with
educational activities with K-12 students will be achieved by joint mentoring
projects and a series of lectures given by the PI. Collaborations with South
Korean academic institutions (Seoul National University) will also be integrated
into this project through joint technical research and educational activities.