* 1307264
* Ionic reactions in droplets and thin films for preparative and analytical mass spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Robert Cooks, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2017
* USD 675,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Graham Cooks at Purdue University and his group will be
studying the reactions of organic ions and the collection of their products in
the open laboratory environment. Technological applications of chemistry depend
upon both chemical reactions and on chemical analysis. Typical chemical
reactions include those involved in making drugs, improving plastics, and
breaking down biomass for new fuels. Typical chemical analyses include
monitoring levels of specific drugs in blood, measuring pollutants in our
rivers, and identifying the nature of white powders that are at the Senate
Office building in envelopes. Mass spectrometry is one of the most widely used
and sensitive methods of chemical analysis. This proposal involves attempts to
use mass spectrometric methods to increase the rates of chemical reactions so as
to make small quantities of sets of related materials quickly - that is to make
libraries of compounds. These chemicals can be used for evaluating possible
biologically active compounds that respond to certain enzymes or other purposes.
Scaling up the chemistry that occurs in the mass spectrometer has the potential
to generate new types of compounds by new routes, an example being fixing
(incorporating) nitrogen into waxes (alkanes) by electrical discharges in air.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project will be in education in
the design and fabrication of new instrumentation. Chemical instrumentation is
one of the core capabilities in science and technology and experience in
building instrumentation will be a skill that will have impact over the careers
of the graduate students and undergraduates involved in this project.
Prototyping efforts that has produced new types of instruments and led to
commercialization will be continued. An annual short course on chemical
instrumentation for about 100 people will enhance skills in this area. Research
results from the project will form the basis for developing experiments in
organic and analytical teaching laboratories, helping to more effectively teach
organic reactivity.