* 1307611
* Enhancing Bioanalytical Applications of nanoGUMBOS
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Isiah Warner, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 412,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Nano-Biosensing Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET), Professors Isiah
Warner, Daniel Hayes, and Francisco Hung at Louisiana State University &amp;
Agricultural and Mechanical College and their groups will optimize development
of novel nanomaterials derived from a group of uniform materials based on
organic salts (GUMBOS). The goal of this research is to apply these nanoGUMBOS
toward applications in measurement science. These materials can be developed as
safe and effective alternatives to many current nanomaterials used for
bioanalytical applications. This research is designed to examine the properties
of nanoGUMBOS that contribute to their stability, tunability, biocompatibility,
and ready applicability for use in such applications. Thus, the potential of
nanoGUMBOS for employing effective combinations of properties through unique
combinations of cations and anions is outlined in this proposal. As an example,
a fluorescent nanoparticle may be generated from GUMBOS by use of a fluorescent
dye as the cation and a traditional anion. In addition, a non-fluorescent
magnetic particle may be generated by use of a non-fluorescent cation in
combination with a paramagnetic anion. Obviously, multiple properties for a
given nanoGUMBOS can be achieved through a combination of similar strategies.
Such particles would then have uniform multiple functionalities and thus realize
the full potential of nanomaterials in terms of maximum surface activity per
given surface to volume ratio. This is in contrast to many nanoparticles where
multiple functionalities are generated by independently injecting species with
these properties into a neutral species such as
silica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Warner and his team have been actively
involved in educational strategies for using research and mentoring as tools to
actively engage undergraduates in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education. They will continue their efforts in engaging
undergraduate and graduate students of diverse backgrounds in this grant.