* 1307017
* Real-Time Studies of Solution-Processed Organic Semiconductor Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Randall Headrick, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2017
* USD 371,921.00

Technical Description: The goal of this research project is to understand in
detail and to control molecular self-organization processes, utilizing a simple
thin film deposition instrument, the "hollow pen writer," for depositing 10 -
100 nanometer thin films of small-molecule organic semiconductors from solution.
The hollow pen writer provides a surprising degree of control over the
properties of organic semiconductor thin films, in some ways far surpassing the
results obtainable with conventional vapor deposition. The research team
utilizes this method to study the relationships between process parameters and
film properties, such as crystalline grain structure and grain boundary density.
These studies feature real-time analysis techniques such as optical video
microscopy and synchrotron x-ray diffraction, which are necessary in order to
follow crystallization processes on time scales from milliseconds to minutes and
to monitor and distinguish molecular short-range order versus long-range order.
In addition, charge carrier transport in test devices such as organic field
effect transistors are studied as a function of grain structure and built-in or
applied stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: Organic
semiconductors are designed at the molecular level to exhibit useful properties,
and they promise the realization of a new generation of electronic circuits and
solar cells. This research activity addresses a key step in optimal utilization
of organic electronic materials, the organization of individual molecules into
crystalline form through controllable processes such as coating from a liquid
solution into a thin layer. Packing of molecules into crystals as well as the
structure of crystal boundaries profoundly affects the properties of thin films.
The research team seeks to understand the mechanisms inherent to solution
processing in order to evaluate, understand, exploit, and predict the potential
of new functional materials that are being synthesized at an ever-increasing
rate. The societal impact of the research is amplified by innovative teaching
methods and by pursuing community outreach objectives, including: an
undergraduate teaching lab to make organic solar cells, enhanced through online
tools for analyzing and discussing results; lectures and demonstrations designed
to engage the public in a discussion of the science and applications of energy,
light, materials, and nano-materials.