* 1307153
* Crystal-Based Molecular Modulation for Arbitrary Spatio-Temporal Optical Waveform Synthesis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Alexei Sokolov, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

A technique is being developed for sub-femtosecond pulse generation and sub-
cycle pulse shaping. The essence of the technique is the preparation of a
macroscopic medium in a coherent superposition-state. This preparation is
accomplished by two laser pulses tuned close to a molecular Raman resonance. The
resultant molecular motion modulates the input light to produce a wide spectrum
of discrete sidebands. Broadband coherent generation in Raman-active crystals is
shown, and the capability to control spectral phases of the Raman sidebands in a
precise and stable manner is demonstrated. This is the first step toward sub-
cycle pulse shaping, which will allow synthesis of waveforms where the electric
field is an arbitrary predetermined function of time, not limited to quasi-
sinusoidal oscillations. As a result, a direct and precise control of electron
trajectories in photoionization and high-order harmonic generation will become
possible. In addition, coherent transfer of optical orbital angular momentum in
multi-order Raman generation is investigated. The use of singular light beams,
such as optical vortices, provides a new degree of freedom for ultrashort pulse
manipulation, and will open a possibility for spatio-temporal engineering of
sub-cycle pulses.

The broad impact of this research derives not only from the promised discoveries
in fundamental science, but also come from a variety of practical applications
of the new broad-band Raman source. These applications are: optical coherence
tomography, ultrafast spectroscopy, precision metrology, to name a few. In
addition, the technique of molecular modulation can be used to generate coherent
radiation in the UV and IR spectral regions, where laser sources are not readily
available. Eventually, applications to lithography, chemistry, biology, and
astronomy may become practical. An important part of this project is the
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students. The project
provides these students with training in the field of quantum optics and laser
physics and will allow them to develop both theoretical and experimental skills
which are in high demand.