* 1307895
* Advancing Behavioral and Social Science Research for Public Policy: The Policy Roundtable of the Behavioral and Social Sciences
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Melissa Welch-Ross, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 100,000.00

The National Academies Policy Roundtable of the Behavioral and Social Sciences
is exploring ways in which the behavioral and social sciences can better inform
and otherwise contribute to more effective and efficient government policies and
programs. Building upon the recent National Academies report, Using Science as
Evidence in Public Policy, the Roundtable brings together those who make or
advise on policy, those who conduct policy-relevant research, and those who fund
research and data collection in order to provide the interaction necessary for
the production of relevant research that policy makers can use. The Roundtable
informs policy makers of the relevance and utility of behavioral and social
science research and engages researchers in formulating researchable questions
that meet their needs. The Roundtable also contributes to the development of
research to better understand and advance the use of science to inform public
policy and is a source of ideas for future National Academies workshops,
conferences, and studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roundtable members discuss
priority issues in the use of behavioral and social science research for public
policy and engage in dialogue, share information, and suggest ideas for further
exploration and further research. A public workshop usually follows with
presentations and discussions on identified topics that would further advance
the use of science in public policy. About three meetings of the Roundtable are
to be held each year. Brief summaries of the Roundtable discussions, or meeting
recaps, are provided to members and a summary or proceedings of workshops is to
be publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. For scientific
research to continue to contribute to societal well-being, it is critical that
decisions on public policies are informed by relevant scientific knowledge. The
creative dialogue within the Policy Roundtable and the presentations and
discussions at its workshops will serve this important purpose.