* 1307678
* Distributed Nonlinear Multi-agent Coordination in Asymmetric Switching Networks: A Sequential Comparison Framework
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Wei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 421,053.00

The main objective of the proposed research is to derive a novel sequential
comparison framework for distributed nonlinear multi-agent coordination in
asymmetric switching networks. The basic idea is that the stability of one
system can be inferred by that of another carefully chosen simpler system by
suitably choosing scalar nonnegative functions for each system, comparing their
derivatives along the trajectories of their corresponding systems, and
exploiting structural similarity. It is not required that the nonnegative
functions be non-increasing (with negative semidefinite derivatives or the
alike) or show up in their derivatives, or one be upper bounded by another.
Instead the structural relationship between them and their derivatives plays a
role. The comparison can be performed sequentially with simpler and simpler
systems until one final system whose stability can be obtained easily with a
conventional method. The sequential comparison procedure is particularly
promising for tackling the challenges in distributed nonlinear multi-agent
coordination with significant complexity by sequentially reducing the
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research
consists of three thrusts. The first thrust is to derive a rigorous sequential
comparison framework as a novel analysis and design tool for nonlinear systems.
The PI will formalize the framework and explore more relaxed conditions and its
usage as both analysis and design tools. The second thrust is to address open
problems in distributed nonlinear multi-agent coordination in asymmetric
switching networks under the sequential comparison framework. The PI will
address four challenging problems in asymmetric switching networks, namely,
modular design and analysis in distributed control, fully distributed algorithm
design with adaptive laws, distributed control of nonlinear passive systems, and
distributed control of heterogeneous agents with unknown nonlinear dynamics. The
third thrust is experimental demonstration. The novelty of the sequential
comparison framework is three fold. First, the framework does not require
nonnegative functions to be non-increasing and hence allows the choice of
collective nonnegative functions characterizing group behavior independent of
the network topology for concluding convergence through sequential comparison,
rending them suitable to tackle asymmetric switching networks. Second, the
framework can sequentially reduce the complexity in multi-agent systems through
comparison with simpler systems in a sequential manner. Third, the framework
makes good use of existing results through comparison to infer new
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Numerous civilian, homeland
security, and military applications involving multiagent systems and fields
related to stability theory and networked systems including mathematics,
economics, biology, sociology, and physics will benefit from the proposed
research. The research results from the project will be used for curriculum
enrichment and development in multi-agent systems. The PI will develop a new
graduate course on multi-agent systems. With UCR being one of America?s few
research-intensive Hispanic serving institutions, the PI will actively encourage
under-represented students to participate in his research.