* 1307791
* Multi-agent systems with localized objectives
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Mohamed-Ali Belabbas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 291,240.00

Problems concerning the cooperation of multiple entities seeking to achieve a
global objective appear in an increasingly broader variety of situations, for
instance arising from the interaction of agents that were designed to act
autonomously (such as cars on a highway), or from systems built from the ground
up according to the networked systems paradigm (such as uav's (unmanned
autonomous vehicles) or auction systems). Along with this comes an increase in
the variety of tasks such systems have to accomplish. While most of the extant
work in decentralized control focuses on issues relating to agents having
partial information about the state of the ensemble, this new landscape
underscores the need to develop new control theoretic methods that give the
objective of the ensemble a prominent role. The goal of this research is to
develop new results and algorithms to address this need, within the context of
what is termed 'multi-agent systems with localized objectives'. The novelty of
the point of view adopted here thus lies in the handling of information: beyond
restrictions on the information available to the agents about the state of other
agents, we integrate in the analysis restrictions on the information available
about the global objective of the system as whole.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will provide novel, systematic methods for the design and analysis of
multi-agent systems where each agent knows only part of the global objective of
the ensemble. To this end, new connections will be established between control
design and various areas of applied mathematics such as computational abstract
algebra and algebraic topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this research program
will provide tools that enable the design of decentralized control laws with
localized objectives and foster their dissemination and adoption in real-world
systems such as formations of vehicles or power networks. This research plan
will blend tools from different engineering disciplines and will draw on
data/problems stemming from a variety of experimental origins. Its
implementation will moreover involve undergraduate and graduate students from
across the spectrum of engineering.