* 1307272
* Probing Reaction Pathways in Protein-DNA Complexes by Two-Dimensional Fluorescence Spectroscopy and Single-Molecule Correlation Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Andrew Marcus, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 490,000.00

This award in the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program supports work by
Professor Andrew H. Marcus at the University of Oregon to carry out fundamental
studies to investigate the local base conformations and conformational dynamics
at pre-selected sites within functional DNA-protein replication complexes and to
determine key structural end-states, intermediates, and transition states along
enzymatic reaction pathways of these complexes. These experiments employ DNA
constructs containing two adjacently positioned fluorescent nucleic acid base
analogue probes, which absorb in a spectral region where DNA and proteins are
transparent. Coupling between the electronic states of the dimer probe residues
produces signature spectral features, which are used to infer local nucleic acid
base conformation and time-dependent local motions, which is information central
to understanding the mechanisms by which these complexes carry out their
specialized functions. These studies will be carried out using two-dimensional
fluorescence spectroscopy (2D FS, a fluorescence-detected version of 2D
electronic coherence spectroscopy) to elucidate analogue dinucleotide probe
conformation, and single-molecule Forster resonance energy transfer (smFRET) and
fluorescence-detected linear dichroism (smFLD) to monitor conformational
dynamics on time scales ranging between tens-of-microseconds to tens-of-seconds.

The work supported will add to our basic understanding of the dynamic processes
whereby the macromolecular machines of gene regulation and expression perform
their biological functions. Potential benefits range from an improved
understanding of the molecular level interface between chemical and biological
behavior, to new general insights about the underlying principles of nano-
machines. A significant component of the research and educational activities
also involves mentoring the next generation of scientists, and encouraging the
participation of students from under-represented groups. These activities
include i) the involvement of undergraduate students in research projects, and
providing them with guidance to develop professional careers; ii) the
development of new courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels within the
UO Chemistry Department; and iii) outreach to local high school students through
the creation of advanced placement chemistry courses that are taught on furlough
days. Graduate and postdoctoral students working on these projects will benefit
from cross-disciplinary training in physical chemistry, biological sciences, and
theory, enhancing their future career opportunities.