* 1307237
* A New Robust and Energy-efficient Microactuator Device for Demanding Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Feng Zhao, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 05/31/2017
* USD 240,076.00

The objective of this program is to explore and lay a solid foundation for a new
generation of microactuator devices. The robust microactuator device developed
in the program will satisfy the imperative demands of energy efficiency and
operation in harsh environments, including high temperature and pressure,
radiation, corrosion, chemical and biological domains, etc.

The intellectual merit is to develop a novel microactuator device technology
which combines the advantages of photonic actuation and wide bandgap silicon
carbide material. The all silicon carbide platform truly exploits the superior
material properties of silicon carbide for demanding applications. The photonic
actuation enables intrinsic safety, reliability, and electromagnetic
interference immunity. The key technological challenge currently limiting
silicon carbide microelectromechanical systems fabrication will be solved by an
innovative surface micromachining process. High speed and high energy efficiency
will be accomplished by a series of unique approaches. The proposed work is
expected to achieve a new device technology offering harsh environment
operability and long-term reliability, open a new strategic area of research on
silicon carbide, and advance the state-of-the-art of a wide range of sensing and
actuating systems.

The broader impacts are to expose graduate and undergraduate students involved
in the project to an interdisciplinary approach for problem solving, including
solid state electronics, mechanical engineering, photonic and quantum mechanical
simulations, and device fabrication and characterization. It will broaden
dissemination to enhance scientific and technological understanding through
journal and conference publications, K-12 outreach, and industrial interaction
and partnership.