* 1307372
* Nuclear, Particle, and Weak Interaction Physics of the Big Bang and Stellar Collapse
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* George Fuller, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2017
* USD 559,633.00

This project probes the fundamental physics of neutrinos and nuclei by
exploiting the intersection of exciting new developments in nuclear physics and
neutrino physics on the one hand, and the increasingly sophisticated
astrophysical and astronomical probes of compact objects, nucleosynthesis
histories, and cosmology on the other. A key issue in this enterprise will be
studying how neutrinos interact in dense matter and how these interactions may
cause neutrinos to change their flavors. To these ends, this UCSD effort will
work toward: (1) Formulating and understanding the quantum kinetic equations
which govern neutrino flavor evolution in a general medium; (2) Constructing
large-scale numerical simulations of neutrino flavor evolution in various
supernova, stellar collapse, and compact object merger environments and
assessing the feedback of this neutrino flavor physics on the prospects for the
synthesis of nuclei in these sites; (3) Understanding neutrino-nucleus
interactions, nuclear partition functions, and weak strength distributions in
high temperature environments; and (4) Assessing how uncertainties and new
beyond-standard-model possibilities in the neutrino sector could impact ideas on
nucleosynthesis, dark matter, compact object physics, and cosmology, with an eye
toward finding constraints otherwise unobtainable in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported in this project will
provide insights into how atomic nuclei and radiation behave in extreme
conditions of temperature and density. In turn, these insights could give
important clues about the nature of some elementary particles and the origin of
the elements, for example, in the fiery interiors of supernova explosions, or at
the time when the universe was only seconds old. These are fundamental questions
that will provide unique opportunities for the training of young scientists,
nuclear physicists, at both the graduate and undergraduate levels.