* 1307650
* RUI: Mossbauer Studies of Iron Containing Enzyme Active Sites and Model Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Codrina Popescu, Ursinus College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 11/30/2014
* USD 189,747.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Molecular Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (MCB) support Dr. Codrina V. Popescu at Ursinus College for
research in Mossbauer spectroscopy conducted with undergraduate students.
Research ranges from studies of small-molecule iron (Fe) compounds to the
exploration of novel Fe sites in proteins. The expected scientific outcomes of
this research are: (1) elucidation of electronic structures for new iron-based
hydrogen electrocatalysts and models for the hydrogenase enzymes, including low-
spin Fe(I), for which spectroscopic benchmarks are scarce; (2) correlation of
structural and spectroscopic changes in model complexes for the hydrogenases and
other biomimetic compounds; (3) characterization of the active site of the dual
function hemoglobin-peroxidase enzyme dehaloperoxidase from A. ornata and of
models for catalytic intermediates in ring-cleaving dioxygenases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron is the most abundant transition metal in biological
systems. Iron proteins and enzymes are involved in life processes, such as
oxidation, detoxification, hydrogen and nitrogen metabolism. Mossbauer
spectroscopy can bring insight into the electronic structure of iron compounds,
often allowing us to elucidate the nature of the active sites of enzymes
directly, or by probing small-molecule models, which may be used as catalysts.
Frontier problems in fundamental research have implications for environmental
problems, such as the need for cleaner energy sources and dealing with
pollution. From details of Mossbauer spectra we are attempting to learn how iron
is used to perform vastly different feats of chemistry in environmentally benign
ways. These interdisciplinary projects are of broad current interest for
fundamental science and potential technological applications, from alternative
fuels (hydrogenase model complexes) to catalysis (biomimetics), and
environmental bioremediation (dehaloperoxidase). Through its interdisciplinary
collaborative nature, this research has impact on the projects of collaborators
from four other institutions and allows the undergraduates at Ursinus College to
interact with students and faculty from these other research groups. The
research promotes a close relationship between mentor and students, who are
active in all the steps of scientific discovery, from generating hypotheses to
interpreting the spectroscopic parameters needed to elucidate new electronic
structures. This undergraduate research training and education program fosters
the students' growth and independence through advanced degrees, preparing them
for STEM careers in teaching and research. It also provides interdisciplinary
projects for a diverse pool of students, in which hands-on spectroscopy is
applied to current scientific problems and results in external presentations and
publications.