* 1307150
* RUI: Precision Casimir Force Measurements Using a High-Sensitivity Torsion Balance
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Woo-Joong Kim, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 90,000.00

The research program focuses on precision measurements of quantum-vacuum induced
interactions known as the Casimir force using a high-sensitivity torsion
balance. Significant emphasis will be placed on accurate quantifications of
surface electric effects, thus improving experimental sensitivity to distinguish
a specific model to be employed in theoretical calculation of the Casimir force.
The research will address a key problem in modern precision measurements in
which the presence of surface-induced interactions at metallic interfaces has
become one of the biggest sources of systematic errors, as noticed in the
trapping and manipulation of single-atom for quantum computing, and in precise
gravitational experiments such as the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA)
and Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO). As a
historically important scientific tool that has helped verify two of the
fundamental forces in nature (i.e. gravitational and Coulomb forces), the
torsion balance provides an excellent table-top research platform to investigate
the quantum vacuum induced small forces at a predominantly undergraduate
institution. Intrinsic to the project is the integration of the undergraduate
education with cutting-edge research. The research program will provide on-
campus research opportunities for undergraduate students, enhancing an existing
research program in the area of precision force measurements at Seattle
University. The students will receive training in research methods for defining
and addressing open-ended problems, professional ethics and conduct, and
scientific reporting and communications by engaging in leading-edge research
projects. The research program will expand faculty-led research opportunities
for students of diverse backgrounds and is designed to lay the foundation for a
long-term integrated scientific and education program in the physics department
at Seattle University.