* 1307369
* Exploring the Role of Coarray Fortran for Highly Parallel Structured Adaptive Mesh Refinement Calculations
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Dinshaw Balsara, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2016
* USD 306,776.00

Parallel Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) calculations carried out on structured
meshes play an exceedingly important role in several areas of science and
engineering. Software and hardware infrastructure, and the computational
capabilities they enable, go hand in hand. Innovations in software
infrastructure simplify once-difficult computational problems. The first goal of
this proposal is to capitalize on one such recent innovation (Coarray Fortran,
henceforth CAF) in facilitating seamless implementation of parallel AMR. The
project further wishes to make CAF-based AMR ready for PetaScale computations on
NSF?s high-end supercomputers. Its second goal is to develop a highly parallel
CAF-based AMR framework for solving elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic PDEs. The
result of this exploratory proposal will be a small, capable and light-weight
framework for PetaScale class AMR applications.

The lead PI is writing a textbook on "Numerical PDEs for Scientists and
Engineers" and several of the applications from the text will be made available
in this AMR framework. Along with the text, he has developed a website that
freely disseminates polished lectures on PDEs to anyone over the web --
http://www.nd.edu/~dbalsara/Numerical-PDE-Course . The Co-PI is working with the
original inventor of CAF to write a book on "Parallel Programming in Fortran
with Coarrays". Both the textbook-writing efforts, as well as the associated
website development, will greatly enhance the educational resources available to
advanced undergraduates and graduates in STEM disciplines.