* 1307425
* Investigating N-mustard-based analogs of SAM as probes of biological methylation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Lindsay Comstock, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Lindsay Comstock from Wake Forest University to develop
and investigate a novel set of biochemical tools as universal probes to identify
biological methylation sites. Specifically, cellular methyltransferases
facilitate transfer of synthetic N-mustard-containing analogs of S-adenosyl-L-
methionine bearing azide and alkyne functionalities to their corresponding
biomolecules, such as DNA and protein. Once incorporated, these functionalities
can be modified through chemoselective ligation chemistries with fluorophores
and affinity tags to permit both visualization in, and isolation from, complex
mixtures, yielding products that can be easily characterized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA and protein methyltransferases belong to a unique
class of enzymes which have been well documented to play a role in key cellular
functions, including metabolism and cell growth. While it has been established
that DNA and protein methyltransferase activities direct a wide variety of
cellular processes, the biochemical tools being developed in this project are
designed to identify specific sites of biological methylation, with the ultimate
goal of better understanding of methylation in cellular processes. This research
will allow for undergraduate and graduate students to engage in scholarship at
the interface between chemistry and biology, in collaboration with experts in
biochemistry and cell biology.