* 1307939
* Lab-on-CMOS Electrochemical Microsystem for High Throughput Characterization of Membrane Proteins
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Andrew Mason, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 07/31/2016
* USD 368,000.00

Membrane proteins are the essential components of the cell that connect all
living organisms to the outside world. The mechanisms by which various membrane
proteins impart vital functions to natural bilayer lipid membranes (BLMs) are
poorly understood, particularly at the molecular and atomic scales. Although
there is a critical need to understand the structure and function of novel
membrane proteins, discoveries are limited by the substantial bottleneck of
preparing and executing detailed experimental studies.

Objective: The goal of this interdisciplinary project is to establish new
technologies and methodologies for coupling microelectronics with biological
interfaces that will enable high throughput characterization of membrane
proteins. To achieve this goal, we propose to design a lab-on-CMOS platform that
integrates a 1000-element array of microfluidic planar-BLM chambers with
embedded CMOS electrochemical instrumentation circuits. The proposed approaches
will overcome significant technical barriers and contribute new mechanisms for
silicon-to-protein communication pathways, enabling new directions for future
research activities and commercial products.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed approaches for coupling microelectronics with
biological interfaces would overcome significant technical barriers and
contribute new mechanisms for silicon-to-protein communication pathways,
enabling a new direction for future research activities and commercial products.
These approaches will be incorporated into the proposed model instrument which
will itself provide ground-breaking new capabilities for high throughput
biomembrane characterization enabling significant subsequent advances in many
fields of biology, nanomaterials, and medicine. The research efforts would also
advance scientific and engineering knowledge in two primary areas.

Broader Impact: A model instrument will be developed with new capabilities for
high throughput biomembrane characterization, enabling significant subsequent
advances in many fields that could transform the frontiers of knowledge, advance
our fundamental understanding of basic biological processes, and aid in the
generation of new, engineered membrane proteins for sensor platforms, high
throughput drug screening, and development of new medical diagnostics and
disease treatments, all with wide-reaching benefits to society. Results of the
multidisciplinary research will be integrated into education by direct
involvement of graduate and undergraduate student researchers, development and
delivery of a precollege STEM presentation, and participation in a novel
project-based Multidisciplinary Bioprocessing Laboratory course. In addition,
research experience will be provided for a secondary education science teacher
who will integrate the experience into a teaching module for K-12 programs,
including opportunities that target students from underrepresented groups. The
results of this project will be disseminated through journal publications,
conference presentations, and websites of the investigators and their associated
research centers.