* 1307375
* Linear Zwitterionic Polymers for Protein Conjugation and Preservation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1307375 PI: Jiang, Shaoyi ORG: University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Linear Zwitterionic Polymers for Protein
Conjugation and Preservation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The objectives of
this work are to develop linear zwitterionic polymers and investigate their
stabilizing effects on proteins. The first task is to synthesize and
characterize these zwitterionic polymers. The second task is to study their
effects on protein stability and bioactivity using alpha-chymotrypsin as a model
protein. The third task is to investigate the effects of conjugating these
zwitterionic polymers to interferon-alpha2alpha(INF). Bare INF is rapidly
cleared from the body due to its small hydrodynamic radius. Attachment of poly
(ethylene glycol) (PEG) to INF increases the in vivo circulation time, but
dramatically reduces biological activity. Conjugation with these zwitterions is
expected to achieve the same improved stability as PEG, but without sacrificing
activity. These tasks will highlight the importance of polymer structure and
chemistry on preserving protein stability and
bioactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: Zwitterionic materials have
been shown to stabilize and preserve protein bioactivity while poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG) can stabilize proteins, but compromise their bioactivity. This
work will develop a new class of linear zwitterionic materials for a wide range
of applications. They are expected to outperform PEG and existing zwitterionic
materials. They are particularly suited for conjugation with protein-based
therapeutics such as interferon-alpha2alpha (INF), a well-known protein
therapeutic used in the treatment of hepatitis C because they can improve
protein stability and bioactivity. Graduate, undergraduate, and community
college students will be involved in this project, particularly those from
underrepresented groups. This project will provide research opportunities for
high school students, teachers and visiting scholars. The PI has been actively
involved in and will continue to promote international collaborations at
national and university levels.