* 1307874
* Cold Atom-Ion Charge-Exchange and Internal Molecular-Ion Sympathetic Cooling in an Ion-Neutral Hybrid Trap
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Winthrop Smith, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 197,696.00

This research uses an innovative hybrid ion-neutral atomic particle trap
developed by the PI's group as a tool for observing reactions and collisions of
low energy ions with atoms cooled by lasers to near absolute zero temperature
(~0.001 Kelvin). The cold atoms within a magneto-optic trap (MOT) can be used to
refrigerate a co-trapped sample of atomic or molecular ions to study ion-atom
interactions at temperatures approaching that of space. Cold, trapped Na+ and
Ca+ atomic ion, and Na2+ molecular ion reaction rates with ultracold sodium (Na)
atoms will be measured, as well as the rates of sympathetic collisional cooling,
using the hybrid trap. The research has technical applications to precision
spectroscopy, fundamental constants, astrophysical processes in the solar system
and interstellar medium, atomic ion clocks and quantum computing. The ion-
neutral hybrid trap combines two separate but spatially overlapped and
concentric traps: a MOT and a Paul radiofrequency ion trap. Specifically, the
project will involve direct experimental measurements of the absolute electron-
exchange rate constant between Na and Ca+, investigating its dependence on
collision energy and ionic and/or atomic excited-state populations. The rates
will be compared with simulations. The resonance radiation absorption spectrum
of trapped Ca+ ions will be investigated as a temperature probe of the trap as
will the possibility of forming small lattices of confined, ionic Coulomb
"crystals" inside the trap by using sympathetic cooling collisions, rather than
traditional laser cooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student completed his
Ph.D. in experimental atomic physics under the previous NSF grant and two
additional Ph.D. level students expect to complete their ongoing dissertation
research under the new grant. An undergraduate physics-mathematics student
worked on simulations during the previous grant, as well as two M.S.-level
exchange students from the University of Heidelberg, who did experimental work.
Both undergraduate and graduate physics students participate in independent
study work on this project. Students receive a broad education in basic
experimental techniques of atomic and molecular physics: laser and collisional
cooling and trapping at high vacuum (conditions resembling those of space), as
well as cold ion manipulation, trapping, detection and laser spectroscopy. The
PI gave an invited talk on this hybrid trap research in 2013 at a symposium on
the Sao Carlos campus of the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil, attended by 5
physics Nobel Laureates. Research results are frequently presented in
publications and at local, national and international meetings.