* 1307089
* Biomass to Fuels: Multi-Scale Process Engineering Using a Language Workbench
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Eric Van Wyk, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 499,880.00

CBET 1307089&lt;br/&gt;PI: Daoutidis, Prodromos (U.
Minnesota)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biorefineries are envisaged to
upgrade raw biomass feedstock into valuable products such as transportation
fuels and chemicals. Designing and optimizing biorefinery processes requires
developing and integrating mathematical models across multiple length and time
scales - from the molecular to the process level. A unified computational
framework for accomplishing this task is currently lacking. In this research,
investigators comprising of chemical engineers and computer scientists, will
develop a new computational framework, a workbench, to address process systems
engineering tasks involved in the design and operation of catalytic processes
for biorefineries. This framework will enable: (i) elucidating the plausible
reaction mechanisms for converting biomass into gasoline and other valuable
products, (ii) calculating kinetic and thermodynamic parameters of reactions so
that a detailed mathematical model (or, kinetic/reactor model) of the reactor
can be formulated and solved, (iii) developing optimal designs and control
strategies for the reactor to minimize byproducts and improve the overall energy
efficiency, and (iv) making high-level decisions on the optimal product
portfolio to be targeted. The developed computational framework will build upon
a general purpose computer language. A test bed for its development and
application will be a catalytic process in which hydrogen-deficient biomass can
be co-processed with cheap hydrogen-rich natural gas in a multistage catalytic
reactor to produce gasoline. Feedback from experiments will include experimental
data for kinetics and parameter estimation, mechanism hypothesis, and reactor
design. The project will develop: (a) a detailed design and operation and
control strategy for the proposed multi-catalytic process for biomass conversion
to gasoline and chemicals, and (b) a generic computational tool "the language
workbench" that will be made available as open source and could be used in the
rational design of other biorefinery processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Process
systems engineering has been a mainstay in the development of petrochemical
processes. This research aims to develop a parallel computational infrastructure
for biorefining processes. Scientists and engineers will be able to freely use
this workbench to model their chemical processes, develop new designs, and
compare and contrast different biomass conversion technologies. This
infrastructure will further allow problems and solutions in process engineering
to be expressed in natural, domain-specific notations, while also being
applicable in other scientific areas that require integration of multiple
methods and tools.