* 1307337
* Experiments Sensitive to the Electron's Electric Dipole Moment in PbF
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* John Furneaux, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

In 1950, six years before Lee and Yang's famous assertion of a fundamental
difference between a left- and right- handed world, Purcell and Ramsey first
suggested that discrete symmetries may not be sacred. Specifically Purcell and
Ramsey proposed that neutrons and electrons may possess an electric dipole
moment (EDM) proportional to spin that violates time-reversal symmetry. Whereas
Madam Wu's observation of parity violation in the Beta decay of Cobalt-60 almost
immediately verified Lee and Yang?s assertion, Purcell and Ramsey's suggestion
of an electric dipole moment launched an experimental hunt that is still ongoing
today. This project seeks to continue our progress toward a significant
measurement of the e-EDM using PbF. A non-zero e-EDM would break the normal
degeneracy between paramagnetic states of molecules that differ only by the
direction of rotation with respect to an applied electric field. The strong
internal electric field of these molecules causes even a small e-EDM to break
this degeneracy by a relatively large amount. Our experimental concept is guided
by 6 years of intensive spectroscopy which has led to a detailed understanding
of the electronic, vibrational, rotational, hyperfine, Zeeman, and Stark
structures of the PbF molecule, with the ground state energy level structure of
the X1 state now understood to an accuracy of 200 Hz and the energy level
structure of the long-lived A state understood to an accuracy of 10 MHz. The
large body of data we have collected on this molecule has led us to an optical
double resonance experiment that searches for an e-EDM in the even parity ground
state. This molecular state is unique in that it is sensitive to an e-EDM, it
has a small magnetic g factor at the electric fields of the experiment, and has
a spectroscopy that demonstrates focused (hyperfine resolved) spectra at high
electric fields. We will concentrate on necessary details in PbF spectroscopy
and the geometric phase effect using a slightly modified molecular beam
apparatus with the full optical double resonance technique. This measurement
will test models of the geometric phase, which is an important source of
systematic error, and our entire data collection system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The e-EDM search has a history of making dramatic broader
impacts. E.g. Ramsey developed the separated oscillator atomic clock that allows
timing so accurate that a satellite-based global positioning system is feasible;
Eric Cornell has developed a frequency-locked comb-based measurement system with
both extremely high resolution and high scan range that may lead to a new era of
molecular fingerprinting. Finally, we have developed a high-precision (&lt; 5
MHz) resonant ionization scheme that has an unprecedented combination of
resolution and sensitivity. This new technique, pc-REMPI, will be of general
spectroscopic use: e.g. trace detection including remote detection of
explosives, molecular fingerprinting, chemical reaction dynamics. This grant
provides training for graduate students to acquire critical skills that are
important for the future scientific work force.