* 1307671
* Two Dimensional Performance with Three Dimensional Capacity: Engineering the Thermal Properties of Graphene
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Ashok Mulchandani, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 07/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this program is to investigate the effect of rotation angle on
the thermal conductivity of twisted bilayer graphene. The experimental and
theoretical evidence is clear that the electronic states of the individual
layers in twisted bilayer graphene are decoupled. The effect of the twist angle
on the phonon dispersion is still an open question, and the effect of twist
angle on the in-plane thermal transport has yet to be studied. These questions
are intimately related since the heat is carried by the phonons. If the phonon
coupling in twisted graphene layers were suppressed, then the multi-layer
twisted graphene films would have enhanced thermal conductivity of single 2D
layers acting in parallel, thus allowing for transfer of extraordinary large
heat fluxes. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this program is in creating
fundamental knowledge determining the relation of twist angle to the thermal
conductivity of bilayer graphene. The possibility of maintaining 2D properties
of graphene in bulk materials through the use of misoriented stacking is a
transformational concept giving us the best of both worlds ? the enhanced
performance of 2D combined with the capacity of 3D.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
the project includes new applications of graphene for thermal management. It has
the potential to increase the US technological competitiveness. It will increase
the participation of women and underrepresented minorities and contribute to
undergraduate and graduate STEM education at UC Riverside, which is the minority
serving institution with the largest Hispanic student population among all UC
campuses. &lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) and by the Electronic and Photonic
Materials Program (EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR).