* 1307171
* Particle Astrophysics with VERITAS and Defining Scientific Horizons for CTA
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Rene Ong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,444,782.00

The field of high-energy particle astrophysics has advanced significantly during
the last decade as a result of discoveries made by ground-based gamma-ray
telescopes. These instruments have now detected very high-energy gamma-radiation
(energies above 100 gigaelectronvolt (GeV)) from classes of objecting ranging
from pulsars to blazars and starburst galaxies. Detailed measurements of these
sources probe the most energetic phenomena in the Universe. The ground-based
observatory VERITAS is an array of four 12-meter imaging atmospheric Cherenkov
telescopes located in Arizona. VERITAS has now reached a sensitivity level more
than an order of magnitude better than the previous generation of instruments
and, as a result of its recently completed upgrade, has now extended its
sensitivity range to energies below 100 GeV. VERITAS is producing a wealth of
scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support scientists at
the University of California, Los Angeles working on VERITAS science and on the
scientific projections for the next generation international ground-based gamma-
ray observatory, the Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA.) UCLA has played a major
role in the VERITAS construction, in the development of analysis and simulation
software for the experiment, and in the production of the scientific results
reported to date. With this award the UCLA group will focus on maintaining
VERITAS, analyzing data, producing scientific results, and defining science
goals for CTA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The UCLA group supports
the VERITAS Education and Public Outreach program, which it helped to develop.
The program reaches local audiences at the Whipple Observatory Visitor's Center,
museum audiences at the Adler Planetarium, and the general public through the
VERITAS education web site. UCLA scientists conduct tours at the VERITAS site
and help to provide materials for the public. VERITAS and CTA materials will be
used for local activities at UCLA involving schools in the Los Angeles area. In
addition, researchers at UCLA are involved in education and outreach efforts
through public speaking, planetarium shows, and individual student mentorship.