* 1307794
* Collaborative Research: A Unified Approach to Quantifying Market Power in the Future Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Adam Wierman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2017
* USD 199,564.00

The objective of this research is to develop a unified approach to measuring
market power that connects short-term and long-term analysis, while maintaining
strong economic foundations and incorporating the transmission system. The
approach is to focus first on long-term analysis to develop a rigorous framework
on which to build tools for short-term analysis. This combined approach will
allow quantification of both the potential for and the exploitation of market
power in deregulated electricity markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: This project explores a unique mixture of economics and power systems by
building a unifying and comprehensive foundation for measuring market power. It
will close the gap in the existing fractured literature on long-term and short-
term market power analysis and has the added benefit of providing an important
tool for studying the impact on market power of future grid phenomena such as
demand response, renewable and distributed generation, and electricity
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Market monitoring is essential for
maintaining efficient electricity markets: not only is market power a major
challenge to the efficiency of today's electricity markets, e.g., the California
energy crisis of 2000; the importance of monitoring market power will only grow
as we move toward a smarter grid. Thus, an improved understanding of how to
identify and quantify market power is of crucial societal importance.
Additionally, the proposed research will improve dialogue between the power
systems and economics communities. Finally, the proposed research program has a
strong potential to successfully make the leap from academia to practice.