* 1307138
* Coupled simulations of low temperature microstructural evolution in nanocrystalline metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Elizabeth Holm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the earliest days of
metalworking, it has been understood that quenching freezes in the desirable
attributes of the finished object. However, the advent of nanocrystalline metals
has offered significant counterexamples to this generalization, with substantial
grain growth occurring in days, hours, even minutes at temperatures as low as
77K. The common denominator in these instances of low temperature evolution is
abnormal grain growth (AGG), where a few grains grow very large at the expense
of the more slowly evolving matrix grains.&lt;br/&gt;As yet, low temperature
microstructural evolution has not been satisfactorily explained. Grain boundary
motion is widely accepted to occur by thermally activated atomic processes, so
that the rate of boundary motion should decrease exponentially as temperature
decreases. However, a recent computational survey of grain boundary mobilities
identified three new mobility categories that permit fast motion at low
temperatures. In this project, a synthetic driving force molecular dynamics
method will be applied to explore and characterize these fast, cold grain
boundaries to confirm whether high mobility persists to low temperature; to
discover the atomic mechanisms of low temperature boundary motion; and to
determine the occurrence of these boundaries in real microstructures. This
atomistic study will provide the first fundamental understanding of this newly
revealed grain boundary motion regime. &lt;br/&gt;High mobility boundaries alone
are not sufficient to cause the abnormal grain growth observed in
nanocrystalline metals. AGG requires the concerted motion of most or all of the
boundaries surrounding the abnormal grain, and as such is fundamentally a
collective process within the grain boundary network. In this project, a
mesoscale model of microstructural evolution, incorporating full grain and grain
boundary structure and crystallography, will be coupled with the results of
atomistic simulations of grain boundary motion to explore and characterize AGG
in systems containing fast, cold boundaries. Initial simulations will address
which microstructural features are required for AGG. Subsequent simulations will
incorporate additional factors that enhance the frequency and rate of AGG.
Finally the results will be used to develop analytical models for low
temperature AGG.&lt;br/&gt;Low temperature grain growth in nanocrystalline
metals is not just an academic problem. Implementation of nanocrystalline
materials requires that the microstructure remains stable during service;
microstructural evolution changes, and usually degrades, the desirable
properties of these materials. Understanding low temperature evolution is the
key to controlling it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have all seen an image of a sword maker plunging a red-
hot blade into cold water to freeze in its final structure. The same principle
applies to many materials that we use in our everyday lives. Metal objects from
a soup spoon to a car axle are manufactured using a series of heating and
cooling operations, with the final structure frozen in by cooling to room
temperature. Once the material has been quenched, we expect it not to change
anymore, so it is an important scientific and technological issue when it
does.&lt;br/&gt;Nanocrystalline metals are made from familiar ingredients - such
as copper, nickel, or iron - processed into tiny crystallites one-millionth the
size of a grain of sand that are packed closely together to form a solid
substance. Because these new materials are harder and stronger than conventional
metals, they may enable lighter airplanes and more reliable cars. But there is
one major problem: scientists have observed that the structure of
nanocrystalline metals changes over hours, days, or years at room temperature.
&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we investigate how the structure of nanocrystalline
metals evolves at low temperatures. We first use computer simulations of atomic
motion to understand how individual interfaces between certain crystallites can
move even at low temperatures. We then simulate the motion of large groups of
interconnected interfaces to reveal how fast-moving interfaces can change the
overall structure of the material.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding low temperature
structural evolution is the key to controlling it. The goal of this project is
to use computer simulations to develop that understanding.