* 1307800
* Understanding A Few Nanoscale Light-Matter-Spin Interactions by Combining Ultrafast Optical Spectroscopy and Colloidal Quantum Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Min Ouyang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 05/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an experimental
research program to understand emerging light-matter-spin involving processes
within pre-designed zero-dimensional colloidal quantum structures by ultrafast
optical spectroscopy. This research plan will directly involve graduate students
training in tools and techniques needed to address a few fundamental issues:
control of resonant plasmon-exciton interactions; realization of ultrafast spin
control and echo in colloidal quantum structures by spin-plasmon and spin-phonon
interactions; and development of new class of colloidal quantum magneto-
semiconductor devices. Accomplishment of this project should advance our
fundamental understanding and materials engineering of light assisted spin-
dependent phenomena at the nanoscale. This work is additionally important
because zero-dimensional quantum structures represent the smallest dimensional
units that can be used for quantum information processing based on the spin
degree of freedom. In addition to student training, this award will also allow
to integrate cutting-edge research activities with undergraduate education
program, K-12 outreach, classroom demonstration and teacher
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports experimental research to understand and control various
fundamental interactions that are of relevance to the spin of electron at the
nanometer scale. Spin is an intrinsic quantum mechanical property of electron
that can potentially lead to new technology and device development. Time-
resolved spectroscopy that can provide extremely high temporal resolution with
ultrashort light pulses will be applied to launch, probe and manipulate
nanoscale spin-dependent processes. This will include application of ultrashort
light pulse to create coupling of spin in semiconductor with plasmon (that is a
collective motion of electrons in metal nanostructures) and phonon (that is
atomic lattice collective motion in a solid), to manipulate spin of
semiconductor quantum structures in a very fast time scale, and to discover
novel interactions between spins of nanoscale magnets and semiconductors. This
project will be accomplished by employing multidisciplinary experimental tools,
including chemical synthesis of quantum structures, ultrafast optical
spectroscopy and nano-device engineering, and thus provide a fertile ground for
students' training, K-12 outreach and curriculum development.