* 1307340
* Probing the Weak and Strong Nature of the Nucleon
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Mahbub Khandaker, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2017
* USD 900,000.00

The Idaho State University (ISU) medium-energy nuclear-energy group (PI: Philip
Cole and CoPIs: Tony Forest, Mahbub Khandaker, and Dustin McNulty) will perform
measurements using electromagnetic and electroweak probes at Jefferson Lab that
will enhance our understanding of the fundamental properties and symmetries in
nucleons and nuclei. Through their several approved and conditionally-approved
experiments, they propose to study the quark/gluon constituents of nucleons at
various distance scales, measure the size of the proton, and ascertain the
structure of neutron-rich nuclei. This award is a continuation of their work on
using both electromagnetic and electroweak probes for exploring the nature of
the strong force and the weak force expressed in nucleons and nuclei. The strong
force, for example, is responsible for how quarks and gluons arrange themselves
into nucleons and how these protons or neutrons subsequently bind into nuclei.
This research program broadly addresses the many facets of both the strong and
the weak force, namely: how valence quarks self assemble when sea quark and
gluon contributions are minimal, the nature of how gluons attach to quarks
serving to increase the mass of current quarks to that of constituent quarks,
how quarks resonate inside the nucleon to form excited assemblies of quarks, how
the weak force is coupled in electron scattering from quarks as well as
garnering precise data on the neutron radius as evidenced through parity
violation. All these dedicated efforts require a group, who overlap in their
work, coordinate local resources and skills, and maintain a solid sense of
teamwork. Further, the ISU group is providing a great service to the JLab
research community in building, stringing, and instrumenting the CLAS12 Region 1
drift chambers for the 12 GeV upgrade to Jefferson Lab. We are the largest JLab
group west of the Mississippi.