* 1307204
* Participation in the Construction and Operation of the CUORE and Majorana Neutrinoless Double-Beta Decay Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Frank Avignone, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 997,500.00

This award will enable the group to continue a comprehensive program in
neutrino-less double-beta decay (NDBD). The intellectual merit of this activity
is based on the fact that NDBD is the only practical way to determine if
neutrinos are Majorana particles (their own antiparticles). This exotic decay is
the most sensitive test of lepton number conservation, an important symmetry in
elementary-particle physics. If indeed neutrinos are Majorana particles, a
measurement of the NDBD half-life would yield the effective Majorana mass of the
electron neutrino. Combined with neutrino oscillation data, it would determine
all three neutrino mass eigenvalues. Leptogenesis in the early universe is only
possible if there are Majorana neutrinos. The laboratory observation and
measurement of NDBD would be transformative of elementary particle physics,
astrophysics and cosmology.

The group is working on two NDBD experiments: CUORE and MAJORANA. USC has the
major tasks of the procurement, production, installation, and maintenance of the
front-end CUORE electronic system from the detector to the data acquisition
system, and is involved in the construction and operation of CUORE-0, the first
tower of CUORE. USC leads a major Task in the MAJORANA DEMONSTRATOR R&D which
has the responsibility for the procurement of enriched germanium oxide, its
reduction to metal, zone refinement to detector quality metal, and reprocessing
of scrap material. USC led the construction and operation of the facility for
the germanium (Ge) processing.

Broader Impacts: Discovery would make important contributions to astrophysics
and cosmology. New Ge-detector technology developed in this program is now used
in National and Homeland security. Students are being trained in cryogenic
technology for other basic and applied sciences and in advanced computational
methods. The USC group has a new program of outreach to high school students and
teachers.