* 1307959
* Student Travel Support for the 2013 North American Power Symposium. Date:, September,22-24,2013, Location: Kansas St. University, Manhattan, Kansas.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Anil Pahwa, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal requests funding to partially support travel of students attending
the 45th North American Power Symposium (NAPS), which will be held on the campus
of Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas in September 2013. The North
American Power Symposium (NAPS) is a non-profit event that is aimed primarily at
student participation. Traditionally, the overwhelming majority of the papers
are presented by students. The symposium is technically co-sponsored by the
IEEE-PES and it is expected that about 140 conference papers will be presented
and become available on IEEE-Explore. NSF?s support will positively impact
student participation at the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: NAPS is unique in its focus on students preparing and presenting
technical papers. This conference provides a unique opportunity for NSF to
interact with and promote interaction among students, academia and power
industry to promote and discuss NSF?s vision of technical challenges in power
and energy systems, including technical, societal and economic aspects; and more
broadly in cyber-physical (CPS) systems. NAPS is also a venue to an exciting
student paper competition for identifying and fostering high quality research
performed by students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: NAPS conferences
have a history of giving students their first opportunity of research
presentations. Further, NAPS encourages discussion of systematic integration of
research and teaching. Based on recent history of NAPS conferences the student
program has been able to attract 20% minorities and women.