* 1307529
* Discovery and Development of Novel Nanochemical Processes to Enhance the Effect of X-rays
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Ting Guo, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2017
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Ting Guo of the University of California at Davis is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the Division
of Chemistry to study X-ray Nanochemistry, which is defined as creating and
discovering nanochemical processes to enhance the effects of X-rays. In this
proposed work, chemically, lithographically, and microfluidically prepared
nanoassemblies are synthesized and created to isolate, optimize and recombine
individual enhancement mechanisms. Specifically, physical enhancement of
localized energy deposition resulting from X-ray absorption by nanomaterials,
chemical enhancement enabled by catalytic properties of nanomaterials, and the
effective combination of the two are investigated in this work. The enhancement
to the X-ray effects results in increase in the yield of many processes
including X-ray triggered precision energy deposition in water, generation of a
specific reactive oxygen species in water, bond formation reactions such as
hydroxylation and polymerization, and bond cleavage reactions, e.g.,oxidation of
nucleoabses leading to DNA strand breaks. Many of these processes can be used to
probe the magnitude of enhancement. Three exemplary nanosystems are created to
study (1) how to control charge transfer processes between reactive oxygen
species and the nanostructures under X-ray irradiation, which is critical to the
maximization of chemical enhancement, (2) how to measure and maximize physical
enhancement through controlling the shape of nanostructures, and (3) how to
combine the chemical and physical enhancement mechanisms without causing
destructive interference between them, the latter sometimes occuring naturally.
In ideal circumstances, up to 1,000 times combined enhancement to the yield of
properly-designed hydroxylation and polymerization reactions is envisioned.
Optical spectroscopy and electron spin resonance spectroscopy are being used to
assist this exploration.

X-ray nanochemistry is a new research topic in which X-ray-induced effects are
magnified by introducing customized nanomaterials. Like any new field, many
stiff challenges remain before the true potential of the field is known. The
work supported by this MSN grant scrutinizes newly defined concepts such as
different types of enhancement and explores new mechanisms to combine these to
achieve unprecedented enhancements. The proposed research endeavors attempt to
solidify and expand the knowledge basis of this new field. The outcomes of these
fundamental investigations may have transformative impacts on several categories
of technology, for example, cancer diagnosis and treatment, energy conversion
from nuclear wastes to liquid fuels, radiation sensing and detection, and
remediation of potential ecological effects of nanomaterials under constant
irradiation of background ionizing radiation. Education of the first generation
scientists including women and underrepresented minority graduate and
undergraduate students working on the forefront of this new field is directed at
creating a workforce that helps define the future of X-ray nanochemistry. The
instrumentation and research platform developed and employed in this work are
new and inexpensive, and can be adopted by the majority of research laboratories
in the country.