* 1307108
* IceCube Tau and Cascade Data Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Dawn Williams, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2017
* USD 524,400.00

The IceCube Neutrino Observatory is the largest neutrino detector in the world,
instrumenting one cubic kilometer of ice near the geographic South Pole. IceCube
completed construction in 2011 and includes a densely instrumented 'DeepCore'
component in the center of the detector. The goal of IceCube is to detect
neutrinos at Teraelectronvolt (TeV) - Petaelectronvolt (PeV) energies from
astrophysical accelerators which are thought to be the sources of the highest
energy cosmic rays. DeepCore extends IceCube's energy reach down to 10 GeV in
order to study phenomena such as atmospheric neutrino oscillations and neutrinos
from the annihilation of dark matter in the Galactic Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the University of Alabama (UA) group
that has developed algorithms for detecting tau neutrinos in the waveforms of
individual IceCube sensors, lowering the energy threshold for tau detection in
order to increase sensitivity to astrophysical taus. Initial analysis of the
first year of full detector data has already revealed hints of diffuse neutrino
flux in excess of the expected atmospheric background in the 100 TeV - 1 PeV
energy range, and the algorithms developed at UA for tau neutrino detection are
especially well suited to this energy range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: UA has a strong commitment to secondary and undergraduate education.
The PI has worked with undergraduates from various departments both in research
and in developing outreach activities for local high schools. She also co-hosts
a monthly gathering of female physics and engineering undergraduates and
participates in public outreach activities that highlight IceCube's unique
location and science goals.