* 1307831
* Second Skin: Bio-Inspired Tactile Sensing Enabled by Droplet-Based Interfacial Iontronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Tingrui Pan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Objective: Human tactioception provides extensive information about the
environment upon contact or through interactions. Inspired by the physiological
tactile functions, this proposal aims to develop a highly sensitive tactile
array on flexible and transparent substrates, utilizing a novel capacitive
sensing principle at a droplet electrolyte-electrode interface. Several
unconventional microfabrication techniques will be established to devise this
unique tactile sensors with all flexible components, including microfluidic
matrix printing, wettability micropatterning, and interfacial nano-adhesion.
Upon development, such an array of the microdroplet sensors would enable a
highly transformative platform of artificial tactile sensing for a range of
medical and robotic applications with high device sensitivity, high spatial
resolution and high adaptability. Intellectual Merit: The novel bio-inspired
tactile sensing matrix offers several advantages over existing sensing designs,
including ultrahigh device sensitivity (the highest sensitivity of 0.12nF/kPa at
its dimension), ultrafine spatial resolution (down to 0.5mm), dual pressure-
temperature mapping capacity, fast response time (as quick as 1 milliseconds),
ultralow profile with packaging (as thin as 100Ã¬m), in addition to its skin-like
construct made from all soft materials, e.g., polymers and liquids. Importantly,
the interfacial capacitive sensor is highly immune to parasitic capacitance, in
which the base capacitance is more than 100 times greater than that of the
conventional counterpart. Moreover, the simple device architecture permits mass-
production at low cost yet high reliability. Overall, the proposed bio-inspired
iontronic sensors, once established, could offer a highly transformative
solution to various fundamental and translational fields of neural processing,
robotics, medical prosthetics, computer/video gaming, and surgical instruments,
where both high flexibility and sensitive responses are demanded. Broader
Impacts: Exciting discoveries from the proposed research will be fully
integrated with the educational efforts. The PI has been actively promoting
education of cutting-edge micro-nanotechnology at all levels. He is actively
engaged in disseminating the out-of-cleanroom microfabrication concept by
converting consumer electronics into desktop microfabrication tools to the
general public through online open-access channels. Through the K-12 educational
outreach, the PI will lead an outreach initiative of Introducing Tactile Sensing
into K-12 Classroom by turning the research discoveries on the artificial
tactile sensing to a plug-and-play demonstration kit for local high-school
students. Moreover, education opportunities will be directly provided to
underrepresented undergraduate and high-school students on bio-inspired sensing
concepts through a NSF-sponsored summer internship program.