* 1307566
* New Directions in Quantile-based Modeling and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Xuming He, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2017
* USD 210,000.00

Quantile as a data descriptive and analytic tool has earned its place in
statistics for over a hundred years. In recent years, research on quantile
modeling to incorporate the effect of covariates and to handle multivariate data
has accelerated in response to the needs arising from a broad area of
applications. The investigator addresses an important but often neglected
question on the validity of posterior inference on quantile regression for the
pseudo-Bayesian methods that have become popular in the literature. The
investigator conducts a careful investigation into how the choice of a working
likelihood and the choice of a prior play their respective roles, both in
finite-sample problems, and in the asymptotic theory. The investigator studies a
new class of shrinking priors as an asymptotic framework to understand the
efficiency gains of the Bayesian methods for estimation and prediction of
quantiles in data sparse areas and in problems involving high dimensional
covariates. The proposed research will deepen our understanding of the validity
of pseudo-posterior inference and suggest asymptotically valid and efficient
inferential methods for quantile regression at single or multiple quantile
levels. The research will also facilitate a new pseudo-Bayesian framework for
model selection beyond quantile regression. Furthermore, the investigator
studies a new notion of quantile for multivariate data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed activities will stimulate novel ideas and critical thinking in the
areas of quantile modeling and Bayesian inference. The new insights and the new
tools to be developed will be useful for estimation, prediction, and hypothesis
testing regarding rare events in climate research, public health, and other
scientific endeavors. The notion of multivariate quantiles will lead to an
efficient statistical downscaling method for better climate projections at
localized scales. The proposed activities will engage graduate students directly
as part of their academic training. The investigator will work with other
researchers and scientists to ensure that the research results are disseminated
appropriately to the broad scientific community.