* 1307712
* Stimuli-responsive nano-materials from designed proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Lynne Regan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1307712 PI: Regan, Lynne ORG: Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Stimuli-responsive nano-materials from
designed proteins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This award will support
research into the design of novel materials with tunable properties and stimuli-
responsiveness. Inspired by the fact that in nature many proteins self-assemble
into complex supramolecular and nanoscale structures, which are exquisitely
tuned to respond to various chemical and mechanical stimuli, Regan and
colleagues take up the challenge to harness and adapt the chemical properties of
proteins to assemble novel designer smart gels. Arrays of tetratricopeptide
repeat (TPR) modules will form the basis for the initial designs. The TPR is a
protein structural motif consisting of a degenerate 34 amino acid sequence found
in many proteins. It mediates protein - protein interactions and the assembly of
multiprotein complexes. Such arrays adopt a defined super-helical structure, and
their stability can be predicted from the behavior of the modules from which
they are composed. The funding will allow them to create novel materials in
which the mechanical and chemical properties are tuned through appropriate
design and selection of their constituent protein molecules. They will
synthesize a novel suite of designer materials by exploiting the intrinsic
properties of the constituent proteins and establish general design principles
for creating such materials. A unique feature of the approach that they will
pursue is the ability to incorporate specific stimuli-responsiveness into the
materials by appropriately tailoring their molecular components. There are many
potential applications for such novel materials, including tissue engineering,
targeted drug delivery, and artificial light harvesting arrays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: The PI proposes to harness and adapt the
chemical properties of proteins to assemble novel designer smart gels. She will
tune the mechanical and chemical properties of such materials through
appropriate design and selection of their constituent protein molecules. The
materials created will find applications in tissue engineering, targeted drug
delivery, and artificial light harvesting arrays. Students supported by this
grant will enter through the Yale Integrated Graduate Program in Physical and
Engineering Biology (IGPPEB). The PI is Director of this program, whose goal is
to educate a new generation of students who combine excellence in quantitative
approaches with a biological sophistication that allows them to identify and
apply their skills to cutting-edge problems. Regan is also a co-director of an
REU program at Yale, which will bring students from under-represented groups and
undergraduate-only institutions to participate in this research. To instill an
interest in science in the next generation, Regan will work with Breakthrough
New Haven - a high school preparation program for socio-economically
disadvantaged students in Grades 7 and 8. Breakthrough seeks to promote science
as a vehicle to foster academic achievement at the middle school level. The PIs
will work with teachers to implement new age-appropriate modern laboratory
science modules for Breakthrough's summer school program. Regan is Director of
the Raymond and Beverly Sackler Institute for Biological, Physical and
Engineering Sciences at Yale. In this role she supports and expands the
activities of the IGPPEB and develops relationships with other universities,
both nationally and internationally, to promote interactions between students
and faculty who are engaged in interdisciplinary research.