* 1307863
* Collaborative Research: Electromagnetic Field Profile Design for Next-Generation Travelling-Wave MRI
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Branislav Notaros, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 06/30/2019
* USD 248,000.00

This collaborative proposal develops a new method of integrated design of
exposure and excitation of electromagnetic (EM) fields in the UHF and low
microwave frequency range for next-generation magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
at high magnetic fields (B>3T). High magnetic fields improve the signal-to-noise
ratio in MRI, and are accompanied by increased RF frequencies, which can lead to
propagating modes inside the bore with a patient. For example, at 7T, the
required RF frequency is in the 300MHz range, while a bore that fits a human is
at least 60cm in diameter, making it above the cutoff frequency for at least one
mode of the bore viewed as a waveguide, when loaded with the body. The
travelling waves can potentially be advantageous in terms of a more comfortable
environment for patients, larger field of view, imaging to-date MRI inaccessible
areas, and enabling new spatial encoding schemes and a variety of mode
sensitivity profiles. It is important, however, to be able to design the modes
in the bore for better excitation field profile uniformity and control of power
exposure to the body. Intellectual Merit: The principal goal of the proposed
research is development of design methodologies for RF field profiles and
associated cavity wall surface impedances and excitation probes, enabled by
extremely fast and accurate full-wave higher order computational EM simulations
of large body-loaded cavities. Several of the designs will be fabricated,
characterized, and transitioned to clinical and research collaborators at
Harvard University for imaging research. The specific issues to be addressed
are: (a) Understanding the fundamental principles and limitations of radio-
frequency electromagnetic field profile design for next-generation travelling-
wave, high-field MRI; (b) Developing an engineering approach for modification of
surface impedances in body-loaded bore cavities, enabled by extremely fast and
reliable simulation techniques; (c) Solving the problem of proper field profile
excitation (probe) design integrated with loaded cavity; (d) Evaluation and
control of specific absorption rates inside the phantom, animal, or human; and
(e) Implementing the designs for several clinical and research MRI machines
operated by collaborators at Harvard University (these implementations are not
supported by the proposed grant). The project will investigate periodic or
quasi-periodic surface impedance structures in the form of printed resonant
structures or three-dimensional dielectric-metal artificial surface impedances,
and different types of excitations combining wire dipoles and loops, patch-
antenna probes with coaxial feeds, and cavity backed slot exciters (multiple
probes for different modes will be incorporated with switching circuits). Other
(non-MRI) applications of the resulting research in loaded multi-mode cavities
include areas from low-power wireless power delivery in closed spaces to high-
power advanced smart microwave ovens. Broader impacts of the proposed work on
basic science and engineering support the nation's science and technology
advantage. The anticipated results will provide a new method of medical imaging
with more comfort for patients, and an increased field of view, sensitivity, and
functionality. Broader impacts on society are especially warranted by growing
needs for such improved medical diagnostic tool. Because of the potential to
change the way medical diagnostics using MRI is done in the longer term, the
proposal may be considered transformative in its nature. Multi-disciplinary
education at the undergraduate and graduate levels, spanning areas of high-
frequency analog circuit design, EM simulations, bio-EM, and metrology, will
make an impact on two top institutions in the state of Colorado, strengthening
the existing core competency. The PIs at both institutions have been active in
outreach, and related to this proposed work plan to add several new modules to
the existing K-12 outreach, with hundreds of middle-school children on Electric
Field Trip visits. A recruiting effort at all levels focusing on
underrepresented groups will continue to enrich the educational environments.
Collaborations related to medical applications with Harvard and Intermountain
Neuroimaging Consortium, international collaboration with XLIM, University of
Limoges, in France, and industry partnership (NXP) are evidenced by no-cost
technical participation and insertion into clinical studies, student exchanges,
and hardware donations.