* 1307199
* 13th National Conference on Disasters and Environment:   Science, Preparedness, and Resilience; Washington, DC
* GEO,ICER
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Peter Saundry, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

This award to The National Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE) will
support the 13th National Conference on Science, Policy and the Environment. The
2013 theme is Disasters and Environment: Science, Preparedness, and Resilience.
The conference will be held January 15-27, 2013 at the Ronald Reagan Building
and International Trade Center in Washington, DC. Over 1,100 participants from
higher education institutions, government, civil society organizations, research
and policy organizations, business, international organizations and governments
are expected to attend.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported that in 2011 14
disasters caused greater than one billion dollars of damage in the United
States. This figure exceeds the damage incurred during the entire decade of the
1980s.

This conference will consider the range of environmental disasters including but
not limited to hurricanes, floods, tornadoes, heat waves and droughts,
earthquakes, winter storms, wildfires, oil and chemical spills. The conference
will share research questions and findings on many physical, biological, social
and engineering topics related to the causes and impacts of disasters. The
conference will emphasize how to achieve more resilient communities, saving
lives and livelihoods. The Disasters and Environment conference will connect
science and decision-making on range of levels with a focus on six
interconnected themes: cascading disasters; the intersection of the built and
natural environments; disasters as mechanisms of ecosystem change; rethinking
recovery and expanding the vision of mitigation; human behavior and its
consequences; and, "no regrets" resilience case studies.

The conference will feature eight keynote presentations, eight plenary
roundtables, 24 symposia and 23 interactive breakout workshops. The individual
workshops will engage conference participants with experts in generating
science-based recommendations on theme areas. Over 200 distinguished thought
leaders, scientists, federal agency officials, policy experts and international
authorities will speak over the course of the 2.5 day event. NCSE is requesting
funding to support travel and related expenses for approximately 33 conference
speakers.

The Disasters and Environment conference will have five main impacts: 1. sharing
the current state of knowledge; 2. establishing new and stronger relationships
between scientists and decision-makers in the public and private domain; 3.
developing targeting and actionable science-based recommendations on each of the
23 workshops; 4. catalyzing partnerships among institutions and organizations to
advance research and policy related to environment and disaster issues; and 5.
publishing a report of conference highlights and recommendations, that will be
disseminated nationally and internationally and available on the conference
website at www.DisastersandEnvironment.org.