* 1307042
* High Energy Recollision And Excitation Processes At Ultrahigh Light Intensities
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Barry Walker, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

This award investigates how very intense lasers excite atoms and molecules,
using laboratory experiments and theoretical modeling. The work supports three
thrust areas that affect intellectual merit and the broader impact: applied
optical technology, fundamental high intensity laser science, and next
generation global competitiveness for individuals in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) in the United States. Applied optical
technology is addressed with the unique, trillion watt peak power lasers in the
research. These lasers generate some of the highest intensities of visible and
ultraviolet light realized in the lab. The contribution to scientific knowledge
comes about by addressing how intense light excites elements (e.g. lithium,
carbon, nitrogen, oxygen) and polymer hydrocarbons (e.g. methane, propane).
Specifically, the research probes high energy electron dynamics and ion
fragmentation in intense laser-matter interactions. Special attention is given
to quantifying how many of the electrons most tightly bound to the nucleus are
excited. The measurements are made possible by the investment in new scientific
laboratory apparatus designed to probe highly accelerated (e.g. million volt)
electrons and record the complex ion fragmentation. The theory effort uses large
scale (supercomputer) trajectory ensembles to model excitation and relativistic
effects in the interaction. The outcomes are relevant to disciplines including
plasma physics, fusion energy, physical chemistry, atomic physics, and optical
science. The research addresses efforts to develop new laser sources and
attosecond science, which directly measure how electrons move in atoms and
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high field research in the award is pursued
by the international community; students involved in this research are exposed
to international efforts in optics and laser science. As part of a broader
impact, the award strives to improve global competitiveness for the next STEM
generation in the United States. The experiments and theory in the award
provides intensive training for graduate and undergraduate students on applied
and fundamental topics including ultrafast optics, laser pulse diagnostics,
computer programming, data acquisition hardware, laser alignment, opto-
mechanical design, collision physics, and electron dynamics in atomic and
molecular systems. The research provides skills helpful across science and
technology disciplines from national defense contracting to medical physics to
the laser material processing industry.