* 1307559
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* William Wan, Wan                     William
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2015
* USD 138,000.00

Using mathematical models to understand how individual contractile cells give
rise to the movement of muscular tissues

The efficiencies and elegance of biological processes are becoming increasingly
appreciated in engineering communities, and engineering brings quantitative
tools to the analysis of complex biological processes. However, at the
intersection of the biological sciences and engineering are conceptual gaps that
prevent efficient integration experimental observations made at a wide range of
length and time scales and across disciplines. This project seeks to use
engineering, molecular biology, and computational approaches to quantitatively
couple intracellular processes such as gene expression to physiological outputs
such as force generation. Cardiac and skeletal muscle tissues will be used as a
model biological system, and training will be completed in the laboratories of a
molecular biologist and chemical engineer. Results from this project may be
broadly applied to analyzing a variety of hierarchical biological systems in a
multiscaled manner.

Training goals include developing expertise in molecular biology approaches as
well as biomaterials synthesis techniques. Broader impacts include simulations
that make complex biological systems more accessible to K-16 audiences. Research
in molecular biology often provides detailed descriptions of what happens inside
of cells; however, these studies are often performed in cell culture without
integrating the larger system such as tissues and organs. For example, "how do
genetic differences between people affect the way they build muscle or how fast
they can run?" This project seeks to answer questions like this by building
simulations that numerically relate what happens inside the nucleus of
individual muscle cells to the contractile function of whole tissues. These
simulations will help students integrate ideas from various life science
disciplines.