* 1307078
* Capillary-Channeled Polymer Fibers: Chemistries and Structures for Protein Separations and Analytics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2017
* R. Kenneth Marcus, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2017
* USD 434,250.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program (Division of
Chemistry), Professor R. Kenneth Marcus, his collaborators and their students at
Clemson University are developing and characterizing capillary-channeled polymer
(C-CP) fibers as stationary phases for rapid processing of biomacromolecules.
C-CP materials are amenable to a wide range of column formats (microbore to
preparative) and offer advantages for macromolecular separations relative to
traditional porous-bead, membrane, and monolithic stationary phases, including
low flow resistance, minimization of size-exclusion effects, much higher mass
transfer rates, and high mobile phase velocities (not necessarily volume flow
rates) and gradient rates without sacrificing chromatographic performance.
Proposed studies are directed at exploiting the basic characteristics of C-CP
fiber columns to affect highly productive and selective separations in the realm
of protein analytics. This work is necessarily interdisciplinary, involving
cooperation between analytical and biochemistries, chemical engineering, and
textile science researchers. A two-pronged approach will be taken. The first
research area will focus on modification of surface chemistries to affect high
levels of selectivity. The modifications will be evaluated not only for their
chemical selectivity, but also the ligand utilization efficiency, susceptibility
to non-specific binding, and robustness in terms of process cycling (including
caustic clean in place procedures). In all cases, performance metrics will be
directly compared to columns packed with commercially available stationary
phases. The second research area looks beyond chromatographic column structures,
involving the characterization and optimization of the hydrodynamic aspects of
depletion/capture columns and micropipette tip constructs and how they affect
performance of in-line and discrete sample protein processing, respectively.

Just as scientists catalog all the genes in an organism's DNA to study its
biological function, they are also developing protein analytics to eventually be
able to catalog the varying collections of proteins an organism uses to carry
out its functions. Complete, accurate protein catalogs are critical to the
development of more effective pharmaceuticals, diagnostic tools and the advance
of molecular medicine. They rely heavily on efficient separations technology
because biological samples are so complex. This work conducted by Prof. Marcus
will advance protein analytics by developing separations technology that can
analyze more complex samples more accurately in less time. The studies involve a
collaborative effort between research groups from the Department of Chemistry
and the School of Materials Science and Engineering, both of which are
affiliated with the Clemson University Center for Advanced Engineering of Fibers
and Films (CAEFF). Collaborations with federal laboratories are also planned.
Successful completion of the work may lead to new commercial ventures in the
textile and pharmaceutical industries in South Carolina and elsewhere. CAEFF
programs expose graduate students to science and research philosophies across
the science/engineering interface. The low cost and simplicity of constructing
C-CP fiber columns will allow their use in newly designed undergraduate and
graduate laboratory experiments illustrating the basic principles of protein
chromatography.