* 1307396
* Self-Consistent Evolution of Extreme Mass Ratio Inspirals
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Peter Diener, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 125,997.00

We will investigate extreme-mass-ratio inspirals (EMRIs) of compact objects in
orbit around super-massive black holes that, due to emission of gravitational
waves, eventually plunge into the super-massive black hole. We will generalize
existing methods based on the effective source approach from the scalar case to
the more interesting (and demanding) gravitational case with the aim of being
able to perform fully self-consistent evolutions of both the particle trajectory
and the radiation field. EMRIs are expected to be a major source of
gravitational waves for future space-based gravitational wave detectors. The
observation of such events can be used to test the black hole No-Hair Theorem by
mapping out the black hole metric as the small compact object spirals in.
However, a successful test will require very accurate predictions of the full
gravitational waveform with small phase errors over hundreds of thousands to
millions of orbital periods. The slow orbital evolution is determined by the
interaction of the particle with the perturbations produced by the particle
itself, the so called self-force. Though the radiative part of the self-force is
solely responsible for the evolution of the orbital parameters resulting in
amplitude and frequency evolution of the waveform, the conservative piece can
still affect the phase. Current approaches to calculating EMRI waveforms evolve
the system as if it were going from one geodesic to the next. The change of the
orbital parameters is calculated from averages of fluxes or the self-force
itself over several orbits. The approximate methods have to be checked with
fully self-consistent evolutions of both the orbit and gravitational
perturbations. Using the effective source approach, such self-consistent
evolutions are now within reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage
and integrate with several complementary NSF projects which focus on developing
open-source codes and building research communities across many fields of
science. Within these communities, this project will broaden the existing
infrastructure and computational methods and make them available not only to our
group but to the broader self-force community. A central part of this proposal
is the training of a graduate student. The student will be integrated into both
the numerical relativity group at LSU and the international self-force
community. PI Diener participates in two REU programs at LSU (one at the CCT,
one in the physics department)&lt;br/&gt;where undergraduates gain research
experience in computational relativistic astrophysics using real production code
via simple user interfaces developed in the Cactus group at the CCT. In the
coming years the REU research projects will be based on this project.