* 1307714
* Liquid Phase Epitaxy of Ferromagnetic-Piezoelectrics Heterostructures and Femto-Tesla Magnetic Sensors and Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Gopalan Srinivasan, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2018
* USD 345,000.00

A research program is proposed on novel piezoelectric-ferromagnetic
heterostructures for miniature, low-frequency, femto-Tesla magnetic sensors and
sensor arrays with potential for applications in biomedical imaging. A majority
of such magneto-electric (ME) composites studied so far have bonded
ferroelectric and ferromagnetic layers in which an applied ac magnetic field
produces magnetostrictive strain in the ferromagnet, leading to a voltage
response in the ferroelectric layer. Ferroelectrics based ME sensors have
several shortcomings including non-linear sensor response and considerable noise
due to ferroelectric hysteresis and pyroelectric noise. This proposal is aimed
at magnetic sensors made of piezoelectric lanthanum gallium tantalate,
La3Ga5.5Ta0.5O14 (LGT), and functionally graded ferromagnetic layer with nickel
zinc ferrite Ni1-xZnxFe2O4 (NZFO). The motivation is the group's preliminary
data on ME effects in LGT-ferromagnetic composites that show (i) one to two
orders of magnitude higher ME coefficients at low-frequency and at bending and
electromechanical resonance, and much lower noise compared to samples with
ferroelectrics, and (ii) theoretical models that predict a strong zero-bias ME
interactions in the heterostructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The novelty in the planned approach is multifold with: (i) use
of piezoelectric LGT that is expected to show strong ME coupling, linear voltage
response to ac magnetic field and elimination of pyroelectric noise, (ii) graded
ferromagnetic layers for self-magnetic biasing; (iii) heterostructures by liquid
phase epitaxy (LPE) for efficient strain transfer; and (iv) utilization of
micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) technology in miniaturization of sensors
and sensor arrays. Primary tasks will include (i) synthesis of magnetization-
graded NZFO films on LGT substrates by liquid-phase epitaxy (LPE), (ii) studies
on low-frequency and resonance ME interactions, (iii) design and fabrication of
MEMS cantilever based ferrite/LGT multiple structures as resonant frequency
tunable magnetic sensors and sensor array, (iv) comprehensive characterization
of the materials and sensors. The desired fT-sensitivity will be achieved by
frequency modulation with the sensor operating at bending or electromechanical
resonance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Anticipated broader
impacts of the research include the following: (i) Miniature magnetic sensors
and sensor arrays for applications in diverse fields, including medical imaging
(magneto-cardiography and magneto-encephalography) and security systems. (ii)
Human resources development and curriculum development/enrichment in materials
and measurement technologies. (iii) Undergraduate Research Training: The PIs
will recruit undergraduate science and engineering majors for participation in
the research. (iv) Research experience for high school students: Students from
local schools will be recruited for participation in research.