* 1307606
* Mid-Segment Polydispersity as a New Tool for Manipulating ABA Triblock Copolymer Morphologies and Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Mahesh Mahanthappa, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2016
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Applications of commodity and specialty block copolymers rely on their useful
combinations of properties, which stem from covalently linking two or more
dissimilar homopolymer segments into a single macromolecule. By virtue of their
thermodynamically driven self-assembly into complex yet well-defined nanoscale
morphologies, block copolymers are useful as thermoplastics and thermoplastic
elastomers, advanced molecular separations membranes, and new templates for
fabricating next-generation microelectronics. Modern polymerization techniques
enable access to a plethora of copolymers containing unusual combinations of
chemical functionalities with useful physical properties, at the expense of
introducing significant segmental dispersity into one or more blocks of the
copolymers. However, the role of broad segmental dispersity on block copolymer
phase behavior is not well understood. This project will directly investigate
the effects of mid-segment polydispersity on the phase behavior of ABA-type
triblock copolymers. Model polydisperse triblock copolymers with varying
segmental interaction parameters will be synthesized by tandem polymerization
techniques for studies of their composition-dependent phase behavior, using
small-angle X-ray scattering, electron microscopy, polymer rheology, and various
transport measurements. Characterization of samples near the order-disorder
transition (ODT) will help to identify the variables that parameterize the phase
behavior of these multicomponent block copolymer mixtures. Ultimately this study
aims to transform segmental polydispersity into a new tool for manipulating the
morphologies of block copolymers with technologically useful bulk properties.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The development of innovative polymeric materials possessing unusual
combinations of chemical functionalities and useful physical properties is
crucial in their myriad applications as high-strength structural materials,
water and gas purification membranes, components in organic photovoltaic cells,
and materials for high power lithium-ion batteries. Within a highly
interdisciplinary research environment, this project will challenge
undergraduate and graduate students to conduct hypothesis-driven, crosscutting
research at the interface between chemistry, chemical engineering, and materials
science. By using modern methods in synthetic polymer chemistry to generate new
materials and by characterizing their structures and attendant physical
properties, this project will aim to uncover new tools for designing innovative,
functional polymers with unusual morphologies and novel properties for a variety
of potential applications. An undergraduate polymer chemistry lab and two
polymer-oriented lecture demonstrations will be developed for use in general
chemistry instruction and in public outreach lectures.