* 1307847
* RUI:  Materials Design and Wavefunction Engineering in Lead Sulfide Based Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Paul Van Patten, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 140,950.00

Professor Paul G. Van Patten of Middle Tennessee State University is supported
by this award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry to study the reactions between lead sulfide
(PbS) quantum dots (QDs) and a variety of salts containing main group metals,
first-row transition metals, or lanthanide cations. These reactions will result
in partial or complete cation exchange within the QDs to produce a variety of
novel, metal sulfide QDs that have not been prepared or studied before. Varying
the distribution of metal cations within the QDs will permit tuning of
electronic energy levels and carrier wavefunctions, thus imparting novel
reactivity and/or optical properties to these materials. The project will
include structural, optical, and even magnetic characterization of these new
materials with an eye toward understanding structure/property relationships and
toward identifying materials with strong potential for technological
application.

The exploration of new materials is essential to the development of future
technologies and has always been a central goal of the chemical sciences. This
project will investigate several new materials derived from PbS quantum dots,
which have themselves garnered significant attention for their solar energy
conversion potential. The new materials developed here are expected to cover a
wide spectrum of chemical and optical properties to further improve on the
already-promising characteristics of PbS QDs. This research project will also
provide valuable education and research experience for several junior
scientists, including master's students, undergraduates, and even high school
summer interns from the American Chemical Society's Project SEED program.