* 1307576
* Building High-Performance Perpetual Wireless Sensor Networks Through Mobile Energy Replenishment
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 277,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop a novel framework for wireless
sensor networks which exploits a joint design of the latest wireless power
transfer technology with mobility to achieve high performance with low system
cost and maintain perpetual operation of the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is to adopt the latest wireless power transfer, controlled mobility for
energy replenishment and data gathering techniques in wireless rechargeable
sensor networks. This research develops a novel integrated approach to
addressing several closely coupled issues: (1) Efficient and scalable energy
information collection; (2) Energy replenishment and energy-aware data
collection; (3) Sensor-mission assignment with quality assurance. This project
develops a new class of algorithms that improve data throughput, network
utility, surveillance quality, and most importantly, guarantee the perpetual
operation of network. The proposed work combines protocol design, algorithm
design, probability modeling, combinatorial optimizations, software simulations
and testbed implementations to conduct a full-scale study on the above
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are
to provide a new paradigm to reliably power wireless sensor networks which is
transformative to conventional sensor networks. This project would be beneficial
to a wide spectrum of applications, including military, environmental, health
care, target tracking and commercial business areas. The important findings of
this project will be disseminated to the research community by ways of
conferences, journals, and web site access, and to the industry by facilitating
the partnership between the industry and the academia through New York State
Center of Excellence in Wireless and Information Technology.