* 1307092
* RUI: Investigation of Electron Migration and Trapping in Doped Luminescent Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Anthony Diaz, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2017
* USD 175,735.00

Technical Description: This research project involves the study of electron-hole
(e-h) pair transport and trapping processes in solid-state luminescent materials
under vacuum ultraviolet excitation. These materials are comprised of an oxide
host and a rare-earth dopant. Under vacuum ultraviolet excitation, an e-h pair
is created in the host that must migrate and be trapped by the dopant for
luminescence to occur. The research project addresses two fundamental questions:
(1) How is the efficiency of e-h transfer affected by the position of dopant
states relative to host band states? (2) How much does the choice of dopant
influence the degree of surface loss observed in particles with sizes of from 50
to 500 nanometers? This is accomplished through systematic spectroscopic
investigations of materials of controlled particle size, and the evaluation of
these data in the context of current models. The analysis and modeling of these
experimental data allow for the assessment of the mobility of e-h pairs in a
given host, as well as the degree to which absorbed energy is lost to bulk
defects versus surface traps. Such a differentiation is especially important to
the development of efficient nanoscale optical materials that have an
intrinsically high surface area. The project also applies these methods to
larger bandgap phosphate hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description:
The objective of this research is to understand the fundamental
structure/property relationships that govern the efficiency of solid-state
luminescent materials, especially materials with sub-micrometer particle sizes,
under vacuum ultraviolet excitation. Such materials often exhibit properties
different from their bulk counterparts, and can improve the performance of
certain technologies such as in high-definition displays. The PI has established
a rigorous research program in solid-state chemistry at Central Washington
University, with undergraduate students comprising the bulk of the investigative
team. Students are gaining a deeper and broader scientific training, which
serves as excellent preparation for graduate school or future professional
endeavors. Undergraduate students trained in the PI's lab often published papers
in peer-reviewed journals and routinely go on to pursue graduate degrees.