* 1307117
* Exploiting 3,5-Difluoro Aromatic Systems to Functionalize Poly(arylene ether)s
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Eric Fossum, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Eric Fossum of Wright State University will
utilize meta-activated nucleophilic aromatic substitution as a facile route to
prepare poly(arylene ether)s with a multitude of functional groups located in
pendent positions. Three different approaches will be employed including: 1) the
introduction of azide moieties, via the corresponding iodo derivative, allowing
for "clickable" systems, 2) utilization of functional sulfonamide groups as the
activating group for nucleophilic aromatic substitution reactions, and 3)
reactivity ratio controlled polycondensation reactions of BB'B"-type monomers,
which provide the possibility of functionalization either before or after the
polymerization process. The thermal and mechanical properties of the polymers
will be evaluated as well as their potential for application as engineering
thermoplastics. The broader impacts involve training master's, undergraduate,
and high school students in research methods, disseminating results in
publications and seminars, as well as the development of a new class of
chemically robust polymeric materials suitable for a wide variety of
applications.

Polymers are long chain organic molecules and are found in many facets of
everyday life that utilize plastics, including food packaging, structural
materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and lightweight
electronic devices. This work will enhance our ability to synthesize new
engineering plastics with excellent environmental stability and properties that
can be readily tailored to meet a specific need. The results of these studies
may have many positive, long-term impacts on applications in which engineering
plastics are currently employed, including the energy, medical, automotive,
electronics, and aerospace industries.