* 1307740
* Understanding and Manipulating Charge and Entropy Flows in Layered Structured Transition Metal Dichalcogenides by and for Thermoelectricity: A Multi-scale Materials Chem. Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Jian He, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 07/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The primary objective of this project, sponsored by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program of the Division of Materials Research, is
to understand and tailor the charge and entropy flows in layer-structured
transition metal dichalcogenides (LTMDs) by studying their thermoelectric (TE)
properties in totality for higher TE performance. The structural simplicity of
LTMDs facilitates an understanding of charge and entropy flows, while the
chemical versatility allows for manipulating their interplay. In this project,
the "material template", LTMDs, will be subject to multi-scale restructuring via
substitutional doping, intercalation-deintercalation, exfoliation, and hot
deformation, followed by detailed studies of crystal and defect chemistry,
microstructures, and TE properties. A compelling topic involves mobile ion
intercalated LTMDs, in which quasi-two-dimensional multi-scale ionic
microstructures evolve under a thermal gradient (i.e. the Sorét effect). Spark
plasma sintering, emission Mössbauer spectroscopy, parallel thermal conductivity
measurements, and hot-stage micro-Raman spectroscopy will be used to facilitate
the proposed research.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project will take a course of materials-by-
discovery and materials-by-design in layer structured transition metal
dichalcogenides (LTMDs). The scientific results emanated from this project will
provide key insights in order to bridge two different realms of energy-related
materials research in thermoelectric materials (electronic conductors for direct
heat-to-electricity energy conversion) and electrolyte materials (ionic
conductors for energy storage in batteries). The research plan builds on a close
collaboration between doctorate granting/research universities, non-doctorate
granting universities, and national labs. The research activities are integrated
with a comprehensive education plan to serve the nation's needs in energy-
related materials research. The students involved in this project will learn to
use various equipment, facilities, and techniques in materials synthesis,
materials chemistry processing, and materials characterization. A major part of
the training will be on single crystal growth, a discipline that "not only led
to the advancement of science but also made a direct and significant
contribution to society in general" as emphasized by the National Research
Council. Furthermore, the dissemination of scientific results to the broader
public through lectures, science fairs, and classroom demonstrations will
enhance scientific understanding and hopefully stimulate new ideas in energy-
related material research.