* 1307551
* Achieving Two Orders of Magnitude Reduction in Cellular Network Energy Inefficiency
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Ahmed Eltawil, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,996.00

The goal is to develop a set of algorithms to increase the
energy&lt;br/&gt;efficiency of cellular wireless networks. These networks
were&lt;br/&gt;originally designed without paying sufficient attention to
their&lt;br/&gt;efficiency, calculated to be less than 10%. With cellular
traffic&lt;br/&gt;increasing at exponential rates, the experts believe that in
one&lt;br/&gt;decade the traffic will be 1000 times today's traffic. In the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research, a number of algorithms will be developed to improve
energy&lt;br/&gt;efficiency. Examples are new modulation techniques, new link
adaptation&lt;br/&gt;algorithms, or algorithms for the cellular network to adapt
to&lt;br/&gt;changing traffic conditions such that cells with small traffic
use&lt;br/&gt;only as much energy as needed, or cells shut down, their coverage
to&lt;br/&gt;be taken over by their neighboring base stations. We analyze
the&lt;br/&gt;contributions of a number of different techniques, and reach
the&lt;br/&gt;conclusion that it is possible to reduce the energy consumption in
the&lt;br/&gt;cellular network base stations to the 1.5-2% of its current
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal is in
redesigning the cellular&lt;br/&gt;network and improving its energy efficiency
by several orders of&lt;br/&gt;magnitude. This will be achieved by a new set of
tools, methods, and&lt;br/&gt;algorithms employing a different set of tradeoffs
such as deployment,&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth, and possibly
delay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Because the project relies on
knowing a user's&lt;br/&gt;location, the project will enable location-based
services. These are&lt;br/&gt;highly desired but cannot be implemented in
today's networks. This&lt;br/&gt;project will build on our existing research,
prototyping efforts, and&lt;br/&gt;an existing testbed.