* 1307443
* Particle Astrophysics with VHE Gamma-Ray Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Nahee Park, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 738,278.00

This award provides continued support for the particle astrophysics group at the
University of Chicago to participate in the operation and analysis of data from
the Very Energetic Radiation- Imaging Telescope Array System (VERITAS). VERITAS
is an array of four 12-meter Cherenkov telescopes that use the imaging
atmospheric Cherenkov technique to detect and characterize the flux of 50
Gigaelectronvolt (GeV) to 50 Teraelectronvolt (TeV) photons from astrophysical
sources. The VERITAS project has been very successful over the past few years of
operations providing important measurements of high-energy emission from
supernova remnants, pulsar wind nebulae, gamma-ray binaries, and active galactic
nuclei. A recently completed upgrade, which updates the telescope cameras and
trigger systems, should lead to even greater sensitivity and promises to further
accelerate the scientific output of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Chicago group has been a key participant in the VERITAS project
since its inception. From design and construction to commissioning and operation
and now to analysis and interpretation, Chicago has assumed leadership roles in
all aspects of VERITAS. The specific scientific interests of the group involve
the study of Galactic sources, including supernova remnants and pulsar wind
nebulae, as well as more general questions in particle astrophysics. In
addition, the group will work to develop new hardware and technologies suitable
for use in the next generation of ground-based TeV gamma-ray
observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The field of TeV astronomy
has impacts on many other fields of science, from the study of the high-energy
particle acceleration to fundamental physics questions such as the nature of
Dark Matter. The data from VERITAS have been combined with data at other
wavelengths to provide unique insights into the high-energy processes powering
astrophysical objects. The VERITAS project involves both graduate and
undergraduate students in significant roles. There is a strong local outreach
effort at the University of Chicago, which involves a successful partnership
with Adler Planetarium for producing public lectures and classes for high school
teachers. Finally, the continued development of the TeVCat resource will expand
the visibility of TeV astrophysics beyond the high energy gamma-ray community.