* 1307367
* Structural characterization of rod phosphodiesterase 6 using mass spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Rick Cote, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is supporting the
collaborative research of Drs. Feixia Chu and Rick Cote at University of New
Hampshire on the structural characterization of a central phototransduction
effector enzyme, photoreceptor phosphodiesterase-6 (PDE6). PDE6 modulates cGMP
levels in the photoreceptor outer segment to define the amplitude, duration and
adaptation of the photoresponse in vertebrate photoreceptors. This study aims to
elucidate the structural determinants of PDE6 allosteric regulators, the spatial
organization and molecular recognition of the dynamic PDE6 signaling complex.
This research is interdisciplinary, involving the combination of mass
spectometry and protein biochemistry to study the underlying structural elements
that govern the PDE6 activation/deactivation cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work is expected to both shed light on key events in the visual cycle and the
molecular level, focusing on a key protein involved in signal transduction. In a
more general sense, the work is expected to lead to strategies and methods to
detect protein conformational change, especially in structurally heterogeneous
systems, with potentially applicability to technically challenging membrane
proteins and protein complexes. The interdisciplinary nature of this project
will expose undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral trainee to a
broad set of skills at the interface of biochemistry, mass spectrometry-based
proteomics and structural analysis. In addition to the proposed research, the
research team personnel will continue to participate in education and outreach
efforts at the Chemistry/Biology interface at the University of New Hampshire.