* 1307744
* Nanofabrication, Characterization, and Analysis of Topological Insulator Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Lu Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 07/31/2016
* USD 359,978.00

The objective of this program is to create nanoelectronic devices made from
topological insulator nanostructures and explore new areas for creating and
characterizing&lt;br/&gt;low-dissipation electronics. In particular, the PIs
intend to address the following aims: (i) fabricating transistors based on
topological insulator nanoribbons and nanojunctions by using template-mediated
growth; (ii) characterizing the magnetotransport and thermoelectric properties
of topological insulator devices by using torque magnetometry and capacitance
spectroscopy; and (iii) achieving an in-depth understanding of experimental
results through theoretical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit is that the successful completion of the proposed research can transform
the basis of future transistors with low power consumption and enable
reconfigurable topological quantum computation. Particularly, the fundamental
science associated with the modulation of topological surface states via
external fields will be studied allowing for the realization of electronic
operations involving reversible switching of topological states. The performance
of the proposed new topological transistor devices would surpass that of
conventional silicon based devices, in terms of the higher speed (~1 THz) and
the lower power consumption (microwatt).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts are extending nanoelectronics education opportunities for students from
high schools and universities. All the PIs are involved in education and
outreach programs; including a collaboration with The University of Michigan's
academic programs to provide research opportunities for undergraduate students,
as well as a collaboration with Lurie Nanofabrication Facility in outreach
workshops for K-12 educators, workshops for the Michigan Science Teacher
Association conference, and the "NanoCamps" program sponsored by National
Science Foundation.