* 1307461
* RUI: Disentangling Quark and Gluon Energy Loss with Heavy Flavor Jets in the ALICE Experiment at the CERN LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jennifer Klay, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2017
* USD 309,063.00

The Universe as we know it evolved from a very hot, dense primordial soup of
fundamental particles that were created in the cataclysm known as the Big Bang.
As the Universe expanded and cooled, these fundamental particles, called quarks
and gluons, condensed into protons and neutrons, which eventually combined into
nuclei that captured electrons to form atoms. Nearly everything we can observe
is made from this fundamental material. Using large particle accelerators,
scientists are recreating the conditions at the birth of the Universe in the
laboratory by colliding gold or lead atoms at very high energies to study the
properties and interactions among these particles. These investigations will
provide us with clues to the deeper nature of the fundamental forces in the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important discoveries to come
from such experiments is that the dense matter created in these collisions is
opaque to very high energy quarks and gluons produced in them. These "partons"
suffer tremendous energy loss as they make their way out of the collision zone,
depositing a large fraction of their initial energy in the medium. The strength
of the energy loss is directly related to the density of the medium and varies
according to the type of parton. It appears that the heavier the parton, the
more energy loss it suffers. Energetic partons fragment into a spray of
particles called a "jet". If a jet contains a high energy electron, there is a
very high probability that it originated from a heavy quark. The energy loss of
these electron-jets can be used to investigate the properties of the quark gluon
plasma medium through which it passed. The goal of this research is to
disentangle the energy loss of quarks and gluons by isolating jets containing
electrons and comparing their energy loss patterns to those without
electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) in
Switzerland collides nuclei at the highest energies ever created in a
laboratory. This RUI project will utilize the ALICE experiment to explore the
properties of the quark-gluon plasma using the energy loss of heavy quark jets
as a probe. Undergraduate students working on this experiment will be trained in
the most advanced data collection, reduction and analysis techniques at the
cutting edge of high energy nuclear physics. They will be able to apply these
skills in a wide variety of careers, whether they choose to pursue an advanced
degree in basic science or not. Their contributions will also help us develop
new understanding of the fundamental interactions among the basic building
blocks of matter, leading to a deeper understanding of the Universe we inhabit.