* 1307365
* New Peptidic Foldamer Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Samuel Gellman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 456,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Samuel Gellman of the University of
Wisconsin at Madison will develop new oligomers with protein-like folding
behavior ("foldamers"). This work will focus on the use of gamma-amino acid
building blocks, to construct "gamma-peptides" that adopt novel shapes or for
use in conjunction with alpha- and/or beta-amino acids to generate foldamers
with more diverse backbones. The research is directed toward conformations that
can ultimately be tailored to achieve specific molecular engineering goals. This
experimental program includes three specific goals. One is to build upon the
recent NSF-supported discovery of alpha / beta / gamma-peptides that mimic
natural alpha-helices; an experimental strategy will be developed for
quantifying the thermodynamics of alpha / beta / gamma-peptide folding, so that
the subunits can be optimized. The second goal involves exploration of
previously unknown types of gamma-amino acids as potential foldamer subunits.
This effort will necessitate the development of new asymmetric synthesis
methods. The third component of this program is directed toward unusual or
unprecedented secondary structures (e.g., oval-shaped helices) that could
ultimately be used to accomplish high-value tasks, such as mimicking expansive,
information-rich surfaces on natural proteins. The broader impacts of this
research will include training young scholars to be successful in highly
intersciplinary and collaborative research environments, and the generation of
tools can be used by many researchers to address molecular-level challenges in
medicine, nanotechnology and other fields.

Biological systems make heavy use of proteins to carry out complex tasks at the
molecular level. Proteins are "oligomers": they are composed of multiple
chemical subunits linked together in a long chain. The chain must fold into a
specific, complex shape in order for the protein to become functional. This
research project is part of a growing international effort, inspired by natural
proteins, to create new types of synthetic oligomers that can adopt complex
shapes and perform useful functions. Long-term outcomes of this basic research
could include the development of new types of medicines, materials with
unprecedented properties, and other useful chemical technologies.