* 1307415
* Studies of Nucleon Structure and Medium Modifications with Electroweak Probes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Michael Christy, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 07/31/2015
* USD 110,000.00

The objective of this research is to provide important experimental information
on the fundamental structure of both free protons and neutrons (nucleons) and
those bound inside the atomic nucleus. When scattering leptons from nucleons
with large momentum transfer the process can be described within perturbative
QCD in which the scattering takes place on an asymptotically free quark with a
well defined longitudinal momentum distribution. On the other hand, the quarks
are confined inside mesons and baryons, and at low momentum transfer it is these
composite particles which are the effective degrees of freedom. One focus of
this research is on better understanding the transition between these regimes.
In particular, this grant will support work on a precision determination of the
magnetic elastic form factor of the proton to large momentum transfer to study
the transition to perturbative scaling, in addition to a measurement of the F_2
structure function of the proton and deuteron at large Bjorken-x, for which most
of the nucleon momentum is carried by a single valence quark. The former
experiment will be performed in Jefferson Lab experimental Hall A and the latter
in Hall C. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this research will study the
modification of the nucleons in the nuclear medium, for which no generally
accepted physics model currently exists. While many studies of the ratio of
structure functions measured in nuclei to those on the deuteron have been
performed in electron and muon scattering, practically no experimental data
exists for neutrino scattering. Such data would provide important tests of
models of medium modifications and will be the focus of the upcoming MINERvA
medium energy beam run, while the continuing analysis of the successfully
concluded low energy run is primarily focused on elastic scattering and
resonance production.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;From a broader perspective, this
project aims to further elucidate the structure of the nuclear constituents of
ordinary matter via new experimental data. While, Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD)
has been accepted as the theory of the strong interaction, which is responsible
for confining the constituent quarks and gluons into the composite hadrons which
make up ordinary matter, many questions of the resulting structure still
remain.These studies will be performed with complementary probes via the
electromagnetic interaction, utilizing the electron beam at Jefferson Lab, and
the weak interaction, utilizing a neutrino beam in the MINERvA experiment at
Fermilab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both Jefferson Lab experiments are expected to be
among the first performed after the energy upgrade of the accelerator. This will
leverage the significant expertise of this group to the commissioning of both
Hall A and Hall C in support of these experiments, which will also broadly
support the larger Jefferson Lab nuclear physics program. It is expected that
this research program will also address a critical need in the training of the
next generation of researchers in physics, where African-Americans and women are
both significantly under-represented.