* 1307643
* Finding WDM Network Topographies that are Nonblocking without Wavelength Interchange
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Richard Thompson, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2014
* USD 45,563.00

Modern long-haul optical networks are capable of carrying a wavelength of light
(a lambda or an optical circuit) and its associated bit stream thousands of
kilometers without regeneration, conversion from an optical signal to an
electrical one and back again (OEO). This long-haul technology has substantially
reduced the cost of optical systems since OEO regeneration has traditionally
been expensive. It has also offered the (as yet unrealized) promise of running
multiple data formats. However, when two lambdas of the same wavelength need to
be inserted onto the same optical fiber at least one of them must undergo OEO in
order to change its wavelength. This is called wavelength interchange. The
problem of routing and wavelength assignment (RWA) to minimize the number of
wavelength interchanges has been deeply studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study a different question: what types of topologies minimize the
need for wavelength interchange? This question is expected to lead to graph
properties that minimize the need for wavelength interchange in physical
networks. By taking a different approach to understanding the minimization of
wavelength interchange the project couples the RWA problem to issues of network
design. In turn this allows questions of network resilience to be coupled to
questions of optical-layer design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-haul optical
networks are a foundational element of the modern economy. Both network cost
minimization and network flexibility and resilience are concerns affecting our
national interests.