* 1307801
* The Dark Reaction Project:   A Machine Learning Approach to Materials Discovery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Alexander Norquist, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,998.00

Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal synthesis reactions of
organically-templated inorganic solids are an ideal test case for data-driven
materials chemistry, as just a few reactants (one or two inorganic components,
one or two organic components and solvent) and a few reaction conditions (pH,
temperature, reaction time) yield a diversity of products with numerous
applications. Despite this simplicity, the formation of crystalline products
depends sensitively on the quantities of reagents used and the reaction
conditions, which makes this a demanding test case for predicting success or
failure of the reaction. Moreover, unlike other systems such as metal organic
frameworks (MOFs), the many different types of intermolecular interactions that
are present result in highly diverse crystal structures which cannot be
predicted a priori. &lt;br/&gt;Rather than predicting a final crystal structure,
we aim to address the simpler problem of whether a reaction will yield any
crystalline product or not. Our project will address this with three strategies:
We propose constructing a searchable online repository for "dark reactions", the
chemical reactions that have been performed and recorded in laboratory
notebooks, but never reported in the literature. This begins with putting our
own reactions online, then the reactions of selected experimental collaborators,
and finally creating a web-accessible public repository for depositing,
retrieving, and utilizing reaction information. Using this data, we propose
using machine learning to derive predictions to increase the success rate of
performing novel reactions. From the experimental reaction data, we use
cheminformatics calculations to predict &gt;200 computed properties of the
individual reagents (e.g., van der Waals surface areas, polar surface areas as a
function of pH, number of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors, etc.) and compute
50 stoichiometric descriptors (e.g., ratios of organic and inorganic components,
weighted by hydrogen bond donor/acceptors as a function of pH, etc.). Based on a
preliminary dataset of 506 reactions, we have been able to train a decision tree
model to achieve an 87% success rate in predicting whether a crystalline product
is formed or not. During this project, we will make the improved model publicly
available (via the web), address weaknesses in the physicochemical model, and
integrate this with databases of commercially available starting materials.
Finally, we will perform experimental validation to demonstrate a proof-of-
principle synthesis of new compounds, address structural holes in the dataset,
and engage with the broader research community to guide experiments in other
laboratories for the synthesis of new materials and addressing limitations in
the chemical space of our model. Besides the impact on this specific area of
materials synthesis, the software architecture that we develop will serve as a
starting point for others to begin similar projects and we commit to freely
distributing our work to others by open-sourcing our code under a license that
will allow its free use in academic settings. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organically-
templated metal oxide framework compounds have outstanding structural and
chemical diversity, which lends them to applications for industrial catalysis,
gas separation, and optical engineering. Yet, despite several decades of
experimental effort, making new examples of these materials is a time-consuming
trial-and-error process. Most of the chemical reactions that have been performed
are deemed "unsuccessful" because they do not result in a crystalline product,
and are never reported in the literature. There is no forum for collecting these
experiments, nor a means for deriving value from them. Nevertheless, these "dark
reactions" are valuable because they define the bounds on the reaction
conditions needed to successfully produce a product. By providing a searchable
online repository for reaction data, we will enable better management and
sharing of these dark reactions. Moreover, we will use this data as a resource
to train machine learning (aka statistical learning or data-mining) algorithms
that predict the success of reactions ahead of time. Based on the machine
learning predictions, we will perform experimental validation to test the
predictions of the model.&lt;br/&gt;Our project will provide a mechanism for
collecting the dark reactions and then using them to guide future reactions to
be more successful, reducing the researcher time and cost of reagents needed to
synthesize new materials. This will accelerate and lower the cost (in researcher
time and materials) of discovering new materials. This directly addresses the
call of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy's 2011 Materials
Genome Initiative, specifically finding ways to use computation to bring
functional materials to market more quickly. Second, this project will serve as
a model for collaboration between chemists and computer scientists that can be
directly transferred to a wide range of other disciplines and avenues of
investigation. Third, we will provide a cohesive, comprehensive,
interdisciplinary and sustained research experience for undergraduate students,
thus contributing to the scientific workforce. Fourth, our outreach activities
will foster interest in data-driven techniques, create a network of
collaborating laboratories and provide the software infrastructure to others
wishing to initiate related projects.