* 1307631
* Thermodynamics and Physical Properties of selected Heusler Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Philip Nash, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 375,707.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Heusler compounds of type X2YZ and half-Heusler compounds of
type XYZ, where X and Y are transition metals and Z is a group III-V element,
can exhibit interesting and useful properties, such as shape memory,
thermoelectric, ferromagnetic and spin polarization effects. Unexplored
compounds of these types could lead to new mechanical and electronic devices.
The thermodynamic properties, crystal structures and phase equilibria of a large
number of these compounds will be systematically determined. Drop calorimetry
will be used to measure the standard heat of formation and heat capacity as a
function of temperature. Phase equilibria and crystal structures will be
determined using differential scanning calorimetry, energy dispersive X-ray
analysis and X-ray diffraction. The thousands of possible compositions will be
rapidly screened using systematic analyses of phase diagrams and first-
principles calculations to identify specific systems for study. The
thermodynamic data obtained will be incorporated into an on-line database for
access by the scientific community. The data will be used to predict phase
equilibria and to benchmark first principles calculations for these compounds.
Students from high school through graduate school will be trained through these
investigations.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The Heusler family of alloys holds promise for the next
generation of sensors and actuators. This experimental study will produce
thermodynamic data of fundamental importance to the exploration and future
development of these promising materials. Properties to be measured include both
thermodynamic and physical properties. Collaborations with scientists around the
world will enable computational screening of thousands of potential compositions
to determine those most appropriate for experiments and will enable the
measurement of potentially useful physical properties. The data produced, which
are expected to be critical to the field for future material development and
benchmarking/validation of computational predictions, will be made available
through a free on-line database. Education and training activities will include
graduate students, undergraduate students and high-school students. Outreach
will include the construction and dissemination of video tutorials on
experimental techniques.