* 1307176
* Self-triggered coordination of robotic networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 290,665.00

There are a myriad of current applications in which robotic sensor networks are
having an enormous impact. Examples include a network of coordinated underwater
gliders tracking the motion of chemical pollutants, a camera network monitoring
a busy street, or a group of autonomous vehicles providing force protection. At
the most basic level, coordination strategies for these networks involve agents
repeatedly taking measurements, communicating with other agents, processing the
collected data, and taking actions in response. A common assumption throughout
these applications is the continuous or periodic availability of information to
the agents about the state of other agents and the environment, and the
synchronous execution of these strategies. This synchronization assumption poses
nontrivial challenges in practice and leads to inefficient implementations in
terms of processor usage, communication bandwidth, and energy. Periodic
communication, for instance, may lead to a wasteful use of the available
resources. When asynchronism is considered, it is often done in "a posteriori"
fashion: guarantees only hold if the agents time schedules satisfy conditions
ensuring the freshness of information. While such results are valid from an
analysis viewpoint, they are unsatisfactory from a design perspective because
ensuring that such conditions hold is not built into the algorithm
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is the design of
self-triggered coordination strategies that account for uncertainty in the state
of other agents and the environment, and are able to produce substantial energy
savings in the network operation. The key conceptual novelty is the study of how
the performance of the overall network task is affected by the quality of the
information available to the agents. This understanding leads to tools and
triggering criteria for individual agents that allow them to autonomously decide
when they need fresh information to successfully perform the required task.
Self-triggered strategies eliminate the need for continuous communication,
sensing, and re-planning, incorporate uncertainty at the control design stage,
seamlessly handle asynchronous executions of plans, and increase agent autonomy
and network efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This proposal
seeks to develop tools, abstractions, and techniques that help design self-
triggered cooperative strategies for autonomous robotic sensor networks. Our
ultimate goal is to synthesize robust and efficient cooperative strategies that
handle uncertainty and asynchronism, and ensure that the robotic network
performs the assigned task with guaranteed quality of service, while operating
with limited energy supplies, bandwidth, and computational resources. The
research plan is structured along the following thrusts: (i) the synthesis of
reliable models and abstractions that capture the uncertainty about the state of
the network and the environment; (ii) the identification of triggering criteria
that allow agents to determine the impact that the actions planned with their
current information have on the performance of the network; (iii) the
development of stability and correctness tools suited for the analysis of self-
triggered coordination strategies and the precise characterization of their
robustness and efficiency properties. We envision that the proposed paradigm
will lead to the synthesis in a variety of distributed scenarios of novel
coordination algorithms that optimize the trade-offs between performance and
implementation cost and have superior robustness guarantees than existing
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Multi-agent systems are
extending the range of human capabilities in an increasing number of scenarios,
including the study of oceans, disaster recovery, environmental monitoring, and
surveillance. The results of this project will help design robust and efficient
cooperative strategies that naturally account for uncertainty and are able to
produce substantial energy savings in the network operation. The educational
activities are integrated into the research plan and consist of (i)
undergraduate student involvement in research via summer internships,
independent study courses, and senior-design projects. The PI belongs to the
UCSD Cymer Center for Control Systems and Dynamics and will be involved in the
supervision of industry-sponsored undergraduate research in control; (ii)
offering of a graduate course on cooperative control and graduate student
supervision; (iii) outreach targeted at high school students and teachers
through the California State Summer School for Mathematics and Science program
and collaboration with the NSFfunded project ComPASS at UCSD; (iv) involvement
of minority students through participation in the activities of the UCSD School
of Engineering IDEA Student Center; (v) broad dissemination activities (journal
publications, conference, workshop presentations, and conference organization).