* 1307290
* Experimental Investigations of an Inhomogeneous Electronic Phase of Matter, the Cooper Pair Insulator
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* James Valles, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** &lt;br/&gt;This project will involve low temperature
experiments that elucidate properties of a state of matter exhibiting both
superconductor and insulator characteristics simultaneously. It builds on
substantial progress showing that this Cooper pair insulator state has a
spatially inhomogeneous granular structure that emerges spontaneously. This
quality appears commonly among many other interesting systems in which electron
correlations effects are strong. Experiments will focus on the Cooper pair
insulator phase in thin amorphous films deposited on the surfaces of nano-porous
anodized aluminum oxide substrates. Investigations of how this phase responds to
magnetic impurity doping, depends on the physical dimensions of the films and
evolves with systematic changes in the substrate nano-structure will be
conducted. These results can reveal the factors driving the Cooper pair
localization and the size of the localized states. These studies will be the
platform for training graduate and undergraduate students in nano-technology and
forefront issues relevant to the development of new materials for applications.
This type of training has been good preparation for careers in industry. The
results will impact the general field of condensed matter electronics by
providing new insights into how granularity emerges and the properties of
correlated electron systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports experimental research in condensed matter physics
that will be performed with PhD and undergraduate students. The investigations
focus specifically on a class of materials that has been transformed
dramatically using nano-technology. The material normally superconducts (i.e.
carries electricity without losing energy) but becomes an exceptional electrical
non-conductor or insulator when patterned with nano-technology. The experiments
build on recent work showing that these insulators consist of electrically
disconnected grains of superconductor that are few billionths of a meter in
size. The experiments will study the factors that drive the spontaneous
formation of these grains. These insights will be valuable for understanding the
electrical properties of many other recently discovered materials that show
similar spontaneous grain formation as well as promise in future applications.
This research program will expose the PhD and undergraduate students to
scientific issues relevant to the development of new materials for high
technology. This type of training has been excellent for launching the careers
of scientists in high technology fields.