* 1307853
* Resonant Cavity Photodetectors using thin GaInAs/GaAsSb Quantum wells
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Archie Holmes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 338,897.00

The objective of this program is to develop mid-infrared photodetectors using
indium phosphide-based materials for applications where high sensitivity and
near-room temperature operation are desired. These materials provides advantages
including the use of compressive and tensile strained materials for flexible
device design options and mature wafer foundry capabilities for processing InP-
based structures. This program is transformative in that it couples mid-infrared
optoelectronics to a technology platform that has been well developed in
industry but does not currently allow use of this wavelength range.

The intellectual merit is to use a resonant-cavity approach that combines a
thin, strained quantum well absorption region with high-reflectivity mirrors.
Experiments have shown that these quantum wells can absorb light beyond 3000 nm
at room temperature. The addition of strain with a novel strain compensation
approach will allow an extension of the detection wavelength. The use of a
resonant cavity decouples the optical absorption length and physical thicknesses
of the quantum wells leading to both higher quantum efficiency and lower dark
currents.

The broader impacts of this program are to create a technology that can have a
positive influence on society through its use in both military and civilian
applications. In addition, this program focuses on two main categories for
research/education integration: recruiting a talented undergraduate to pursue
research with the goal of encouraging him or her to pursue graduate studies and
the development of educational materials which can be used to educate first-year
engineering students on the societal benefits of this research.