* 1307820
* Cooperative Wireless Networking for  Secure and Optimized Transmission of Non-Gaussian Source Signals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop
integrated design and optimization of wireless cooperative networks for
practical source signals. Unlike traditional approaches based on idealized
Gaussian input assumption, this project takes into full account the practical
constraint of finite-alphabet input signals and data security consideration
against eavesdropping. The fundamental nature of this study should lead to new
discoveries in wireless networking, optimization, and PHY layer security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical merit
lies the development and optimization of novel integrated transmission precoders
and receivers for various wireless multi-antenna configurations including
cooperative and wiretap channels by focusing on practical input signals from
finite alphabet sources. This investigation emphasizes effective design
integration and joint optimization of these wireless configurations such as
cooperative multi-antennas, multi-user cooperative systems, and packet
retransmission diversity schemes. The project?s novel approach to wireless
system design integration represents a fundamental and practical design paradigm
shift that truly transcends both physical and data link layers to achieve high
spectral efficiency, reliability, and secrecy. Important technical contributions
include investigation of centralized and distributed cooperative transceiver
optimization and relevant open problems under non-Gaussian discrete input
signals and passive eavesdropping, under incomplete or uncertain channel state
information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's broad impacts include new research directions, new tools, and results
that can influence research and development in other science and engineering
fields. The research findings would impact the quality of future wireless
services and broaden their applications in practical environment where quality
of service, spectral efficiency, and confidentiality concerns are paramount.