* 1307161
* U.S.-Poland Project Development: Research on Rare Horseshoe Crabs in a Jurassic (160-145 million years old) Fossil Deposit in Poland
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Rodney Feldmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2015
* USD 27,518.00

The goal of this project is to initiate a U.S.-Polish collaboration between Dr.
Rodney M. Feldmann at Kent State University, Ohio, and Dr. Blazej Blazejowski,
at the Polish Academy of Sciences' Institute of Paleobiology, Warsaw. Together,
they will examine the recent discovery of over 100 specimens of ~160-145 million
year old horseshoe crab fossils from the Kcynia Formation in the Owadów-
Brezizinki quarry located in central Poland. The U.S.-Polish team expects their
exploratory field and laboratory research to shed new light on the evolution and
ecology of horseshoe crabs, (limulines) a group that has had a very long
geological history, but has been poorly represented in the fossil record. With a
few exceptions, abundant deposits of such specimens are extremely rare. Access
to the recently discovered locality in Poland presents an exceptional
opportunity to learn more about ancient horseshoe crab evolution and ecology and
how this might affect modern coastal environments.

At the Owadów-Brezizinki site in Poland, the fossils are preserved as whole
animals. Some specimens are preserved with articulated appendages exposed on
underlying body surfaces. Therefore, the Polish and U.S. researchers expect to
begin to characterize growth patterns, study molt stages, determine gender, and
explore group behavior. Preliminary technical results will probe several areas
of horseshoe paleobiology with the goal of testing whether today's limulines are
truly "living fossils." Horseshoe crabs stand out as one of the most intriguing
and ancient elements of arthropod fauna not only as ancients, but because in the
modern era they have attracted interest of researchers due to their rhythmic
patterns of locomotion, photoreceptors, immune system components, and general
ecological significance and commercial potential.

This developmental U.S.-Polish collaboration will engage a U.S. graduate student
in well tested study techniques and field practices. The team's initial findings
are expected to help explain the factors that led to remarkable preservation and
define the direction for follow-on cooperative research to add to our basic
understanding of the diversity of horseshoe crabs ~160-145 million years ago.
Results will be published in reviewed, international journals and new data
entered into the Paleobiology Database. Altogether, the broader impacts of this
international exploratory, collaborative and educational effort are expected to
advance our fundamental knowledge in paleontology, with potential contributions
to future paleoecological, hydrodynamic, and cuticle research.