* 1307948
* Reconfigurable flat optics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Nanfang Yu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2017
* USD 367,001.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new class of reconfigurable flat
optical components that are able to dynamically mold optical wavefronts into
arbitrary shapes with subwavelength resolution and fast speed. It focuses on the
technologically important mid-infrared spectral range (wavelength 2-30?Ým),
which is uniquely positioned to solve a number of important issues in security,
health, and environment. The approach is to use active medium such as graphene,
which has tunable optical conductivity in the mid-infrared, to shift the
resonance of plasmonic antennas, leading to large and controllable changes to
the amplitude and phase of the scattered light. Flat optical components will be
created by assembling arrays of tunable plasmonic antennas.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research is that it addresses the fundamental problem
of optical modulation: how to obtain considerable and tunable changes to the
amplitude and phase of light, given a certain material perturbation.
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this program lie in education, outreach, and
implication for mid-infrared technology. The program provides unique educational
opportunities in device design, modeling, fabrication and characterization for
students of all levels through lab training and research. The program will also
promote a collaborative effort between scientists and artists in producing
artistic illustrations of scientific discoveries that are more accessible to the
general public. The device prototypes developed in this program will have great
promise for a variety of applications, such as mid-infrared light ranging and
detection, free-space communication, security screening, and biomedical imaging.