* 1307328
* Research in Intermediate Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Dinko Pocanic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 965,000.00

Technical description of the project

This project addresses certain basic aspects of the electroweak and strong
interactions reflected in the properties of mesons and nucleons (particles found
inside atomic nuclei) and their interactions at low energies. The strong and
weak interactions are responsible for the structure of matter at the smallest
known scale, a femtometer (size of the hydrogen atom nucleus) or less. The
research is motivated by the fact that the present comprehensive theory -- the
Standard Model (SM) -- is known to be incomplete.

The rare "pi(e2)" decay of the pi-meson (pion) into an electron and a neutrino,
occurring once in about 10,000 ordinary pion decays, provides a theoretically
extraordinarily clean window to certain possible extensions of the SM, at a very
large mass scale not directly accessible at any existing or planned
accelerators. The PEN experiment, with measurements carried out at the Paul
Scherrer Institute (PSI), Switzerland, by an international collaboration of 7
institutions led by the University of Virginia (UVa) group, aims to improve the
current pi(e2) branching ratio result by about an order of magnitude. The data
analysis is planned to be largely completed during the current 3-year award
period. Plans for a possible follow-up measurement will be evaluated at that
time.

A new project of precise measurement of neutron beta decay parameters has been
initiated at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at the Oak Ridge National Lab,
TN. The first phase, Nab, will focus on a precise measurement of the electron-
neutrino correlation parameter "a" and Fierz interference term, "b." Nab should
contribute (along with improved neutron lifetime measurements) to a final
resolution of a longstanding problem in the determination of the ratio of axial
and vector nucleon form factors, G_A/G_V, and a nuclear model independent
determination of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa u-d quark mixing. Through their
precision, these experiments will explore interesting possible extensions to the
SM. It is planned that during the current 3-year award period, Nab apparatus
will be constructed and initially tested.

As the work on PEN concludes, the group will tranisition to the Muon g-2
experiment (E989) at Fermilab. The UVa group has contributed to the detector
design through Monte Carlo simulations, is leading the Calorimeter Bias Voltage
(CBV) project, and plans to play a significant role in the data analysis. The
CBV system is planned to be completed during the 3-year award period, with
instrument installation to follow.

Broader significance and impact of the project

Common to PEN, Nab and Muon g-2, the three main experiments in this research
project, is the search for signals of new physics, not included in the Standard
Model of particles and fields. Each uses its unique sensitivities to probe a
hitherto unexplored region of fundamental physics, and in doing so contributes
to the overall advancement of understanding of our universe at the most basic
level.

In addition to the basic science impact, there is the impact on education of
young scientists: a number of undergraduate and graduate students have gained,
and will continue to gain state of the art training in research. Seven PhD and
one MS degrees were earned on this project during the past decade at UVa alone;
a dozen or more undergraduate students got extensive hands-on research training,
and have gone on to engaging careers. Several of these students have been
members of underrepresented groups in science (women and minorities).