* 1307254
* Synthetic Mechanism for Semiconductor Nanocrystals and Implications for their Single Particle Photophysics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Todd Krauss, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 414,998.00

Professor Todd D. Krauss of the University of Rochester is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the Division
of Chemistry to understand the fundamental mechanism behind the chemical
synthesis of cadmium selenide (CdSe) quantum dots (QDs) and to characterize the
relationship between QD surface chemistry and photophysical properties using
state-of-the-art spectroscopic and microscopic techniques. It is expected that
the relationship between surface chemistry, surface trapped charge, and
photoluminescence properties for individual CdSe QDs will be
determined.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite over three decades of research, the
fundamental chemical mechanism governing the synthesis of semiconductor QDs
remains unknown. As a result of this research, rational procedures for the
synthesis of QDs may be developed that are fundamentally scalable by several
orders of magnitude to industrial scales, and that take place under much lower
temperatures compatible with current chemical manufacturing. Large-scale
synthesis of semiconductor QDs, especially those with bright and stable
photoluminescence, may find broad use in biology, quantum optics, and
optoelectronics. The proposed research also provides for the education and
training of the next generation of physical chemists, inclusive of women and
underrepresented minorities. Students supported by this project will organize
and direct outreach and educational efforts in the local community through the
Adopt-a-School program with the Rochester city school district, and participate
in select "NanoDays" events at the Rochester Museum and Science Center.