* 1307884
* Properties of Atomic-Scale Flow Defects in Metallic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Michael Atzmon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to explore fundamental
properties of the defects that accommodate flow in metallic glasses below the
glass transition temperature, a necessary step toward fully explaining and
predicting macroscopic deformation behaviors. Plastic deformation of metallic
glasses is accommodated by thermally activated shear of atomic clusters, known
as shear transformation zones (STZs), which are also responsible for
anelasticity. Research results will include details of non-Arrhenian behaviors,
guide future atomistic simulations and provide realistic input into mesoscopic
simulations for practical applications. The effect of structural relaxation
state, i.e., of processing, on STZ properties will be determined. To cover a
wide range of time constants, quasi-static and dynamic anelastic relaxation
measurements will be conducted using bend stress relaxation, nanoindenter
cantilever bending and tensile measurements in a dynamic mechanical analyzer.
Data will be analyzed numerically within the framework of a standard linear
solid model developed by the PI. By exploring the size-density distribution of
potential STZs as a function of processing history, proposed predictions for the
potential role of the free volume, or a different structural variable, will be
tested. Temperature-dependent measurements will provide direct information on
size-resolved activation barriers. Further explorations will address the
collective behavior of STZs and the effect of sub-yield, local, irreversible
atomic displacements on STZ properties. In addition to new scientific knowledge,
the work will provide opportunities for alloy design and will enhance graduate
and undergraduate education. It will help inspire high-school students to pursue
a career in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The
freezing of a molten metal can produce a metallic glass. The strength and
elasticity of metallic glasses make them attractive for applications in medical
and other mechanical devices, as well as sporting goods. However, they exhibit
limited ductility and toughness. Understanding the atomic-scale rearrangements
associated with permanent deformation in these materials is a scientific
challenge, but it is crucial to developing metallic glasses with improved
ductility. In contrast to crystalline materials, in which the position of every
atom is known, atomic positions in glasses are far less well understood. Thus,
the nature of atomic rearrangements is a subject of active research. A recently
developed method of characterizing shear transformation zones (STZs), small
atomic clusters that undergo permanent shear as a result of deformation in a
metallic glass, is used in this research. Analysis of time-dependent shape
recovery reveals distinct signatures of STZs, resolved by the number of atoms
they comprise. Critical experiments will be performed to explain previous
experimental observations. The expected results include realistic input into
simulations of macroscopic behavior, benefitting future development of ductile
alloys. Increased understanding will be sought for the role of slow, reversible,
deformation to benefit both manufacturing and the interpretation of experiments.
The proposed work will promote the education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students, who will learn materials fundamentals, develop abilities
to plan and conduct experiments and modeling and learn to communicate their
results. The PI and graduate students will participate in high-school visits in
under-resourced parts of the state of Michigan.