* 1307846
* Collaborative Research: Direct-Drive Modular Transverse Flux Electric Machine without Using Rare-Earth Permanent Magnet Material
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Iqbal Husain, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2017
* USD 266,135.00

Earth Permanent Magnet Material&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to develop compact, high torque density, energy-efficient,
rare-earth-material-free electric machines for alternative energy and
transportation applications. The approach is to use the concept of transverse
flux paths with the unconventional "ring" winding that allows the increase of
pole numbers without the reduction of ampere-turn per pole. The goals of this
research will be achieved through electromagnetic, structural and thermal
design, analysis and optimization followed by fabrication and testing of a 50kW
prototype electric drive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed transverse flux machine has a modular structure that
uses the flux focusing technique to increase air-gap flux density without having
to use high flux density materials. The modularity of poles allows for easy
assembly and scalability of the machine. The double windings per module or phase
open the door for developing innovative control methodologies. The structure has
high stator core utilization, and high fault tolerance capability, which are
highly desirable features in traction machines and wind generators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt; The research will establish
designs and design methodologies for high torque and power density electric
machines without using expensive rare-earth magnet materials. The practical and
lower cost machines to be designed will promote alternative transportation and
increase the penetration rate of renewable energy harvesting technologies. The
research will establish the US foothold in the area of compact, high-torque
motors facilitating gearless electromechanical systems. The comprehensive
educational plan built with lecture and laboratory modules on alternative energy
and transportation will help train many graduate and undergraduate students.