* 1307020
* Gravitational-Wave Astrophysics: Getting Ready for the Advanced LIGO Era
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Vassiliki Kalogera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 476,263.00

This award supports projects in the area of astrophysical interpretation of
gravitational-wave (GW) signals from binaries with two compact objects, black
holes or neutron stars, through both GW data analysis, GW source modeling and
interpretation. The proposed work focuses on developing a concrete framework for
the processing of GW detections (or event rate upper limits) in order to extract
the maximal available astrophysical information for binaries with compact
objects with any mass and spin configuration. Specifically the following three
main research projects are targeted: (i) parameter estimation for binaries with
two compact objects using advanced applied mathematics methods, including the
advancement of algorithms and computational tools, so that we can measure masses
and spins of black holes and neutron stars and localize their GW emission on the
sky so we can understand their physical origin; (ii) development of a
quantitative framework for using GW event rates to derive constraints on
astrophysical models of compact-object binary formation and evolution; and (iii)
the astrophysical interpretation of multiple GW detections and associated mass
and spin measurements, accounting quantitatively for GW observational biases and
selection effects. Furthermore, the involvement in public outreach activities is
intended to strengthen the connection between astronomy and GW physics, by
focusing on projects that explain the formation of GW sources to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is of interest to the broader community
of compact-object astrophysics in a wide range of contexts: e.g., stellar and
binary system evolution, neutron star and black hole formation, gamma-ray
bursts, stellar dynamics of globular clusters and galactic centers, as in the
coming years LIGO observations can provide uniquely reliable answers to some of
the long-standing questions in astronomy and astrophysics. The computational
tools to be developed will be made available within and outside the LSC, and
hence can benefit other LSC projects and enhance the research infrastructure for
parameter estimation in other scientific and engineering contexts. Outreach
activities take advantage of the existing collaboration with the Adler
Planetarium &amp; Astronomy Museum with hundreds of thousands of visitors per
year; this connection ensures the broad dissemination of research understanding
in the diverse, urban environment of the Chicago metropolitan area. Our group
also has an active history and interest in involving undergraduate students in
research projects and promotes a framework of peer learning in tutoring and
mentoring.