* 1307754
* Modeling and Analysis of Uncertain Cyber-Enabled Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ian Hiskens, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 166,618.00

Power systems will undergo a significant change in their behavioral
characteristics over the next few years as renewable generation begins to make a
meaningful contribution to electricity production. The variability inherent in
large-scale renewable generation will challenge traditional power system
operating practices. The responsiveness required to incorporate large amounts of
renewable generation can, however, be achieved through non-disruptive control of
highly distributed loads. To achieving the desired response from loads that are
highly distributed calls for extensive communications, computation and
coordination. The overriding objective of the project is therefore to develop
practical modeling and analysis techniques that are well suited to the cyber-
enabled nature of responsive power systems, and that are rigorously justified.
Such a modeling paradigm will become essential as power system responsiveness is
enhanced to cater for the variability inherent in large-scale adoption of
renewable generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a modeling framework that
rigorously describes cyber-enabled power systems and provides a platform for
investigating the dynamic behavior of real systems. This will involve the
development of a functional (delay) differential-algebraic model formulation
that incorporates switching and impulsive events. An object-oriented modeling
structure will be used, ensuring that arbitrarily large systems can be
assembled, verified and analyzed. The extension of trajectory sensitivity
concepts to incorporate the modeling of the cyber infrastructure will be of
particular importance. These sensitivities will facilitate the extension of
uncertainty analysis to functional differential-algebraic models, allowing the
development of methods for assessing time-varying
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools and techniques developed in the project
will enable assessment of the resilience and robustness of power systems that
are reliant upon variable generation and highly distributed control strategies.
This will support the large-scale deployment of renewable generation by
providing rigorously justified techniques that meet industry requirements for
evaluating cyber-physical interactions. The mathematical nature of the project
will also provide an opportunity for introducing power systems concepts to
students from diverse backgrounds.