* 1307164
* Rigidity Phenomena in Geometry and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Ralf Spatzier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2017
* USD 295,192.00

The research proposed lies between dynamical systems, group theory and geometry.
Principally, the investigator plans to study dynamical and geometric structures
of "higher rank" systems in these areas. These appear naturally in seemingly
quite separate areas, for example in number theory or in studying the spectrum
of the Laplacian. The investigator will work on rigidity properties of actions
of higher rank abelian and semi-simple Lie groups and their lattices striving to
classify such systems under suitable geometric or dynamical hypotheses. In
particular, he will study higher rank hyperbolic abelian actions and their
cocycles on tori and homogeneous spaces as well as general Cartan actions of
rank 2. These special cases provide tests for more general conjectures. The
investigator will also study actions by semi-simple groups and their lattices
preserving projective, affine and other geometric structures. In addition, the
investigator will analyze Riemannian manifolds (especially those of higher
spherical rank) and more general singular spaces and their geodesic flows.
Geometric, dynamical and group theoretic tools will be used in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems and ergodic theory investigate
the evolution of a physical or mathematical system over time, such as turbulence
in a fluid flow. New ideas and concepts such as chaos and fractals have changed
our understanding of the world. Dynamics and ergodic theory provide excellent
mathematical tools, and have a strong impact on the sciences and engineering.
Symbolic dynamics for instance has been instrumental in developing efficient and
safe codes for computer science. Tools and ideas from smooth dynamics are used
as far afield as cell biology and meteorology. Geometry is a highly developed
and ancient field in mathematics of amazing vigor. It studies curves, surfaces
and their higher dimensional analogues, their shapes, shortest paths, and maps
between such spaces. Differential geometry had its roots in cartography,
starting with Gauss in the nineteenth century. It is closely linked with physics
and other sciences and applied areas such as computer vision. Geometry and
dynamics are closely related. Indeed, important dynamical systems come from
geometry, and vice versa geometry provides tools to study dynamical systems. One
main goal of this project studies when two dynamical systems commute, i.e. when
one system is unaffected by the changes brought on by the other. Important
examples of such systems arise from geometry when the space contains many flat
subspaces. Group theory finally enters both dynamics and geometry by studying
the group of symmetries of a geometry or dynamical situation, or by
investigating the dynamical and geometric behavior of the group of symmetries
acting on a space.