* 1307423
* RUI: Investigate Thermal and Upconversion Noise for  Advanced LIGO and Third Generation Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Steven Penn, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 175,000.00

This research program explores two of the primary noise sources in Advanced LIGO
and other gravitational wave interferometers: upconversion noise and coating
thermal noise. Coating thermal noise can be reduced by understanding and
minimizing the mechanical loss in the mirror materials. Traditional high
reflectivity coatings are multilayers of dielectric material, usually amorphous
metal-oxides, with alternating high and low index. The materials that comprise
the high-index layers are the primary source of mechanical loss; the low-index
material is fused silica, which has an anomalously low loss among amorphous
dielectric materials. In this research program, the PI seeks to develop a
stabilized, high index material with a coefficient of thermal expansion matched
to the low index material, so that the loss of the composite coating can be
reduced through high temperature annealing. In addition, crystalline coatings,
such as Aluminum Gallium Arsenide (AlGaAs), have been shown to have a mechanical
loss about a factor 10 lower than most amorphous dielectric coatings. The AlGaAs
coating could be developed as mirror materials for the 1.5 micron lasers planned
for third generation detectors. However, current samples have been limited to
the centimeter scale. This research program will explore the source of
mechanical loss in these crystalline coatings including any issues related to
the scaling and application of the coatings for large optics. Finally,
upconversion noise is the coupling of low frequency noise, primarily seismic
noise, into the detection band of the interferometer. Upconversion noise can be
difficult to characterize because the noise peak is located at the sum or
difference of the frequencies of the coupled mechanisms. This research program
will develop a data analysis tool that will use bicoherence, the higher order
form of coherence, to determine the sources of the upconverted noise.

Coating thermal noise is the leading noise source in the central frequency band
of Advanced LIGO and is a primary limit to overall detector sensitivity.
Reducing coating thermal noise leads to a direct increase in the detector
sensitivity and a cubed increase in its expected event rate. Thus even a small
reduction in the noise is important. A significant improvement in coating noise
will hasten the day when LIGO will make a direct detection of gravitational
waves and launch the era of gravitational wave astronomy. Beyond the study of
gravitational waves, coating thermal noise has now become an important noise
source in other areas of physics, including precision optics and in precision
experiments that utilize microresonators. Finally, with the lower noise floor of
Advanced LIGO, upconversion is expected to be a much more prominent noise source
than in Initial LIGO. The commissioning teams will welcome a tool that can
identify these noise peaks with their source. And since upconversion is a common
noise problem within the precision physics community, the development of an
effective tool could be useful well beyond the gravitational wave community.