* 1307507
* RUI: Search for Anomalous Spin Interactions with Atomic Comagnetometers
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Derek Kimball, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 299,917.00

Our research program encompasses two different projects. The first project is an
experimental search for a long-range interaction between atomic spins and the
mass of the Earth. Such an interaction could arise due to a heretofore
undiscovered "fifth force" or if gravity, as opposed to being a purely tensor
interaction as assumed in general relativity, has a scalar/pseudoscalar
component. Recent theoretical work has shown that such interactions could be the
cause of the accelerating expansion of the universe, commonly attributed to dark
energy. Our experiment seeks to detect this effect by simultaneously measuring
the spin precession of two isotopes of rubidium using laser spectroscopy. Our
experiment aims to improve experimental sensitivity to long-range spin-mass
interactions by 1-3 orders of magnitude. Our second project focuses on
development of a prototype sensor for the Global Network of Optical
Magnetometers for Exotic physics (GNOME), an array of geographically separated,
time-synchronized ultrasensitive atomic comagnetometers that will search for
correlated transient signals heralding new physics. The GNOME would be sensitive
to nuclear and electron spin couplings to various exotic particles and fields.
To date, no such search has ever been carried out, making the GNOME a novel
experimental window on new physics. A specific, feasible example of new physics
detectable with the GNOME, presently unconstrained by astrophysical observations
and laboratory experiments, is a network of domain walls of light pseudoscalar
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our present understanding of fundamental physics is
confronted by a number of deep mysteries: the origin of the matter-antimatter
asymmetry of the universe, the nature of dark energy, and the nature of dark
matter. Our experiments, conducted in laboratories on Earth, use precise
measurements of atomic spins to test several hypotheses that might explain these
mysteries. It has been proposed that if our present theory of gravity is
incomplete, additional components of gravity could both generate the dark energy
pushing the universe apart and produce an excess of matter over antimatter after
the Big Bang. These additional components of gravity would also cause atomic
spins to precess in the Earth's gravitational field, the effect for which our
experiment will search. A possible explanation of dark matter is a network of
invisible galactic-scale "domain walls" that store considerable mass and energy.
These invisible domain walls would exert a small torque on atomic spins that
could be detected when the Earth passes through a wall. We are building a
prototype sensor sensitive to such torques from domain wall-crossing events. An
array of time-synchronized sensors based on our prototype will search for
transient signals of astrophysical origin heralding such new physics. Our
research is being carried out at a public undergraduate institution with a
diverse student body, providing hands-on experience in state-of-the-art
experimental physics to many undergraduate students (including a significant
number of women and underrepresented minorities).