* 1307775
* Compressive Sensing Based Inference in Distributed Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Pramod Varshney, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 07/31/2016
* USD 324,916.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to develop
efficient algorithms and obtain performance bounds&lt;br/&gt;for decentralized
inference in the reduced dimensional subspace obtained via Compressive
Sens-&lt;br/&gt;ing based measurement schemes in resource-constrained
distributed networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed program is
that it will advance the theory of Compressive&lt;br/&gt;Sensing to resource-
constrained distributed systems with multiple measurement vectors.
While&lt;br/&gt;there is a considerable amount of work in the literature for
Compressive Sensing based signal&lt;br/&gt;processing with a single measurement
vector, its extension to multiple measurement vectors in&lt;br/&gt;resource-
constrained distributed systems is still at its infancy. The transformative
nature of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed research lies in its potential to identify and
solve decentralized inference problems based&lt;br/&gt;on low dimensional
sampling schemes exploiting structured models of the multiple
measurement&lt;br/&gt;vectors collected at distributed
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will have direct impact on advancing the theory and practice, as well
as&lt;br/&gt;on education and training. The broader impacts are: 1) Development
of efficient low dimensional signal processing techniques for decentralized
inference in resource-constrained distributed networks exploiting structured
properties (sparsity as well as models that go beyond the simple sparsity model)
of large data sets. 2) Efficient design approaches for distributed inference
networks with a wide variety of applications including environmental monitoring,
remote sensing, radar networks, cognitive&lt;br/&gt;radio networks and bio-
medical applications with high dimensional data. 3) Development of graduate
level courses on signal processing and inference for large data sets. Mentoring
of graduate student in research methods.