* 1307206
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Forest climate requirements change through species life history
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Kai Zhu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2014
* USD 4,121.00

Global warming is expected to have strongly negative effects on many species.
One way these effects might be reduced is if species can change their
geographical ranges as climate changes; if species can migrate to cooler places
such as higher latitudes or elevations as temperature rises, they may be able to
stay in the same climate by changing place. However, the preliminary research
for this project shows that species of trees in the eastern U.S. have not moved
northward. The project will test two alternative hypotheses to explain this,
both based on whether young and adult trees differ in their ability to tolerate
a wide range of environmental conditions. Researchers will expand a current
species distribution model to include more explicit effects of juvenile and
adult responses to temperature, and use data from a national forest inventory
and climate measurements to compare the abundances of juveniles and
adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anticipating the impacts of climate change on U.S.
forests is an important issue for forest managers and for the nation as a whole.
Results from this project will help plan strategies for maintaining forest
productivity and for substitutions of alternative land uses. The project will
also strengthen collaboration between Duke University and the USDA Forest
Service, and train a Ph.D. student and an undergraduate student.