* 1307354
* SusChem/FRG/GOALI: Mechanochemically Based Sustainable Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This is a collaborative research project involving a partnership between the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Cornell University, and PPG
Industries. It will develop polymers that utilize changes in stress state to
mechanically activate -- without human intervention -- chemical reactions that
signal the presence of damage and initiate repair wherever and whenever it
occurs. The reduction in waste achieved through lifetime extension will
contribute to a sustainable materials landscape. Mechanoresponsive polymers are
created by directly linking force-activated molecules (mechanophores) into
polymer chains. The complex spatial and temporal changes in stress state that
precede damage in polymeric materials promote mechanophore activation,
transforming it into a new chemical species for signaling or for initiating
productive changes in materials properties. Realization of mechanochemically
based sustainable polymers requires mechanophore motifs with amplified responses
that can be activated efficiently. The proposed research entails synthesis of
new mechanophores specifically for damage detection and repair, experimental and
computational development of force-focusing strategies to achieve efficient
force transmission to the mechanophore, and experimental evaluation of materials
systems. Elucidating the fundamental, molecular-level mechanisms governing
mechanophore response to macroscopic damage in polymers will be advanced through
symbiotic combination of modeling and experiments. These scientific advancements
will then be applied to the design and experimental evaluation of polymers that
self-report and self-heal in response to tension overload, fatigue, and
interfacial delamination.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Waste reduction is key to a sustainable materials landscape. Plastics are
ubiquitous industrial materials and their waste reduction is achievable through
life extension and recycling. Given the high energy requirements, financial
cost, and limited yield of plastic recycling, life extension is critically
important to life cycle management. The proposed research program seeks to
develop graded warning and healing systems for industrially relevant plastics.
The technical approach relies on the synthesis of plastics with force sensitive
molecular units called mechanophores that are activated by damage. Advances in
self-reporting plastics will reduce material consumption and waste by
eliminating prescheduled replacements. Self-healing capabilities for plastics
can drastically extend the service lifetime of these materials. This research
project will involve the education and training of several graduate students at
the University of Illinois and Cornell University. These students will be part
of an interdisciplinary research team working in close partnership with PPG
Industries, Inc. to translate scientific advances to commercially viable
plastics. The research themes of self-reporting and self-healing for
sustainability provide a unique opportunity for education and outreach to the
general public. A series of educational demonstrations, exhibits, and videos
will be developed on how materials impact sustainability, with emphasis on zero
waste. These platforms will be widely disseminated over the web and at special
public engagement events.