* 1307743
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Sculpting fluid flow using a programmed sequence of micro-pillars
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Jaroslaw Zola, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 10/31/2014
* USD 59,843.00

CBET 1306866/1307550/1307743&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E:
Sculpting fluid flow using a programmed sequence of micro-
pillars&lt;br/&gt;PI(s) Ganapathysubramanian (Iowa State U.), DiCarlo (UCLA),
Zola (Rutgers)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlling the shape and
location of a fluid stream provides a fundamental tool for creating structured
materials, preparing biological samples, and engineering heat and mass
transport. Methods to manipulate the cross-sectional shape of fluids have
focused on creating chaos and mixing by fluid twisting instead of ordering or
structuring streams with precise sequences of fluid perturbations. The ability
to engineer the cross-sectional shape of a fluid using the integrated inertial
flow deformations induced by sequences of simple microstructures (i.e. pillars)
was recently demonstrated. Discretization of single pillar operations followed
by their programmed superposition allows for the hierarchical assembly of
complex flow programs. Although this approach has allowed for the sculpting of
complex fluid shapes, creating user-defined flow shapes important for practical
applications currently requires laborious and time-consuming trial and error
design iterations, and often complex fluid shapes of interest are not achievable
in a reasonable time frame. The ability to create a user-defined flow shape and
automatically determine a sequence of pillars that yields this shape is a
significant and impactful advance, which is ideally addressed by computational
approaches. This challenge motivates the objectives of the CDS&amp;E project:
(i) Computationally explore and create a library of pillar-induced
transformations annotated at different levels of granularity to aid in
computational selection using parallel CFD simulations. (ii) Develop efficient
computational methods to solve the inverse problem and select pillar sequences
for a set of desired flow transformation. This part of the project will explore
mathematical and computational issues related to uniqueness of solution
sequences, scalable approaches to deal with the large libraries of pillar
transformations, and choice of cost-functionals to enable efficient solution to
the design problem. (iii) Test the computational framework and associated
solutions by fabricating microfluidic designs with the defined pillar sequences
that address three transformative applications in medicine and materials,
including fabricating tailored cross-sectional polymer fibers, and capturing
biomolecules on microchannel surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The introduction of
a general strategy to program fluid streams in which the complexity of the
nonlinear equations of fluid motion are abstracted from the user can impact
biological, chemical and materials automation in the same way that abstraction
of semiconductor physics from computer programmers enabled a revolution in
computation. As part of dissemination efforts, gaming and educational modules
involving immersive simulations and directed rubix-cube like puzzles will be
developed that will allow the public and interested parties to experiment with
different pillar programs and learn about fluid mechanics and applications in a
gaming environment. These outreach and workforce development activities will
emphasize to the community the crucial role of computing in science and
technology. This outreach will synergistically enable crowd-sourced design of
complex flow transformations for applications that have a major impact on cell
diagnostics, nano-materials fabrication, and thermal cooling.