* 1307909
* 22nd RD50 Workshop on Radiation Hard Semiconductor Devices for High Luminosity Colliders, Summer 2013 at University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, NM
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Sally Seidel, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 12/31/2014
* USD 23,000.00

The University of New Mexico will host the 22nd Workshop on Radiation Hard
Semiconductor Devices for High Luminosity Colliders on its campus from June 3 to
5, 2013. This represents the first North American meeting in a series dating
from 2001. Silicon detectors, including strip and pixel devices are ubiquitous
in modern particle physics and nuclear physics experiments. The advent of three-
dimensional devices and multi-layer structures used for local track triggering
afford the prospects of bring tracking information to the earliest stages of
trigger decisions for the data recording of very rare phenomena in a horrendous
background of uninteresting processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the very high
radiation fields in which these devices are located, and the attendant high
readout rates needed to deal with signals both in situ and off detector, an
ongoing strong effort is needed to conduct R&amp;D and discuss results and
challenges across the field on a regular basis. This workshop affords the
scientific community such an opportunity. Sessions will cover Material and
Defect Characterization, Detector Characterization, Full Detector Systems, and
New Structures. A half day mini workshop on radiation damage at LHC experiments
is planned for the afternoon of June 5. An important broader impact of the
workshop is that attendance by junior members of the instrumentation community
is a priority for the meeting. All talks will be plenary, providing excellent
visibility for both experts and younger scientists.