* 1307228
* GOALI: Advanced Silicon Carbide based Novel Hybrid Energy Storage System for Plug-In Electric Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Andre Tits, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 438,418.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to develop a novel hybrid energy
storage system for electric vehicles. The specific objectives are to: (a) reduce
the weight of the energy storage system (composed of high energy-density battery
pack, ultracapacitor pack and a DC/DC converter) to less than the weight of a
high power-density battery pack alone, while increasing the battery lifetime;
(b) implement, develop, and validate this technology on the powertrain of a new
electric car.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit is
in the design, optimization, power management, thermal management, and
validation of the advanced energy storage technology. The underlying foundation
behind the proposed research is to provide a transformative solution to overcome
current limitations of the batteries, achieved by (a) a SiC based novel
converter and (b) a unique decoupled power/energy management strategy to
optimally control the system. The project integrates different disciplines such
as electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, and applied mathematics, thus
fostering multidisciplinary collaborative research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts include the highest
quality integrated education and research to meet the emerging workforce and
educational needs of U.S. energy and transportation industry by educating
talented students. It is the intention of the team to broaden the participation
of female and minority students in this project through close collaboration with
the Maryland LSAMP program. In addition, the team will collaborate with the
Baltimore-Washington Electric Vehicle Initiative to educate a broad range of
high school and college students in mid-Atlantic region in strategic field of
sustainable transportation systems.