* 1307083
* Attosecond Processes and Strong Field Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Kenneth Schafer, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 07/31/2016
* USD 254,994.00

We study the interaction of attosecond pulses, which last for less than one
femtosecond, with matter. In particular, we study the interaction of short
(ultraviolet) wavelength (ultraviolet) attosecond pulses with matter subjected
to a delayed laser pulse with a much longer (near infrared) wavelength. These
near-infrared-extreme untraviolet (nir-xuv) pulse pairs are automatically
available when attosecond radiation is made by the strong &amp;#64257;eld
process of high harmonic generation. These two-color pulse pairs have a wide
variety of uses, from attosecond metrology to the control of strong
&amp;#64257;eld processes such as multiphoton ionization. The short duration of
the pulses and the strength of the applied &amp;#64257;elds dictate that
accurate calculations require a nonperturbative solution of the laser-matter
interaction, which we achieve by direct integration of the time-dependent
Schrodinger equation. The work is directly relevant to ongoing collaborations
between the principle investigator and experimental groups at the forefront of
strong &amp;#64257;eld physics and attosecond
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attosecond light allows us to study and manipulate
atomic, molecular and biological processes at sub-femtosecond time scales,
yielding new ways to understand and control matter via its interaction with
light. The basic research on attosecond physics supported by this project will
broaden the U.S. knowledge base on attosecond science. The research will result
in the training of graduate students and postdoctoral research associates in the
interdisciplinary &amp;#64257;eld of atomic, molecular and optical science. They
will gain a broad education in both atomic physics and high intensity laser
science, and a thorough understanding of both the theoretical and experimental
issues involved. They will also receive training in advanced numerical
simulations, with applications to a wide variety of problems in government and
industry. The research topics supported by the grant will be incorporated into
the PI's teaching of time-dependent quantum dynamics at both the undergraduate
and graduate levels.