* 1307188
* Relativistic Heavy Ion Collision Studies at the LHC and RHIC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Thomas Humanic, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,260,000.00

This award is primarily to carry out experiments with relativistic heavy ion
collisions. The principal investigators are T. J. Humanic and M. A. Lisa, of the
Department of Physics at The Ohio State University. Our goals for the high-
energy program are threefold. Firstly, we will study the space-time properties
of the extremely dense matter created at in collisions between heavy nuclei at
the highest achievable energies. It is believed that this matter is a quark-
gluon plasma (QGP), characterized by colored degrees of freedom at the
microscopic scale. The second activity is to study the bulk phase structure of
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), believed to be the correct theory of the Strong
interaction between partons. This will be achieved by varying the conditions of
the collision to lower energies, to probe the transition(s) between confined and
deconfined matter. In particular, we plan to perform a novel analysis as a
function of the collision energy, measuring coordinate-space anisotropies and
dynamics. Thirdly, we will take the tools developed to study bulk physics in
heavy ion collisions, and apply them to hadronic(p+p) collisions at similar
energies. We will look particularly for collective behaviour(flow) in hadronic
collisions. If our initial reports of such flow in ultrarelativistic p+p
collisions are confirmed at higher energies, this raises important issues about
the nature of flow, and the nature of the initial self-interacting state,
itself. In the present grant ultrarelativistic heavy ion collisions will be
studied with Au-Au collisions at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), and with Pb-Pb collisions at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva. RHIC started delivering Au-Au
collisions in Summer 2000, and the LHC, which is the highest energy heavy ion
accelerator now in operation, began delivering Pb-Pb collisions at the end of
2010. In order to look for signatures that a phase transition to Quark Matter
has taken place, one must study the properties of the particles produced in the
collisions, such as particle momenta and multiplicities of each type that can be
detected (e.g. pions, kaons, protons, and more exotic particles). This will be
done at both RHIC and the LHC using the large acceptance detectors available in
the STAR and ALICE experiments, respectively, which can sample most of the
interesting particles per collision. The information obtained in this way can be
used to determine, for example, the physical size of the interaction region
(using two-particle interferometry), the temperatures reached in the collisions
(from particle momentum distributions) and exotic particle production such as
strange baryons.

Besides the intellectual merit described above, there are broader impacts to
society of this proposal in the areas of education, technology and computing.
Since undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
will play key roles in this project, training will be provided to these groups
in how to carry out research in large collaborations and in general problem
solving skills. Since this research requires large-scale computing in order to
acquire and analyze data on the teraflop and terabyte scale, new methods in
information science, such as computing grid systems, will be developed, which
can enhance the computing power of society as a whole.