* 1307021
* Plasmon-Enhanced Chiroptical Biosensors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Vincent Rotello, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Professor Vincent Rotello and his group at University of Massachusetts are
supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program and the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Nano-Biosensing program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport System (CBET) for an International
Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) grant to work with the groups of Graeme Cooke
and Malcolm Kadodwala (University of Glasgow, UK) to create new biosensors based
on plasmon-enhanced chiroptical sensing. This technique is highly sensitive and
provides structural information of adsorbed analyte proteins. The team will
apply this information-rich transduction technique to array-based sensing to
develop highly responsive sensors capable of detecting minute changes in serum
protein levels in a rapid and reproducible fashion. The proposed research
program features both fundamental and applied research goals. Fundamentally, the
researchers will to be explore nanoscale chiroptical behavior, developing new
insights into the interactions of plasmonic fields with chiral systems. On the
applied side, teh UMass and UGlasgow researchers will be tuning and optimizing
synthetic systems, self-assembly, and nanopatterning to create more efficient
sensor systems that employ the information-rich output of the chiroptical
sensors to provide rapid and effective biosensing. This project will also
provide excellent training for students: exchange programs between the groups
will advance the research, draw together the complementary strands of the
program, and transfer expertise between labs. Further efforts to extend the
proposed research to minority participants will be made through the Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation at UMass and the SURE REU program. The
United Kingdom groups are supported by UK Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council (EPSRC).

Different proteins interact differently with polarized light. The signature that
is generated by these interactions provides both insight into protein structure
and allows the protein to be identified. This technique is known as circular
dichroism (CD), and is typically performed using large amounts of protein. In
this proposed research the researchers will use nanopatterned materials to
provide highly efficient application of CD to minute quantities of protein. The
resulting technology will be applied to protein sensing, providing a potential
tool for creating diagnostic devices for detecting disease through changes in
protein level.