* 1307233
* Double Penning Trap Mass Spectrometer for Direct Gamma-Ray Standard Calibrations, Determination of Fundamental Constants, and Tests of Special Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Matthew Redshaw, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 120,000.00

Einstein's famous relation E=mc^2 expresses the equivalence of mass and energy
and is one of the most well-known formulae in physics. It is a consequence of
the theory of special relativity. A direct test of E=mc^2 can be performed by
comparing the mass difference between two nuclear states to the energy that is
released when a transition between those two states occurs. In this research we
will measure the mass difference between two isotopes of chlorine, 35Cl and
36Cl, and compare it to the result of precise gamma ray spectroscopy
measurements of the energy released after 35Cl captures a neutron. The atomic
masses of 35Cl and 36Cl will be determined using Penning trap mass spectrometry,
in which the mass of an ion is measured via the frequency of its motions in a
combined magnetic and electric field. At Central Michigan University (CMU) a
novel double Penning trap will be constructed and housed inside a 12 tesla
superconducting magnet. This apparatus will be used to perform measurements on
pairs of ions stored in two identical traps, which will enable the effect of
magnetic field variations to be reduced. A comparison of the 35Cl and 36Cl mass
difference with the gamma-ray spectroscopy energy measurement will also enable a
calibration of gamma-ray energy standards used by detectors in nuclear physics
applications in terms of atomic masses. In addition, it can be used to provide a
precise determination of two important fundamental constants of nature: the
Molar Planck constant and the fine structure constant, and could impact
experimental data required for a possible redefinition of the
kilogram.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program under development at CMU
will provide training of Masters and undergraduate students who will gain
research experience in modern experimental atomic and nuclear physics
techniques, creating an avenue for them to go on to pursue a Ph.D. or enter
positions in the technical workforce. The CMU Penning trap will use ions
produced by an external ion source and injected into the trap. This will enable
many additional precision mass measurements to be performed on a wide range of
isotopes, such as those with very low natural abundances, and long-lived
radioactive isotopes and isomers, with applications in atomic, nuclear and
neutrino physics. The techniques being developed could impact other high
sensitivity mass spectrometry applications such as the single-ion Penning trap
for rare-isotopes under development at nearby Michigan State University, and
mass spectrometers used in national security applications for trace chemical
detection.