* 1307545
* RUI: Dense Matter and Gravitational Waves: The Coalescence of Neutron Star Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Jocelyn Read, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2018
* USD 126,000.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) is on the brink
of making the first direct detections of gravitational waves. With the improved
sensitivity of Advanced LIGO, we expect to enter an era of astronomy in which
frequent gravitational-wave measurements are used to learn about astrophysical
sources. The inspiral and merger of binary neutron stars is a likely source for
many gravitational-wave observations, and waveform models for the inspiral of
such systems can be used to detect the signals using matched filtering. However,
additional physics near merger is not captured by detection templates. As the
stars coalesce, the gravitational waveforms will depend additionally on the
properties of matter in the core of the stars. The relevant behavior is encoded
in the equation of state of dense matter. Its effects on gravitational waveforms
have not yet been fully modeled; while ever-improving analytic models in the
inspiral and numerical simulations of the merger each contribute information, a
complete picture remains elusive. This award supports a program of research by
the PI and her students at California State University Fullerton (CSUF) to
understand the effects of neutron-star matter on inspiral and merger, both by
constructing hybrid (analytical-numerical) waveforms with explicit error
estimates and by developing phenomenological waveforms which incorporate tidal
resonance effects. The results will be incorporated into the public LIGO
Algorithm Library for use in realistic search and parameter-estimation studies
with the full data analysis infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is essential to maximize the astrophysical return on NSF's investment
in LIGO. Improved understanding of measurement potential will inform
configuration decisions as Advanced LIGO develops. Gravitational-wave
measurements of neutron-star matter effects will potentially shine new light on
the equation of state of matter above nuclear density, which is currently
uncertain and a key research topic in both nuclear physics and astrophysics.
This proposal also supports active involvement by undergraduate and masters
students in the Physics program at CSUF, a primarily undergraduate Hispanic-
serving institution with strong integration of teaching and research. Including
students in cutting-edge research introduces them to the gravitational-wave
science community, kindles future participation in science, and develops broadly
applicable skills. The PI is actively involved in LIGO outreach, and will engage
students, the University, and the surrounding community in the excitement of
this new field of astronomy.