* 1307698
* Solid-State Oxides and Oxide-Fluorides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kenneth Poeppelmeier, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging technologies require high-
performance nonlinear optical (NLO) materials that exhibit enhanced optical
properties at the microscopic and macroscopic level. The rational design of
crystal structures, in particular noncentrosymmetric (NCS) materials, and how to
target polar, polar-chiral, and chiral structures, is an ongoing theme in
crystal engineering. A new class of potentially high performance NLO inorganic
materials, solid-state oxide-fluorides, has been identified with the synthesis
of new compounds containing [MOxF6-x]2- units in inorganic, solid-state
environments. In the process it has been discovered that i) the use of fluoride
ligands with early-transition metals (ETMs) enhances the second-order Jahn-
Teller distortion in comparison to pure oxide ETM compounds, ii) the synthesis
of NCS materials can be achieved with the use of polar basic-building units
(BBUs), iii) design of NCS BBUs can predictably lead to NCS structures, iv) the
synthesis of compounds that contain two, separate anionic BBUs is likely to
result in an NCS compound, and v) the synthesis of ETM oxide-fluoride compounds
can produce energy-storage materials such as high-potential primary batteries.
Drawing from these learned principles, a program of discovery-based research on
NCS structures based on acentric ETM oxide-fluorides (ETMOFs) is planned. These
materials comprise a large and new class of solids with properties associated
with piezoelectricity, pyroelectricity, ferroelectricity and second harmonic
generation (SHG). The structural-property relationships that give rise to high,
low, or null nonlinearities of the NLO material are examined. Finally, the
growth of large crystals (on the order of 1 cm3) allows detailed analysis with
measurements of the NLO tensor and phase-matchability properties, and other
properties of interest such as piezoelectricity. The materials synthesized will
have potential use in relaxor ferroelectrics and non-linear optics. These
materials will have a high damage threshold and the potential for bulk growth to
create large, single crystals suitable for optical use and examination. This
work is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;As recently
described in a Nature News Feature, the highly-efficient non-linear optical
(NLO) oxide-fluoride material KBe2BO3F4 and other NLO materials are essential to
act as wave guides for the modification of the amplitude, phase, and/or
frequency of an optical signal. Such materials are used in femtosecond laser
spectroscopy and-more recently-to generate UV laser light for nanolithography.
Such NLO materials are increasingly needed to upconvert laser light to higher
energies by second-harmonic generation (SHG). Current research and engineering
activities in the field of NLO materials typically concern synthesis of NLO
crystals; however, research is lacking in understanding how to design NLO
materials and why materials exhibit a particular NLO response. While exploring
the fundamental driving factors that create NLO materials, research will be
performed to grow large (on the order of cm3) single crystals with a floating
zone image furnace to allow a quantitative understanding of the interaction of
light with the NLO material. This project concerns such analyses and progress
made towards rational synthesis of solid-state inorganic materials and analysis
of their structure-property relationships. These analyses of basic principles of
the chemistry by graduate students and postdoctoral associates - who are engaged
in local education, teaching, mentoring, and leadership - will facilitate broad
understanding of stable solid-state compounds.