* 1307797
* Random matrixes: Eigenvalues distributions and Universality
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Van Vu, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2016
* USD 345,000.00

One of the main goals of the theory of random matrices is to study distributions
concerning the eigenvalues. In recent years, we have witnessed notable
progresses on central problems in this area. The PI has been fortunate to
participate in some these developments and he would like to propose to continue
his research on these topics. In this proposal, he is going to discuss the
current state of some of these problems, and propose to study several research
problems that would lead to a more complete and deeper understanding of the
subject, especially problems related to the universality phenomenon. Beside
studying traditional questions on limiting distributions, we will also discuss
non-asymptotic aspects of the theory, e.g. problems concerning large deviations.
Many of these problems are important in applications in other fields, such as
theoretical computer science and data mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of
random matrices is a rich topic in mathematics. Beside being interesting on
their own right, random matrices play fundamental role in various areas such as
statistics, mathematical physics, combinatorics, theoretical computer science,
etc. A famous example here is the study of physicist Wigner, who used the
spectrum of random matrices as a model in nuclear physics, and consequently
discovered the fundamental semi-circle law. The main project in this proposal is
to study limiting distribution the spectrum of random matrices, at the finest
scale, motivated by long standing problems from mathematical physics and
probability. We also believe that the methods being developed in the project
will be useful for other purposes, such as the study of large (random) networks
and large data from random samples.