* 1307444
* Random Matrices and Disordered Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Horng-Tzer Yau, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

In the recent work, the universality conjecture for the local spectral
statistics was solved for both Winger ensembles and beta ensembles. The goal of
this proposal is to extend this understanding to large classes of random
matrices. The objective is to understand the grand vision of Wigner, which
asserts that local spectral statistics of large correlated quantum systems are
universal. Specifically, the following projects are proposed: &lt;br/&gt;1. The
spectral properties of Wigner matrices with random potentials. These are toy
models for &lt;br/&gt;random Schrodinger operators on lattice. &lt;br/&gt;2. The
statistics of both eigenvalues and eigenvectors in band and sparse matrices. In
addition to these two projects, local statistics at the level of individual
eigenvalues will also be studied. More specifically, the intention is to look
into the following problems: &lt;br/&gt;3. The single gap universality, i.e.,
identify the probability distribution of a single gap in random matrices.
&lt;br/&gt;4. The universality of local statistics at a fixed energy.
&lt;br/&gt;5. Identify the Gaussian fluctuations of a single eigenvalue in
Wigner matrices, i.e., extending Gustavsson's result for GUE to all Wigner
matrices. &lt;br/&gt;6. Establish the edge universality via Dyson's Brownian
motion. &lt;br/&gt;These problems will be approached using the Helffer and
Sjostrand representation of correlation functions and the parabolic regularity
in the work of Caffarelli, Chan and Vasseur.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eugene Wigner's grand vision asserts that local
spectral statistics of large correlated quantum systems are universal. In our
recent work, we solved the universality conjecture for the local spectral
statistics for both Wigner ensembles and beta ensembles. The goal of this
proposal is to extend these findings to large classes of random matrices and
expand our understanding of Wigner's vision.