* 1307453
* Lattice Effective Field Theory for Radiative Capture Reactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Gautam Rupak, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2016
* USD 219,393.00

The study of nuclear interactions and properties from the underlying theory of
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) represents a central goal in nuclear physics
research. At low energies, however, QCD becomes non-linear and strongly
interacting, eluding first-principle pencil-and-paper calculations of nuclear
properties. An important aspect of nuclear physics at low energy is the physics
associated with weakly bound systems. Some properties of such systems are
universally shared across atomic, nuclear and particle physics. The effective
field theory (EFT) formulation allows for systematic calculations of nuclear
properties that are deeply rooted in QCD. EFT allows reliable error estimates in
calculations that are otherwise difficult to estimate in phenomenological
approaches. In the supported research work, EFT for few-body systems involving
electromagnetic radiation would be constructed. Key reactions involving light
nuclei that are relevant in Big Bang Nucleosynthesis and stellar burning would
be studied. Some of these reactions play an important role in interpreting
experimental results probing physics beyond the Standard Model of particle
physics. The proposed work would also introduce new model-independent tools with
reliable error estimates to study halo nuclei. These nuclei are described as a
tightly bound core with usually one or two valence neutrons forming a halo. This
research ties in with planned major U.S. investment in rare isotope beam
experiments.

Broader impacts of the research include training of physics graduate students in
numerical and analytical work for an academic or industry career benefiting
society. Results from this research work would be incorporated in a graduate
course. Atomic physics research would also be affected by this study of weakly
bound few-body systems due to the universality described above. Atomic systems
with large scattering lengths form an active field of theoretical and
experimental research.