* 1307811
* Collaborative Research- NSF-CDMR: Informatics Guided Data Driven Computational Design of Multifunctional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Krishna Rajan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2016
* USD 182,500.00

Technical Abstract

This project will establish a new approach for materials simulation and modeling
that links informatics methods to Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations.
The discovery of new chemistries of perovskites that possess high Curie
transition temperatures are the template for this study; although the
computational methodology that is being developed is generic to any class of
materials problems. The approach exploits and develops statistical learning and
graph theoretic methodologies to discover patterns of behavior among known
materials that can be used to generate design rules for identifying structure-
property relationships in new compounds; and will serve to guide and target DFT
calculations to specific chemistries with the desired properties. Specifically,
the project is developing a rule-based design approach, based on informatics, to
identify new chemistries of high temperature piezoelectric perovskites by
exploring vast chemical space, so large, that it would otherwise have been
prohibitive to study by solely experimental and/or computational methods. The
intellectual impact of this work will be to transform the traditional use of
computational materials science from one of building large data repositories
where informatics is primarily used as a search engine for compounds, to one
where data science methods are used as a learning engine to uncover new physics
and suggest new directions for conducting detailed computations on promising
chemistries that would otherwise remain unidentified. The broader impacts of
this work is to build a data science cyberinfrastructure (CI) that is called a
"Materials Data Foundry" that will include models, materials metadata, and
simulation capabilities that will be broadly accessible through a secure cyber
infrastructure platform. The project will also involve the multi-institutional,
multi-disciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students, outreach to
high-school students and teachers, and inclusion of underrepresented groups in
both education and outreach efforts.

Non-Technical Abstract

The field of atomistic scale materials modeling makes use of sophisticated
theories based on quantum mechanics, called Density Functional Theory or DFT for
short, that are implemented in computationally efficient software that are,
nonetheless, computationally intensive. This project makes use of a new and
emerging methodology called Materials Informatics that is able to detect and
extract structure-property correlations by exploring the statistical nature of
data without necessarily utilizing pre-existing theoretical formulas. In this
project materials informatics is used to identify new materials with optimum
properties for high-temperature electronic devices without having to carry out
calculations for every possible material structure and composition. The tools
developed will be made broadly available through a cyberinfrastructure platform,
we term a "Materials Data Foundry". This web portal will also facilitate joint
online courses between Iowa State University (ISU) and the University of Florida
(UF), where the students use the tools developed in the project to analyze real
data and problems. At UF, outreach will be focused on high school students
through the UF Student Science Training Program while at ISU we will leverage
the Iowa EPSCoR program to have access to a national network of community and
Tribal Colleges. Our plan is use the educational capabilities of the Materials
Data Foundry to connect with teachers who in turn will reach hundreds of
students over the course of this project.