* 1307674
* Connecting Short Range Order to Macroscopic Properties in Complex Structured Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,06/30/2019
* Robert Twieg, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2019
* USD 969,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Small, elongated organic molecules are the
archetypal materials behind today's $100 billion/yr liquid crystal display
industry. When the shape of these molecules is made less symmetrical - e.g., by
introducing a kink in their central core or a branching of an otherwise linear
structure - they often spontaneously form nanometer size domains that are more
ordered than the overall, macroscopic material, which still exhibits an
essentially fluid-like behavior. This interesting dichotomy across length scales
can be exploited to produce novel, easily processible structured fluids with
potential for new technologies much broader than electro-optical displays -
technologies ranging from unique soft actuators to personal-scale green power
generation. This project will enhance existing, and develop and demonstrate new,
experimental and analytical tools and procedures to connect short-range order in
low symmetry molecular systems to larger scale properties of potentially
significant technological impact. It will also aim to synthesize and
characterize a completely new class of reduced-symmetry complex fluids based on
combining the exquisite length tunability of DNA duplexes with the bent-shaped
molecular structures that have revitalized research in the liquid crystal field
in recent years. Undergraduate and graduate students will be mentored through a
rare 'trifecta' of cross-disciplinary exposure (physics, chemical physics, and
chemistry), regular opportunities for participation in international research
collaboration, and a balance of cutting-edge small and large (national) scale
laboratory experience. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP)
and Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) Programs will pursue materials'
synthesis and experimental studies of orientationally-ordered fluids composed of
complex-shaped molecular constituents, ranging from reduced-symmetry liquid
crystal monomers and dimers to lyotropic solutions in which tunable-length DNA
duplexes are combined with a bent-shaped aromatic core structure in a novel
approach to produce a reduced-symmetry nematic fluid. The project will test the
generality of the concept that reducing the symmetry of particles significantly
enhances the nature and degree of nanoscale ordering among them (effecting,
e.g., a biaxial, polar, or chiral nanostructure), while the overall system
maintains higher (fluid-like) symmetry at the macroscopic scale. The response of
these materials to external fields (electro-optical and electro-mechanical
responses in particular) will be assessed for potential technological
applications. The investigation will employ a variety of techniques aimed at: i)
detailing the nanostructure, using synchrotron X-ray facilities (including NSLS-
II) and direct imaging via cryo-TEM methods, and ii) connecting short-range
structure to macroscopic properties, utilizing sensitive optical probes and
external electric and magnetic fields. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be mentored through a combination of cross-disciplinary exposure (physics,
chemical physics, and chemistry), a balance of cutting-edge small and large
(national) scale laboratory experience, and regular opportunities for
participation in international research collaboration.