* 1307625
* Collaborative Research: Computationally Efficient Solvers for Power System Simulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Shuwang Li, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 130,000.00

Collaborative Research: Computationally Efficient Solvers for Power System
Simulation

Mariesa Crow, Electrical Engineering, Missouri University of Science &
Technology Maggie Cheng, Computer Science, Missouri University of Science &
Technology Shuwang Li, Applied Mathematics, Illinois Institute of Technology

Abstract: Several recent advances in computational methods in a variety of
fields have brought the goal of real-time dynamic simulation within reach.
Unfortunately, many power system analysis tools do not use algorithms that
implement state-of-the-art solution techniques due to the time lag of results
percolating from one field to another. Therefore, there is a need to bring
together the best of the mathematicians, computer scientists, and power
engineers to solve realistic problems. In this project, computationally
efficient solution methods will be synergistically developed and applied to the
problem of achieving real-time power system simulation. Specifically, recent
advances in computational science and theoretical computer science will be
extended to the problem of electric power networks. Intellectual Merit: Real-
time simulation has long been considered to be a grand challenge in electric
power engineering. A realistically sized electric power network problem can
generate hundreds of dynamic state variables and 50,000+ algebraic states. The
computational complexity of some power system simulations has kept time domain
simulation from being used in on-line decision making. If simulations could run
in real-time, then power system operators would have situational awareness and
could implement on-line control to avoid cascading failures. This tool will
assist the operator with proactive measures to limit the extent of the incident,
and can significantly improve power system reliability. This project will
exploit the expertise and advances in areas of linear solvers from a variety of
physical fields and will adapt them for use in power system simulation.

Broader Impact: This project will provide an opportunity for educating a diverse
STEM workforce in electric power systems, computer algorithms and applied
mathematics. The PIs, the graduate students, and the post-doctoral fellow will
enter into a close mentoring relationship that will include one-on-one
instruction not only in computational methods, but also ethical research
practices, communication skills, and international awareness. The results of
this research will be incorporated into multiple graduate classes: Computational
Methods for Power Systems andApproximation Algorithms. The PIs will also develop
undergraduate course material and pre-college hands-on projects.