* 1307289
* Studying Cosmic-Ray Acceleration and Propagation, Gas Content and Interstellar Radiation Fields in our Galaxy with the HAWC Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Petra Huentemeyer, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 470,250.00

Cosmic rays are produced and accelerated in the most violent environments of our
Universe and can have energies that are orders of magnitude larger than the
energies produced by the Earth's most powerful accelerators. Teraelectronvolt
(TeV) gamma rays can be used to probe the possible sources of cosmic ray
acceleration since they are produced in the interactions of cosmic rays with
matter and radiation fields, and as neutral particles they can be traced back to
their origin. The sensitivity and angular resolution of Imaging Atmospheric
Cherenkov Telescopes make these devices particularly well suited for point
source and morphological studies, while the wide field of view and large duty
cycle of extensive air shower arrays are advantageous for detecting diffuse
gamma radiation from large areas in the sky. The High-Altitude Water Cherenkov
(HAWC) observatory is currently being constructed at the Sierra Negra Plateau,
Mexico, and is expected to have a point source sensitivity that is improved by a
factor of 10 to 15 over that of previous extensive air shower instruments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Michigan Technological University group will play a
leading role in the collection and analysis of the scientific data of the
experiment. Their research focus will be on the study of diffuse and extended
very high-energy emission at large scales, which is now possible with
unprecedented sensitivity due to the improved performance of HAWC. The group is
also responsible for detector calibration and will therefore play a critical
role in the HAWC construction and operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The participating students and post-doctoral scientist will receive
scientific and educational training in the analysis of large data sets as well
as the operation of a complex instrument within the context of a large
international collaboration. The outreach component of this project is designed
to generate greater community interest in physics through the installation of
detector components in a local mine that is open to guided tours. This will
expose teachers to modern experimental physics at the very-high energy frontier.
The results of the outreach component of the proposed project will be
disseminated by publications and conferences presentations.