* 1307064
* Structured Rigid Rod Framework Gels from Clickable Synthetic Polypeptides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Paula Hammond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical polymer networks, in
particular hydrated and solvated crosslinked gels, are typically derived from
random covalently crosslinked polymer backbones. Most systematic studies of such
systems involve the generation of structures with an effective mesh size that is
molecular in nature in a traditional chemically crosslinked system, and defined
by random crosslink chemistry. This project involves the construction of highly
controlled polymeric networks consisting of rigid rod alpha-helical polypeptides
functionalized with short functional groups or oligomeric groups that impart
solubility, charge, chelating or ligand groups, and responsive behavior to the
network system with modular levels of control. The systems, which utilize a
versatile click chemistry for functionalization, can be designed with random
crosslinks that link the helical rod-like polypeptide chains to the network, or
alternatively, the rods can be linked together at their endgroups through multi-
arm linkers to provide highly defined network structures whose mesh size is
determined by the extended chain length of the polymer, and mechanical
properties influenced by the rigidity of the backbone. Unlike the networks
formed from traditional random coil polymers, the high persistence length and
rod-like rigidity of the helical structure can provide an open mesh structure.
By appending different functional groups to the backbone, it should be possible
to create unique gel structures that can present solvated, reactive or chelating
groups within the interior of the mesh structures and exhibit controlled
mechanical properties. The intellectual merit of this work involves the
implementation of fundamental chemistry and physics to explore the control of
these novel gel/network architectures with the freedom to modify side groups to
manipulate other gel properties, and manipulation of architecture and structure
to gain isolation of function and key architectural aspects of the gel system
such as mesh size and water hydration. The specific aims of this project are to:
1) develop and extend the synthetic approaches to clickable synthetic
polypeptides; 2) investigate new polypeptide conformationally controlled
structured framework hydrogels; 3) investigate responsive mesh framework gel
systems for which the full responsive behavior is due to the changes in
conformation of oligomeric side chains within the rigid framework and 4)
demonstrate the incorporation of unique functionality to achieve novel
properties for applications such as ion selective membranes or electrolytes and
three dimensional matrices for biomaterials with unique decoupled mechanical,
transport, and ligand properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New types of polymeric networks will be generated
using chemical synthetic methods to create polymer hydrogels in which relatively
rigid segments that mimic the behavior of some natural biomolecules are used to
strengthen gels while maintaining open mesh structures for molecular transport.
The gels will be functionalized with a range of responsive chemical groups,
enabling unique properties such as selective transport of ions, sequestration of
specific molecules, reactivity, and temperature or pH responsive gating
behavior. By exploring this new concept in the generation of molecular rigid rod
gel systems, opportunities exist for development of new biomimetic hydrogels for
tissue regeneration, drug releasing systems, water separation membranes, and
solid state electrolytes for solar, battery and other electrochemical energy and
storage applications. Mentoring and outreach to high school age students as well
as future faculty development activities will also be a key part of the proposed
program, including participation of the PI in outreach programs that engage high
school students and undergraduate students. The PI is also a co-Investigator in
the NSF funded Open Chemistry Collaborative in Diversity Equity (OXIDE) and
National Diversity Equity Workshop (NDEW) for addressing diversity
representation in the chemical science faculties, as well as the Future Faculty
Workshop for Materials Chemistry.