* 1307632
* Generalized Steady-State Ab Initio Laser Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Alfred Stone, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2017
* USD 315,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education to advance the theoretical description and design of novel laser
systems with complex media and multiple scattering playing a central role.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many novel modern laser systems involve complex resonator
geometries such micro-cavities, photonic crystals and even random lasers based
on disordered scattering media with gain. These lasers have a wide range of
potential applications and are challenging to simulate and understand using
conventional methods. The PI has developed a method, known as steady-state ab
initio laser theory, that provides a tractable way to simulate and design as
well as new physical insights into their behavior. The method agrees with full
time-dependent numerical solutions of the laser equations with much less
computational effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will generalize his steady-
state ab initio laser theory with an aim to develop a unified framework for
describing many different laser systems. The PI will extend the theory to
describe multi-transition lasers and semiconductor gain media, including the
effects of gain diffusion, and injection-locking of lasers. New types of lasing
modes are found when certain lasers are non-uniformly pumped in space; this
behavior is related to the appearance of exceptional points in the relevant wave
equations, where two solutions merge. These phenomena will be extensively
studied to elucidate their implications. A first principles theory of quantum
effects in lasers will be obtained by combining the steady-state ab initio laser
theory, which provides the classical scattering matrix of the laser, with input-
output theory, which describes the scattered quantum operators. Quantum
fluctuations determine the laser linewidth and photon statistics, which can be
predicted with no free or phenomenological parameters with the PI's approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI intends the extended theory to become a
computational tool for the design of applied laser systems for technological
purposes such as communications, quantum information processing, spectrometry,
projectors, optical coherence tomography and imaging. The extension of the
approach to semiconductor gain media will lead to improvements in the modeling
of quantum cascade and conventional semiconductor lasers. An open source
computational tool for laser design using the approach pioneered by the PI is
being developed and will be made available to researchers in academia and
industry in the course of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education focused on improving the capability to understand and design novel
laser systems, which are fundamental tools in research across the sciences, and
a basic technology underlying the modern economy. Lasers are non-linear systems
and also involve complex patterns of wave propagation within and outside the
laser, hence the theory of these devices is quite challenging. New materials and
materials systems play an important role in shaping potential laser
technologies. This award supports the development of theory and related
computational algorithms to enhance to enable quantitative solutions to the
equations describing novel laser systems under current development, hence
allowing better and more efficient designs for these systems. Important
potential applications for the research are in the areas of communications,
quantum information processing, spectrometry, biological sensing, projectors,
optical coherence tomography and imaging. A spin-off from the theory is the
concept of the "anti-laser," a novel device for selectively absorbing light with
only very specific properties. An open source computational tool for laser
design using the approach pioneered by the PI is being developed and will be
made available to researchers in academia and industry in the course of this
project.