* 1307979
* Surface Nanopatterning by Ion Bombardment
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Karl Ludwig, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2017
* USD 338,296.00

Technical Description: Ion-based processes play a vital role in a wide range of
thin-film growth, surface etching and surface modification processes. A major
impediment to developing a robust understanding of surface evolution during ion
bombardment has been the difficulty of quantitatively examining the kinetics of
nanoscale morphology evolution. This project meets the challenge using a unique
facility for in-situ x-ray surface studies developed at the National Synchrotron
Light Source. In-situ grazing-incidence small-angle x-ray scattering (GISAXS)
studies measure the wavenumber-dependent linear response governing the
fundamental stability/instability of a surface to ion bombardment. The project
pursues an integrated approach to resolve outstanding problems of ion-surface
interaction along three directions. First, systematic studies of native
semiconductor surface stability/instability to ion bombardment are carried out
to test existing theory and provide insights for its further development. Stress
development and its relationship to surface morphology evolution is an issue of
particular focus. Second, nonlinear surface evolution and dynamics of the final
steady-state surface morphology is examined using conventional real-time x-ray
scattering and x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy, respectively. The latter
technique uses a small x-ray beam, partially coherent across its width, to go
beyond traditional kinetics studies. Finally, the effects of seeding are
systematically examined to resolve the relative importance of stress and phase
separation in driving nanostructure development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: A fundamental understanding of surface evolution during
ion bombardment is an "enabling focus" because hyperthermal bombardment is so
ubiquitous in surface and thin-film growth processes. Results from this research
project could thus potentially impact a wide range of deposition and surface
modification techniques. Moreover, the development of coherent GISAXS studies to
investigate surface dynamics envisioned in this project would be a powerful tool
with a broad range of potential applications in the surface growth/modification
community. Graduate, undergraduate and high-school students participating in
this research project have an opportunity to work in an area that bridges basic
research and application. In addition to experiencing, and contributing to, an
important topic in current materials research, they learn to use a wide range of
characterization tools. Students interact with a growing materials research
community at Boston University and the graduate student also have an excellent
opportunity to participate in the multi-disciplinary synchrotron research
environment.