* 1307997
* High-Sensitivity Ultra-Wide Sensing Range 2D Photonic Crystal Strain Sensor
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Hongbing Lu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 380,002.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT &lt;br/&gt;A high-sensitivity ultra-wide strain sensing range
two-dimensional photonic crystal strain sensor is proposed. The proposed device
consists of two-dimensional array of high refractive index nanoscale pillars
embedded in low refractive index polymer, leading to formation of a two-
dimensional nano photonic crystal. When light is incident upon the photonic
crystal, specific resonant wavelengths are reflected back due to the guided-mode
resonance in the photonic crystal slab. Such sharp reflection peaks of the
resonant wavelengths are extremely sensitive to the refractive indices of the
constituent materials and geometrical parameters such as grating pitch. This
characteristic makes the proposed device an outstanding sensor for high-
sensitivity strain/pressure/force sensing. An inverted photonic crystal design
will make the proposed sensor suitable for attaching to the surface of a
structure of interest with negligible reinforcement effects. Two-dimensional
guided-mode resonances will enable simultaneous multi-axial strain measurements
and one can envision real-time measurement of Young's relaxation function and
Poisson function. This sensor has a great potential to make a breakthrough in a
variety of challenging applications such as viscoelastic property
characterization of soft materials, multi-axial strain sensing from small
deformations to extremely large deformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACT&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide ample research opportunities for both
graduate and undergraduate students. The program will also have a strong impact
on diversity, as University of Texas at Dallas traditionally has large Hispanics
heritage student population. The team will continue their efforts to actively
reach out to underrepresented minority students through Clark summer research
program and the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math Saturdays events. In
addition, the team will actively participate the Nano Explorer program at UT
Dallas to reach out talented high school students to promote science and
engineering in the North Texas region. The program is widely recognized as a
success, largely because of the research accomplishments of these students
resulted in receiving 12 major awards including the Gordon E. Moore prize. This
project will also make contributions to improving research and education
infrastructures by developing new capabilities in micro/nano fabrication,
nanophotonics, modeling, and mechanics of materials. The team has extensive
record of developing cooperative research partnerships with industry and for
carrying out programs in a way that fosters innovation. This project is
anticipated to make impact in both research and educational aspects of North
Texas? semiconductor, defense, optics, and nanotech industries, by developing
new technologies with high commercial potential and also by supplying well-
trained engineers.