* 1307401
* A  Search for Gravitational Radiation at LIGO: Oregon Experimental Relativity Group
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* James Brau, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 760,000.00

The Oregon group will continue its vigorous efforts aimed at discovery of
gravitational waves with Advanced LIGO, working within the LIGO Scientific
Collaboration (LSC). However, most importantly for the next three years, the
Oregon group will apply to Advanced LIGO the deep expertise gained from the
initial LIGO experience in detector characterization. In particular, our
leadership in finding, describing, and mitigating noise sources which are not
intrinsic to the LIGO interferometers will be crucial to the success of Advanced
LIGO. And it is during this period of transition, as the new systems are being
installed and commissioned, that these investigations will be most valuable.
This will be carried out via two main avenues of inquiry: (1) detector
characterization, and (2) data analysis, especially in developing strategies to
search for gravitational wave transients associated with astrophysical triggers,
such as gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) or supernovae. For detector characterization,
the focus will be to interrogate Advanced LIGO sub-systems as they come on line.
We will identify potentially problematic couplings of the LIGO interferometers
to noise from the environment (electromagnetic, seismic, acoustic, cosmic-ray,
etc), determine the physical character of the coupling, and use this knowledge
to reduce or mitigate it. In data analysis and gravitational wave science, the
Oregon group plans to continue to play a central role in developing strategies
and analyses to search for astrophysically-triggered, transient gravitational
wave signals. The overriding goal is to be ready with a full arsenal of analysis
tools, including infrastructure to provide timely communication with
astronomical partners, when Advanced LIGO begins science running. And as LIGO
makes the transition from a discovery phase to a full program of gravitational
wave science, the Oregon group will be poised to exploit the rich scientific
opportunities available.

During the next three years, the quest for the discovery of gravitational waves
-- a fundamental natural phenomenon predicted by Einstein's General Relativity
-- will enter a critical phase. The LIGO project is transitioning to its
"advanced" phase. Advanced LIGO, when complete in about three years, is expected
to have the exquisite sensitivity required to directly detect gravitational wave
signals for the first time. This discovery, when realized, will usher in a new
era of astronomy and astrophysics, as gravitational waves will provide a unique
view of the cosmos, distinct from that provided by light, radio, x-rays, gamma
rays, neutrinos, or other astronomical messengers.