* 1307429
* Toward Gravitational Wave Discovery with Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Xavier Siemens, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 960,000.00

The UWMLSC group will contribute several critical elements to create a low-
latency streaming on-line search for transient gravitational waves, such as
those produced during the coalescence of binary neutron stars or black holes,
the most anticipated gravitational wave signal. Among the data analysis elements
we will create are the streaming data calibration system, a low-latency system
for determining data quality and glitch vetoing, and on-line searches for
signals from inspiralling compact binaries and for generic unmodeled bursts.
Such a system to rapidly identify signals will be an essential element of
gravitational wave science in the Advanced Detector Era, and will enable multi-
messenger astronomy in which observations of several kinds (gravitational waves;
electromagnetic waves; high energy particles) are synthesized to obtain a
detailed understanding of the sources of the most cataclysmic events in the
universe. Gravitational wave astronomy will reveal the inner mechanism of the
mysterious gamma ray bursts, will provide a means to measure the population of
black holes and determine the channel by which massive black holes are grown,
and will probe the fundamental nature of matter above nuclear densities. New
ways of measuring cosmological parameters will become available, which will
complement existing observations. Gravitational wave observations will also
provide sensitive tests of Einstein's General Relativity in ways in which it has
not yet been scrutinized. The opening of the gravitational wave window onto the
universe can potentially evince exotic objects such as naked singularities,
cosmic strings, or unexpected physics. We must be ready to address these
scientific challenges as our new astronomical facilities come into operation. To
this end, this award will support work that may result in the first
gravitational wave discoveries of compact binary coalescence, provide rapid sky
localization to facilitate electromagnetic follow-up efforts, yield fast turn-
around targeted searches prompted by triggers generated by other observational
facilities, obtain the the nuclear equation of state by measuring the tidal
interactions of binary neutron stars just prior to their merger, observe black
hole formation channels and probe fundamental properties of black holes through
their quasi-normal modes of oscillation, scan the sky to find undiscovered
rapidly rotating neutron stars and to learn about their properties, test
cherished principles of gravitation such as the no-hair and cosmic-censorship
conjectures, and seek new exotic and unexpected
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our work supports the creation of critical
components of a system that will allow the rapid transmittal of gravitational
wave observations to the entire community of astronomers, and facilitates the
integration of gravitational wave science into the broader field of
astrophysics. The group has a solid track record of educating new researchers;
this project will have a broad impact by training a new generation of graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows and junior faculty members in gravitational-wave
astronomy, as well as conveying the excitement of this budding branch of
astronomy to the community through outreach efforts such as the UWM Planetarium.