* 1307275
* Microscopic Aspects of DNA Translocation by hOGG1 DNA Glycosylase
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2016
* James Stivers, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Using this award funded by the Chemical of Life Processes Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor James Stivers from the Johns Hopkins University
seeks to elucidate the fundamental basis for how a paradigm DNA repair protein,
namely human 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase, translocates along a DNA chain to
find damage. Present models suggest that DNA sliding, where the protein remains
in constant contact with the DNA chain, is the primary mode for damage
recognition. However, these models are based on the results of single-molecule
imaging methods that do not have the temporal or spatial resolution to detect
important microscopic tracking events of the protein on DNA such as chain
hopping. Professor Stivers uses a kinetic approach that allows quantification of
both sliding and hopping events involved in protein translocation on DNA. The
research aims to elucidate how nonspecific electrostatic interactions promote
chain sliding by using chemical modifications of the DNA backbone, specifically
neutral methylphosphonate substitutions, and by appending cationic peptide tails
to the protein through expressed protein ligation. The results of this research
are expected to facilitate a fundamental understanding of how nonspecific
protein-nucleic acid electrostatic interactions underline the kinetics and
mechanism of the search, and to provide data useful for the interpretation of
the results of single molecule measurements of DNA sliding.

The efficient binding between biomolecules is a fundamental requirement of life
that is governed by the chemical properties of the partners that participate in
the binding. For proteins that interact with genomic DNA, the formation of
specific complexes that result in DNA repair, replication or transcription takes
advantage of the linear chain structure of DNA. Thus, proteins can bind to DNA a
great distance from a specific target site and use the DNA chain as a track to
find the target site. This work will examine the interactions that a DNA repair
protein uses to track along DNA to find a damaged site, which would result in
mutation and disease if not repaired. The techniques developed from this award
will provide investigative methods to other scientists and contribute to general
knowledge of protein-DNA recognition. This program is also designed to encourage
young people to pursue training in biophysics and related sciences.
Undergraduate and high school researchers (including students from groups
underrepresented in STEM careers) will participate in summer research
internships guided by Professor Stivers. Professor Stivers will continue to
participate in- and organize- a variety of multidisciplinary conferences,
workshops and summer courses through which his and others research results are
disseminated to the scientific community.