* 1307709
* SBIR Phase I:  Signing Science for Kids
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Corinne Vinopol, Institute for Disabilities Research and Training, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to addresses
the need for improved science literacy and knowledge of young deaf children by
producing an e-book series on STEM topics with American Sign Language (ASL)
translations. Each e-book will focus on a specific topic and include three
original related sub-topic stories. Each story will be accompanied by: 3
interactive learning games (9 in total) that foster developmentally appropriate
critical thinking skills with scientific applications; study questions
accessible on each screen that provoke further thought and investigation, and
recommended experiments to do at home or in the classroom. The topic area chosen
for the Phase I e-book is Weather, and the stories will focus on Wind,
Temperature, and Rain/Clouds/Rainbows. These e-books will contain options to
view the story content in ASL (video), as well as English text and audio. All
science terminology will be viewable individually as a sign video clip. All
instructions within the e-books will include ASL video translations with voice-
over. A Dictionary, accessible through any of the screens, will enable users to
read, play ASL video of, and print graphics of the signs and concepts related to
all of the scientific vocabulary used in the e-book.

The broader impact of the ASL-translated STEM e-book series is increased
knowledge and reading achievement scores of deaf children through the use of
these assistive materials. Reading achievement scores of deaf children usually
fall far short of those of hearing children with comparable abilities because
English is a second language for deaf children (ASL being their primary
language). While many deaf students may not understand a sentence in print, they
may understand it perfectly if it is presented in ASL. Incorporation of ASL into
science content positively impacts on reading achievement and information
retention. A major reason deaf people frequently have limited knowledge of
science and are underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields is that much formal scientific information is not in
accessible formats. In fact, nearly all scientific information currently
available is audio and text-based and without interpretation into sign language.
By starting with young children, we can stimulate early interest in STEM fields.
This product will be tremendously useful to teachers, parents, speech/language
pathologists, etc. who have a need to support understanding of early science
instructional materials, and particularly STEM terminology and symbols, with ASL
signs for purposes of literacy improvement and curriculum enhancement.