* 1308878
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Timothy Sanchez, Sanchez                 Timothy        H
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2016
* USD 207,000.00

PRFB Fellowship: Effects of metabolic changes on mitotic spindle morphology and
chromosome segregation

This research will pursue a fundamental understanding of the relationship
between mitochondrial metabolism and chromosome segregation in C. elegans
oocytes. Metabolic activity, spindle morphology, and chromosome segregation
errors (CSEs) in oocytes will be simultaneously characterized in order to
understand the extent to which mitochondrial metabolism determines spindle
function and chromosome segregation. The project will employ two broad thrusts.
First, biochemical perturbations to metabolic function will be performed and
their effects on both spindle morphology and CSE rates will be characterized.
The latter goal is to explore the statistical relationship between metabolic
activity and spindle morphology/CSE rates in a natural context. This will entail
high-throughput measurements of metabolic levels, spindle properties, and CSEs
in C. elegans of diverse genetic backgrounds.

Working in an interdisciplinary laboratory, the fellow will deepen his
biological understanding and have the opportunity to work with live cells. He
will also gain experience with high-value genetics techniques such as RNA
interference and quantitative trait loci mapping across varying genetic lines.
To quantify metabolite levels in perturbed oocytes, the fellow will also receive
training in mass spectrometry at the Small Molecule Mass Spectrometry Facility
at the Harvard FAS Center for Systems Biology. In conjunction with this
research, the fellow will conduct a carefully tailored outreach program through
Fourth Presbyterian Church in South Boston. This highly active urban ministry
provides programs and services for neighborhood youths of disproportionately
minority and economically challenged backgrounds. Here, the fellow will provide
demonstrations, lessons, and active learning in the form of hands-on experiments
in a series of 8 weekly classes to run on a yearly basis.