* 1308728
* EAGER: Application of a Bottom-up Approach to Study Bio-adhesives Molecular Conformation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Mahour Parast, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2016
* USD 184,287.00

1308728 (Fini). This project will evaluate the feasibility of using molecular
dynamics simulation to understand how molecular conformation affects bio-
adhesive?s basic mechanical behavior, including its modulus, viscosity, and
adhesion. To provide the most realistic molecular structural information for
modeling, a bio-adhesive with specified mechanical properties will be produced
using thermochemical liquefaction and fractionation, a method recently developed
by the PI. Then, the chemical compounds in and the molecular structure of bio-
adhesive will be characterized using XRD, NMR and AFM. This information will be
used to develop the molecular model for MD simulation. The molecular structures
of bio-adhesive will be constructed using the major molecular compounds
identified in the bio-adhesive. Based on the results of the laboratory
experiments and the molecular models, the relation between the chemical make-up
of bio-adhesive and its rheology will be established. Such knowledge will help
identify the fundamental mechanisms which control the mechanical behavior of
bio-adhesives including adhesion, fracture energy and toughness. The results
will be further used to determine the chemical compounds in bio-adhesives which
positively or negatively affect mechanical behavior. This, in turn, can provide
in-depth knowledge on how distillation parameters should be controlled in order
to produce bio-adhesives with specified rheology and mechanical characteristics.
The outcome of this project could support the use of the 40.2 million tons of
swine manure produced annually in the U.S. to supply about 28 million tons of
bio-adhesive. This bio-adhesive can be used for industrial carpeting, packaging,
soil stabilization, crack sealing, roofing and pavement construction as well as
fertilizer coating applications. This, in turn, can improve manure management
practices by sequestering carbon from manure into bio-adhesive while using its
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium as a pathogen-free liquid
fertilizer.Therefore, the project can lead to major, positive environmental and
economic impacts in both the agricultural and construction sectors.