* 1308948
* Mathematical modeling and computational studies for proliferation kinetics of tumor growth with spatial-temporal dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Xinfeng Liu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 192,674.00

Solid tumors are heterogeneous in composition. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a
highly tumorigenic cell type found in developmentally diverse tumors that are
believed to be resistant to standard chemotherapeutic drugs and responsible for
tumor recurrence. Thus understanding the tumor growth kinetics and spatial
composition is critical for development of novel strategies for cancer
treatment, while tumor growth is a very complicated phenomenon involving many
inter-related processes across a wide range of spatial and temporal scales,
which makes the mathematical modeling and computation very challenging. With a
close integration with designed experiments, the main aims of this project are
(1) to further develop and evaluate mathematical models to explore underlying
mechanisms and biological factors to control the balance of tumor growth; (2) to
develop both stochastic and continuous mathematical models to better understand
the spatial structures of CSC populations during tumor growth; (3) to design
fast and efficient numerical methods to solve the proposed mathematical models
with moving and complex domains.

This research seeks to employ modeling techniques and computational studies to
address complex issues arising from tumor growth at the interface of
mathematics, chemical engineering and biology. Therefore, principles and
techniques from multi-scale, stochastic and continuous models incorporated with
new computational algorithms will be employed to achieve the study goals. By
integrating complex regulatory networks and spatial distributions of nutrients
during tumor growth to control proliferation, differentiation and cell layers of
CSCs, the transformative studies and novel methodologies in this project will
help revealing the underlying mechanisms to regulate the dynamics and spatial
distributions of CSC derived cell lineages. Successful completion of this
project will also have a significant impact on public health, as the research
findings can be used to develop diagnostics, prognostics, and therapeutics to
more specifically target cancer stem cells. This project will mentor students
through multidisciplinary training to advance their own scientific knowledge as
well as contribute to the wider scientific body. The mathematical and
computational toolbox to be developed in this work will also help to initiate a
new project oriented course on computational biology for better training of both
graduate and undergraduate students.