* 1308577
* Polyoxometalate-Containing Linear-Dendritic Hybrids As Novel Optoelectronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Da-Ming Zhu, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2017
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this proposal
is to develop a novel hybrid photovoltaic material which combines broad light-
harvesting, efficient and directional energy transfer, efficient photoinduced
charge separation, and bipolar charge transport. Specifically, a linear-
dendritic diblock system will be designed where one end is a tribenzopentaphene
(TBP)-based light-harvesting conjugated dendron while the other end is a
polyoxometalate (POM)-containing linear polymer. These two different
architectures are joined together by a diimido-functionalized POM cluster as the
core. At the molecular level the conjugated dendrons are expected to harvest and
funnel the photon energy unidirectionally to the core where photoinduced
electron transfer will occur through the ligand-to-metal charge transfer
transition. In bulk, the linear/dendritic system is so designed that the strong
pi-pi stacking interaction among TBP rings and the architectural contrast
between the linear block and the dendritic block should promote phase-separation
to form pi-stacked dendron-aggregated conjugated domains and cluster-rich
domains. The cluster-rich domain transports electrons while the pi-conjugated
dendron domain transports holes. The proposed hybrids are thus potentially
highly efficient PV materials with long-term stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies not only in the development of new
materials including a new type of light-harvesting dendrimer (LHD) based on
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon building blocks, and the first POM-containing
linear-dendritic hybrids, but also in the fundamental understanding of exciton
decay pathways, energy transfer dynamics, and electron transfer thermodynamics
and kinetics of these light-harvesting materials. In addition, insight into how
nanosized and charged POM clusters affect the linear-dendritic diblock copolymer
self-assembly can be gained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at developing new hybrid
materials for photovoltaic (solar-cell) applications. These materials contain
polymers and other complex, highly branched planar organic molecules that will
be combined in special molecular architectures. These would include a molecular
light-harvesting component and the ability of parts of the molecules to form
stacks to direct the transport of electrical charges. The broader impact of the
proposed activities stems from the project's multidisciplinary nature, its
potential technological advances, and its integration with education and
outreach. The technological impact of demonstrating and testing a novel hybrid
polymer design for solar cell applications is directly related to the broader
challenge of energy sustainability. The training under this program will offer
students opportunities to develop skills in many areas from chemical synthesis
to materials characterization and device fabrication and evaluation. The project
will also allow the PIs to continue to expand their outreach efforts toward
underrepresented students in science and technology.