* 1308725
* Away from Independence: Probability in Geometry, Topology, Number Theory and Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Elizabeth Meckes, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 113,452.00

The common thread running through the various sub-projects described here is to
make use of geometric and functional-analytic perspectives in conjunction with
tools of quantitative probabilistic analysis in order to investigate
probabilistic phenomena in areas of mathematics in which independence is not a
natural condition. The first sub-project is a continuation of the PI's ongoing
investigation of the phenomenon of "typically Gaussian marginals'' of a large
class of high-dimensional probability distribution. In the most recent part of
this work, the PI found a sharp cut-off for the projection dimensions for which
this phenomenon occurs for a very general class of distributions. One direction
of proposed future work is to enrich this theory by investigating the effect of
additional geometric conditions on the measure on the largest dimension onto
which most projections look Gaussian. A second sub-project deals with the
spectral measures of certain types of random matrices, and has connections to
both geometry, mathematical physics and number theory. In very recent joint work
with M. Meckes, the PI proved strong concentration results for the empirical
spectral distributions of arbitrary powers of random unitary matrices. It is
likely that this work will enable a detailed analysis of the asymptotic behavior
of the maximal eigenvalue gap of random matrices from the compact classical
groups. A third proposed project is a collaboration with P. Albin to investigate
conditions on a compact manifold under which the eigenfunctions of its Laplacian
have approximately Gaussian value distributions in the high-eigenvalue limit.
Conjectures that such an approximation sometimes holds have mostly come out of
quantum chaos, and some numerical evidence for these conjectures exists.
Combining earlier work of the PI with techniques of pseudo-differential calculus
appears promising. Other projects in early stages include a collaboration with
C. Hughes to find new patterns in the zeroes of L-functions, inspired by a deep
result of Rains on random unitary matrices; a joint project with K. Kirkpatrick
to prove central limit theorems in many-body quantum dynamics using a new non-
commutative version of Stein's method; and a joint project with V. de Silva to
extend the PI's earlier work on limit theorems for Betti numbers of random
simplicial complexes to the context of persistence homology.

A main goal running through these projects is to move away from the problems
that classical probability theory has traditionally focused on, so as to
interface with a wide variety of other areas of mathematics. It seems that more
and more fields, from Riemannian geometry to number theory to algorithm design
and beyond, are finding that a probabilistic viewpoint can open doors to
solutions to previously impenetrable problems, and suggest fruitful new lines of
research that had not previously been considered. Central to such exploration is
the role of independence. Classical probability theory focuses on situations in
which independence plays a key role -- when one can describe multiple
experiments and assume that their outcomes cannot affect each other, very
precise analyses can be carried out in tremendous detail. However, probability
arises in many fascinating and important ways in other areas of mathematics and
science in which independence does not naturally occur, but where there is some
other special structure. Consider, for example, a sensor network that needs a
certain degree of connectivity in order to function properly. If sensors are
dropped from an airplane over a region of wilderness, it is important to know
how many are probably needed to gain enough connectivity for the network to
function. A classical probabilistic approach might be to assume that each pair
of sensors communicates with some prescribed probability, independently, but a
more realistic approach is to incorporate spacial data and say that sensors
communicate if they are close enough together. Understanding the likelihood that
such a random network will function becomes a harder problem because of the lack
of independence, but an ultimately more useful one. The goal of this project is
to investigate situations like this, in which independence assumptions are gone
but geometric or other considerations can be exploited instead.