* 1308550
* Collaborative Research: Boron Carbide Nanowires - Structure and Transport Property Relations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Deyu Li, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 357,231.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Thermoelectrics, a direct energy conversion
technology between thermal and electrical energy, could generate significant
impact on many energy-related issues the world is facing. Over the past decade,
significant progress has been made in creating better nanostructured materials
to improve the efficiency of thermoelectric energy conversion. However, to date,
most efforts have been focused on low temperature thermoelectric materials for
refrigeration applications. High temperature nanostructured thermoelectric
materials, which could harvest electricity from waste heat, have not received as
much attention. Boron carbides, a class of complex ceramic materials, have been
projected as promising candidates for thermoelectric applications. Boron carbide
nanowires, with desirable confinement effects to the transport of charge and
energy carriers, could have even better thermoelectric performance than bulk
boron carbides. In this project, the fundamental structure-property relations
for boron carbide nanowires of different diameters, crystalline structures, and
compositions are being constructed, which is critical for manufacturing the best
performance boron carbide nanowires for high performance thermoelectric energy
conversion. The project has integrated research and education components to
train graduate students in an interdisciplinary environment, and to extend the
impact to underrepresented minorities and K-12 students through demonstration of
the importance of nanomaterials in energy
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project aims at
constructing the structure-transport property relations of boron carbide
nanowires, a class of complex ceramic nanowires that is promising for high
temperature thermoelectric power generation. The approach is to integrate
rational materials synthesis, transport property measurements at individual
nanostructure level, thorough structure characterization of measured samples,
and theoretical analysis to achieve in-depth understanding of charge and energy
transport. The structure-property relation is critical to design and fabricate
boron carbide nanowires with the best thermoelectric properties, which could
generate significant impact on industrial waste heat recovery. The project
tackles an area where little research has focused to date, namely,
nanostructured high temperature thermoelectrics, that has the potential to make
use of waste heat. Successful implementation of the project can lead to an in-
depth understanding of transport properties of boron carbide nanowires, and
create a class of high performance thermoelectric nanomaterials. The project
trains students in an interdisciplinary environment, which prepare them well for
today's cutting-edge multidisciplinary research.