* 1308645
* Plaquette Percolation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Christopher Hoffman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 285,381.00

There is a long and fruitful history of interaction between probability and many
other fields such as combinatorics and ergodic theory. This proposal will
further many of these connections in a number of fields including random
simplicial complexes random matrix theory, extremal combinatorics and geometric
group theory. In particular this proposal focuses on problems in the following
areas: topology of random simplicial complexes, spectrum of random matrices,
higher dimensional generalizations of percolation and subshifts of finite
type.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Randomness is evident in many aspects of modern life
from conflicting political polls to fluctuations in the stock market.
Probability theory is the branch of mathematics which tries to quantify
randomness. Over the last few decades the language, ideas and results from
probability theory have been applied to many different branches of mathematics.
This proposal seeks to continue this trend and extend the connections between
probability theory and several branches of mathematics. This proposal also will
apply probability theory to topology, a branch of mathematics which until
recently has had little interaction with probability. The grant has will sponsor
talks that will let undergraduates learn about the ways that mathematics has
been applied to a variety of fields.