* 1308556
* DARKNESS:   Dark-Speckle Near-IR Energy-resolved Superconducting Spectrophotometer
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Benjamin Mazin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 02/28/2018
* USD 811,423.00

An exciting approach to studying planets around other stars exploits recent
technical advances in adaptive optics to directly image the exoplanets while the
spatially concentrated but very bright light from the nearby star is suppressed
by a coronagraph. Outstanding technical and theoretical progress in recent years
has allowed this approach to achieve extremely high contrast, and thus detect
very faint companions to stars. This approach to hunting for stellar companions
is in some ways complementary to the well-established radial-velocity technique,
and may be able to unearth different classes of exoplanets and determine
different things about them. The combination of multiple state-of-the-art
technologies will make the instrument being built here capable of substantially
better contrast than competing instruments, and make it the first capable of
high contrast coronagraphy at visible wavelengths.

Coronagraphic capabilities are leveraged from the existing and well-proven
PALM-3000 (P3K) extreme adaptive optics system operating at the Palomar
Observatory. The detector technology is very novel, making use of recent
developments in superconducting Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detectors (MKIDs)
that can spectrally resolve the wavelengths intrinsically (with no external
dispersing optics) of the optical/near-infrared light that they see. These
detectors also provide microsecond time resolution, all with zero read noise and
zero dark current photon counting that enable a mode of coronagraphy known as
Dark Speckle, which originated in the mid-90?s and appears promising for
suppressing focal-plane speckles as needed for companion detection. The overall
project combines multiple exciting and novel technologies to attack one of the
most pressing scientific problems in modern astronomy.

This project will have broad appeal to the public by the nature of the science,
and will train undergraduate and graduate students as well as a post-doctoral
fellow.

Funding for this project is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical
Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.