* 1308751
* First-Principles Studies of Magnetic Interactions and Excitations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kirill Belashchenko, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research and
education aimed at developing a better understanding of the magnetic
interactions and excitations in magnetic materials, as well as their response to
external probes and effects on transport properties of nanostructures. This
research is based on firsts-principles electronic structure theory. The PI will
study the following properties and phenomena: magnetic phase diagrams of alloys
with competing magnetic interactions; the temperature-dependent longitudinal
piezomagnetic effect; dynamic magnetic susceptibility and spin-fluctuation
effects in metals and alloys; the temperature-dependent magnetocrystalline
anisotropy in alloys for applications in permanent magnets; and spin-flip
scattering due to spin-orbit coupling at metallic interfaces.

The project is aimed to advance the fundamental theory of magnetism through
facilitating the design of new rare-earth-free materials for permanent magnets,
antiferromagnets for exchange bias applications and more efficient
magnetoelectronic devices, and through the development of new computational
tools for the studies of magnetic interactions and excitations in magnetic
materials. Research will involve graduate students, who will be educated in
modern electronic structure, magnetism and transport theory and gain experience
in the use and development of sophisticated electronic-structure codes.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research
and education aimed at developing a better understanding of the physical
mechanisms by which the microscopic magnetic moments interact in magnetic
materials, which determine the observable properties and affect the response of
these materials to external probes. These are materials in which the electron
spin, which is an intrinsically quantum-mechanical property related to the
intrinsic magnetism of the electron, plays an important role.

The PI will address a range of problems relevant for predicting the fundamental
properties of magnetic materials. A better understanding of these properties
contributes to the design of more efficient and inexpensive permanent magnets,
as well as to electronic device technology for information systems and emerging
future electronic device technologies that exploit not only the electron charge
as existing devices do now, but also the electron spin. This research will
expand our ability to predict the properties of materials starting only from the
identities of the constituent atoms. This contributes to the broader vision of
being able to design materials with desired properties through computer
simulations based on fundamental principles of quantum mechanics.

The research involves developing new computational tools for the studies of
temperature dependent magnetic properties, which will be shared with the broader
computational materials research community. This project will provide
educational experiences for graduate students in advanced materials theory and
modeling techniques using sophisticated computational tools.