* 1308430
* Extending Dislocation Dynamics with FFT to Address Dislocation Patterning and Slip Band Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Anthony Rollett, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Summary

The goal of this project is to replace the use of empirical constitutive
descriptions of plastic deformation in three-dimensional simulations of
polycrystal plasticity with direct dislocation-based modeling. We will base the
work on a previously-developed fast-Fourier transform (FFT) formulation of
polycrystal plasticity introduced by Lebensohn and colleagues. The key feature
to the FFT approach is that any eigenstrain can be included with no real change
in the calculational procedure. From a dislocation perspective, the eigenstrains
are just the plastic distortion tensor, which reflects the slip caused by the
dislocation. Thus, replacing a constitutive model for plasticity with a more
direct calculation of dislocation microstructure evolution is straightforward,
given a way to model the dislocations. We will base the initial work on
polycrystalline plasticity on the use of a continuum-level model based on
dislocation density evolution, which will be based in part on results from
discrete dislocation simulations. Our goal is thus to bridge the gap between the
behavior of discrete dislocations and macroscopic-level descriptions of the
behavior of polycrystalline materials, enabling a better understanding of, and
new predictive capabilities for, such fundamental materials properties as
plastic deformation, creep, fatigue, etc.

Successful completion of this project will lead to a new methodology that
couples coarse-grained and discrete dislocation modeling within a polycrystal
plasticity framework. The method will allow for simulation of the heterogeneity
of plastic deformation at the grain scale that includes the effects of
dislocation flow. We thus expect to improve on the ability of polycrystal
plasticity calculations to model local, intragrain orientation changes and
strain, which currently are not well captured. More specifically, this new
capability will be an advance for discrete dislocation simulations by including
the ability to include anisotropic elasticity and local lattice rotations. The
new capabilities for polycrystal plasticity will enable the modeling of the
coupling of dislocation motion with grain structure and orientation and the
accumulation of localized dislocation content. Application of the method will be
made to a series of specific problems, comparing results with both experiments
and existing modeling capabilities.

Non-technical summary:

In most technological applications based on metallic systems, the metals are not
single crystals, but rather are made up of randomly-oriented crystallites,
called grains. These polycrystalline materials serve as the basis for much of
our current technology and will undoubtedly serve a similar role in the future.
Their mechanical properties depend not only on the properties of the single-
crystal grains that make up the polycrystal, but also on the distribution of
size and orientation of those grains. New experimental methods are providing a
detailed look at the three-dimensional distribution of local crystallographic
orientations, with an emerging ability to do so non-destructively and as a
function of time, yielding unprecedented views of the evolving structure of
polycrystals under various loading conditions.

Computational modeling of the mechanical behavior of polycrystals has become a
standard part the study of deformation, used, for example, in the design of the
crash-worthiness of automobiles. Currently, most models treat the deformation
individual grains within the polycrystal as being uniform, which we know from
experiment is not accurate. The goal of this project is to incorporate within
the modeling a better description of the deformation of the material within each
grain. Success of this project will enable us to more accurately model numerous
important problems in deformation, including fatigue, an important phenomenon
that can lead to the failure (breaking) of the material over time.