* 1308652
* SusChEM: A Mechanistic Approach to Understanding and Lowering the Overpotential for CO2 Reduction to C1 Organic Products
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrew Bocarsly, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

The NSF Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Andrew B.
Bocarsly of Princeton University to investigate the mechanisms of carbon dioxide
(CO2) reduction to one carbon (C1) organic products: formic acid, formaldedhyde
or methanol. In the case of methanol, a 6-electron, 6-proton reaction is
required which can be undertaken using either a one-electron redox mediator or
in some cases can be observed to occur via a direct CO2-surface interaction. In
all cases, a complex reaction mechanism is implicated. The research group
examines the rate limiting step(s) associated with the formation of formate, one
of the major reaction products. Heterogeneous CO2 reduction at post-transition
metal oxide interfaces, interface-free CO2 reduction using transition metal
based molecular systems, and cyanogel systems for CO2 electroreduction are under
study. The first two topics explore the critical question of the role of a
reactive surface in the reaction pathway. To consider this question under
kinetically limiting conditions leading to formate formation, the team examines
anodized post transition metal electrodes. These materials are catalytic in the
absence of an additional dissolved catalyst, allowing the research group to look
specifically at the range of heterogeneous processes occurring directly at the
electrode interface during CO2 reduction. The study is organized using periodic
trends, with zinc, cadmium, indium, bismuth and lead selected as key systems.
The second study attacks the problem from the opposite direction. In this study,
aromatic amine catalysts are used to carry-out the reduction of CO2 in the
absence of a surface. Here, advantage is taken of the photoexcited
ruthenium(bipyridyl) systems, charge transfer quenched by an aromatic amine to
generate CO2 reduction absent an electrode interface. The team also explores
manganese complexes containing bisphosphinine (L2) ligands, in this regard. The
final study uses cyanogel chemistry to both generate alloy materials that will
facilitate the electrode-based studies, and to produce novel electrolytes that
are known to have a high CO2 capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding CO2
activation is a critical chemical challenge as it contributes to the development
of new fuel resources and as well as potentially lowering greenhouse gases in
the environment. In addition to its pivotal role in the education of next
generation electrochemical researchers, who are key to an alternate energy
future, this program impacts K-12 education by providing an excellent tool for
teaching both students and teachers fundamental chemical concepts using the
currently topical problem of greenhouse gas control as a motivating principle.
Another important aspect of the proposed program is its close affiliation with
an aggressive startup company that is focused on taking this research out of the
laboratory and into the real world. Demonstration scale systems that will
convert CO2 into commercial chemicals are planned.