* 1308104
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Sarah Brosnan, Brosnan                 Sarah          M
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 05/31/2015
* USD 152,372.00

Synthetic Cells and Organelles with Double Hydrophilic Block Co-polymers:
Design, Synthesis, and Evaluation of Model Systems

Cells are incredibly complex, making it inherently difficult to elucidate the
mechanisms and fundamental properties of living systems. Consequently, the
proposed research will be focused on the development of synthetic cell and
organelle models that can be used as tools for the study of cellular processes.
The proposed research is an interdisciplinary approach to design, develop, and
evaluate model systems to mimic cells and organelles. Specifically, novel double
hydrophilic co-polymer based polymersomal systems will be synthesized and
evaluated for their abilities to encapsulate enzymes while retaining their
activity and mimic cellular cytoskeletons. The proposed novelty is not only in
making new materials and vesicles but in showing that these systems can make
more complex cellular mimics that can combine functional organelles and
cytoskeletons.

The training objectives include design, synthesis, and characterization of novel
hydrophilic block co-polymers using modern radical polymerization methods and
evaluate these materials' ability to assemble into organelles and cell-sized
vesicles. These cellular mimics will be evaluated on their ability to
effectively encapsulate enzymes such that they retain their activity and
function as organelles independently and within cells and to grow and contain
and actin cytoskeleton and to conduct enzyme cascade reactions. The broader
impacts of this work include: development of a series of models and tools that
will facilitate the understanding of cell processes and can be used
collaboratively by polymer chemists and cell biologists, publication in peer-
reviewed journals, and mentorship of graduate and undergraduate students in a
research capacity.