* 1308033
* Particle Astrophysics with HAWC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jordan Goodman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,407,000.00

The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) Gamma-ray Observatory is a wide field-
of-view, continuously operating, teraelectronvolt (TeV) gamma-ray telescope that
will explore the origin of cosmic rays, study the acceleration of particles in
extreme physical environments, and search for new TeV physics. When HAWC begins
operations in August 2013 with 100 Water Cherenkov Detectors it will be the most
sensitive wide-field detector in the TeV range, with an approximately five times
increase in sensitivity over the previous generation of detectors. During the
first year of operation, HAWC's sensitivity will steadily increase as the full
250 detectors are gradually brought online. HAWC will monitor the northern sky
and make coincident observations with other observatories including VERITAS,
HESS, Magic, IceCube and the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope for multi-
wavelength and multi-messenger studies of the high-energy sky. HAWC will observe
Galactic sources in the TeV energy range, detect diffuse emission from regions
of the Galactic plane, observe known TeV active galactic nuclei and the
brightest known gigaelectronvolt (GeV) gamma-ray bursts, and with its
significant increase in sensitivity it is poised to discover new high-energy
phenomena in the Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Maryland group
has a significant leadership role in HAWC. This award will enable the University
of Maryland group to continue work in the construction, operation and science of
HAWC including reconstruction and simulation software, maintenance of the multi-
Petabyte data archive, and science analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: HAWC is an all-sky instrument that will serve as a TeV "finder"
telescope for ground-based observatories, and it can be used to extend
measurements of satellite-discovered sources to TeV energies. HAWC will build on
the strong outreach record of Milagro to bring this exciting field of research
to students and the general public. Since HAWC is a joint Mexican-American
project, it presents an opportunity to attract Hispanic-American students to
science and astroparticle physics.