* 1308856
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Geoffrey Zahn, Zahn                    Geoffrey       L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Geoffrey Zahn of the University of Arkansas to conduct a
research project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at the
National Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences in Tsukuba, Japan. The
project title is "The Importance of Microbial Interactions to Soil Carbon
Cycling on a Warming Planet." The host scientist is Dr. Rota Wagai.

This project examines the effect of microbial interactions on changes to soil
carbon dynamics in response to warming conditions using microcosms with
naturally-occuring bacterial populations under different temperature treatments.
Soil amoebae are abundant and ubiquitous bacterial predators that play an
important, yet understudied, role in regulating bacterial populations, which are
vastly important for global carbon cycling. Existing climate change models have
begun to examine the functions that microbial communities may play in
contributing to or mitigating global warming, but they do not yet include
information about how total microbial community structure impacts these
predictions. Common soil amoebae are used in replicates of intact sterilized
soil cores along with inoculations of naturally-occuring bacteria in a full
factorial experiment. Frequent measurements of carbon dioxide emissions allow an
investigation of the importance of microbial predation and food web complexity
on bacterially-mediated responses to climate change.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this experience and the results of this
research will be broadly disseminated through peer-reviewed publication, public
seminars and radio interviews, and through a multi-lingual online blog geared
towards middle school students. The blog will document the experience of
traveling to Japan and learning about Japanese culture, but will focus on the
importance of international collaborations and cultural exchanges. It will be
designed to engage students at a critical point in their education with the
excitement of discovery and the scientific process, while sharing insights into
another culture.