* 1308095
* EAGER: A Novel Approach to Fabricate Biomimetic Membranes Embedded with AquaporinZ
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Isabel Escobar, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 04/30/2015
* USD 68,679.00

1308095 Escobar

Combining the efficient functioning of biological molecules with the
productivity of synthetic membranes is the basis of this project. Aquaporin, a
highly selective water channel protein, has received increasing attention
because of its potential to form biomimetic membranes with high flux in water
reuse and desalination applications; however, a proof-of-concept that aquaporins
can be used to make biomimetic membranes has not been successfully demonstrated.
The overarching objective of this project is to fabricate a biomimetic membrane
from aquaporin dispersed in a membrane-selective layer, capable of operation
under high hydraulic pressure. The hypothesis is that by incorporating aquaporin
Z (AqpZ) into a membrane, AqpZ will act as a molecular water channel to
significantly increase water permeability. Because of its high selectivity and
permeability, the incorporation of this protein could give rise to a biomimetic
membrane that can provide pure water. The first challenge is to attach aquaporin
to the membrane without chemically altering or damaging the aquaporin. The PI
will treat AqpZ with gum arabic (GA) and then disperse the AqpZ-GA in a matrix
of amphiphilic polyvinyl alcohol carrying alkyl side chains (PVA-alkyl). GA is
hypothesized to protect AqpZ from damaging covalent or ionic interactions with
PVA-akyl. PVA-alkyl is amphiphilic and has the high hydrophilicity of PVA
combined with the hydrophobicity of the long alkyl side chains, good film-
forming properties, and outstanding physical and chemical stability. The second
challenge of the current study is to design and prepare an assembly that will
allow artificial biomimetic membranes with embedded aquaporin proteins to
sustain hydraulic water pressure gradients without losing their integrity and
performance. The PI expects that the GA and the PVA-alkyl will protect AqpZ from
flattening. The attachment of the PVA-alkyl matrix with AqpZ-GA to hydrophilized
polybenzimidizole (PBI) is expected to produce membranes able to withstand high
hydraulic pressures.

Broader Impacts Membrane technologies are expected to be increasingly
competitive for water purification. In addition to reducing disinfection
byproducts (DBPs), membranes can be effective in removing taste, odor, iron,
manganese, synthetic organic compounds, pharmaceutical organic compounds, and
endocrine disruptors. These issues are becoming increasingly important as a
result of population growth and water shortages, especially in the southwestern
part of the United States, where treated wastewater comprises a large fraction
of the drinking water intake sources. Membranes with pores or channels
specifically engineered to maximize water transport or ion selectivity would
offer the potential for dramatically more efficient operation compared to
conventional polymer membranes. Biomimetic membranes with structure and function
similar to membranes of living organisms may offer the ultimate breakthrough for
low-energy desalination. Overall, this research has the potential to demonstrate
a novel biomimetic membrane, useful for water purification and other
applications.