* 1308141
* Strongly Correlated Fermi Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gabriel Kotliar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research to improve the first-principles-based theoretical
description of strongly correlated materials through the incorporation of
quantum many-body theory methods like dynamical mean field theory and to
investigate properties, ordered states, and associated phenomena of strongly
correlated materials. The PI will develop many-body concepts analytical methods
and computational techniques to investigate the properties of correlated metals
insulators and superconductors. The PI will study the physical properties of
Hunds metals such as the iron pnictides and chalcogenides. All these materials
are "bad metals" at high temperatures. The PI will develop a theory of transport
in a regime where materials are not well described by Fermi liquid theory. The
PI will investigate the unusual thermoelectric properties of correlated
insulators such as iron silicide and antimonide, in and out of equilibrium. In
the long term, the PI envisions the construction of a framework for predicting
and understanding the physical properties of correlated materials, building on
the successes of the Dynamical Mean Field Theory. This framework would enable
the computational design of materials with strongly correlated electron systems,
starting from first principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to develop an
interactive website which will serve as an archive of computationally intensive
results for various materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research to improve materials-specific theoretical descriptions of materials in
which electrons strongly interact with each other leading to strong correlations
in electronic motion and unusual materials property and phenomena. Modern solid-
state physics explains the physical properties of numerous materials, such as
traditional metals, semiconductors, and insulators which provide the basis of
our modern technological society. But materials with electrons derived from d-
and f-electron shells tend to fall outside the scope of this theory and have
remarkable properties. Examples include: iron pnictide materials which exhibit
high temperature superconductivity where electrons flow in the absence of
resistance, and iron silicide and iron antimonide which exhibit exceptionally
large thermoelectricity where large temperature differences develop at different
areas of the material when an electric field is applied. The PI will develop
concepts, techniques, and computational tools to describe this class of
materials and elucidate the origin of their remarkable properties
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to develop an interactive website which will
serve as an archive of computationally intensive results for various materials.