* 1308266
* Conformal Geometry and Asymptotically Hyperbolic Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* C. Robin Graham, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2017
* USD 189,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1308266, Principal Investigator: C. Robin Graham

The investigator will carry out several research projects studying various
aspects of conformal geometry and asymptotically hyperbolic metrics. These
include investigation of boundary rigidity for asymptotically hyperbolic
metrics, investigation of minimal submanifolds of products of asymptotically
hyperbolic spaces with compact manifolds, study of boundary terms for
conformally invariant integrals, and study of twisted Dirac operators on
asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds and relation to conformally invariant
operators on the boundary. The main objectives are to further understanding of
these geometries and their relationship. The methods are analytic, geometric,
and algebraic, with an intimate connection between these different aspects of
the study.

This project will focus on the relationship between two different geometric
structures: conformal geometry on the one hand and asymptotically hyperbolic
geometry on the other. Conformal geometry is the study of properties of space
which depend only on angles but not on distances. Hyperbolic geometry involves
spaces of negative curvature, in which the analogues of straight lines separate
more than in usual flat space. The asymptotic structure of hyperbolic geometry
is related to conformal geometry on the lower dimensional boundary at infinity.
Several projects will study the relationship between these geometries. Apart
from the intrinsic geometric interest, one motivation is the AdS/CFT
correspondence in physics, a proposed holographic correspondence for certain
physical phenomena. In recent years, the AdS/CFT correspondence has been used to
model many strongly coupled physical theories, for instance in condensed matter
physics. The proposed activity will further enable the development of human
resources through educationally oriented activities of the investigator,
including advising, mentoring and teaching graduate students, and curricular
development. International cooperation and partnership will be promoted through
collaboration between the investigator and researchers in Japan and France. Ties
between the mathematics and physics communities will be enhanced. The results
will be effectively disseminated through attendance and speaking at meetings and
conferences and through posting and publication of articles.