* 1308074
* Annual Algorithms Workshop - Fall 2012, San Diego, California
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2013
* Abel Rodriguez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 10/31/2013
* USD 43,284.00

Title: Annual NSF/DTRA Algorithms Workshop - November 26 to 29, San Diego,
California Dates: November 26-29, 2012 Location: San Diego California Website:
http://events.SignUp4.com/AlgorithmWorkshop

The increasing availability of new sequencing technologies has dramatically
reduced the cost of obtaining genomic data from biological threats. Similarly,
the recent development of new technologies for the analysis of chemical samples,
such as gas chromotography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and liquid chromotography-
multi-stage mass spectrometry (LC-MSn), has increased the availability and
complexity of data on chemical threats. Furthermore, the availability and deluge
of large scale data sets from all sources of images has increased the need for
inovative algorithm development. This deluge of information creates the need and
the opportunity for the mathematical sciences community to develop technology
for controlling and reducing the threat from biological and chemical attacks and
the analysis of imaging data sets. This proposal aims at securing funding for
the 5th annual ATD workshop. The purpose of these workshops is to provide a
forum for scientists and mathematicians who have an interest in this
NSF/DTRA/NGA sponsored program to share their results, and to foster interaction
between experts in innovative algorithm development and experts in the sensor
R&D community.

The Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA), The National Geospatial Intelligence
Agency (NGA) and the National Science Foundation (NSF) have formed a partnership
to support the development of the next generation of mathematical and
statistical algorithms for the detection of chemical and biological threats and
threats detected from images. The result is a program within the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS), which is called "ATD: Algorithms for Threat
Detection". This proposal seeks to secure travel support for students and
postdoctoral researchers who will participate in this 5th Algorithms Workshops
in addition to securing conference support and management. Providing this type
of funding is critical for the training of the next generation of mathematical
scientists. In particular, by providing opportunities for students and
postdoctoral researchers to be exposed to problems of chemical and biological
threat detection in addition to imaging the NSF creates incentives for junior
researchers (and specially those from underrepresented groups) to focus on these
important and timely areas of research.