* 1308603
* Joint Computational and Neutron/X-ray Scattering Studies of High-Temperature Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Thomas Maier, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to understand and
predict the behavior of solids is key to accelerating the discovery of new
materials and their rapid deployment into new technologies. This combined
computational modeling and neutron scattering characterization project focuses
on a class of systems known as strongly correlated electron systems, which offer
particularly exciting prospects for applications due to their complex emergent
behavior and exotic physical properties. We will use computational and neutron
scattering methods to study magnetic properties of these materials. Our goal is
to understand the magnetic and superconducting properties of certain families of
these materials, which will allow us to design future materials with desired and
optimized properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Monte Carlo and random phase approximation
calculations, in conjunction with resonant inelastic x-ray scattering
measurements will be used to study magnetic excitations in the cuprate and iron-
based high-temperature superconductors, two of the most prominent and
fascinating members of the class of strongly correlated electron systems. Our
primary goal is to understand the interplay between magnetism and
superconductivity in these systems, focusing on the pairing mechanism, which
poses one of the most important and challenging problems in condensed matter
physics. The impact of this research program will be two-fold: First, the link
we will develop between neutron scattering experiments and insights gained from
high-end simulations will establish a new modus operandi that will greatly
conserve beam time and enhance the effectiveness of computing cycles. Second,
this project will provide funding primarily for training of graduate students.
They will be under the supervision of both PIs and therefore have the
opportunity to learn both theoretical and experimental aspects of the study of
correlated materials. This kind of training will benefit tremendously their
future career prospects, providing a skill set that makes them highly
competitive in the future job market.