* 1308862
* Phyllotactic patterns and pattern quarks and leptons
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Alan Newell, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2018
* USD 245,229.00

The arrangements of phylla (leaves, flowers, seeds, bracts) on plants and their
surface morphologies have intrigued and mystified scientists for over four
hundred years. A special challenge has been to understand why on many plants
such as the sunflower, the seeds lie on families of clockwise and
counterclockwise spirals and that the numbers in each family belong not just to
the integers but to a special subset known as Fibonacci numbers generated by
starting with any two integers and defining each successive member as the sum of
the previous two. Google sunflower images and count for yourselves. You will
encounter beautiful sunflower seed heads with 21, 34 and 55 family spirals.
Count them. One can generate this, the most common, Fibonacci sequence by
beginning with 1,2 and obtain 1,2,3,5,8,13,21,34,55...
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attempts to explain phyllotactic configurations fall into
two categories. The teleological approach devises rules for positioning the next
seed or flower so as to pack the seeds in some optimal fashion and is
philosophically equivalent to saying the reason tigers have stripes is that it
provides better camouflage. Now that may be the reason that striped tigers had
an evolutionary advantage over unstriped ones, but nature has to use plain old
physical and biochemical processes to achieve these outcomes. In plants, the
mechanisms by which phylla are made involve instabilities which lead to a non
uniform distribution of the hormone auxin (phylla initiation would occur at
maxima of the auxin field) and non uniform stress fields in the vicinity of the
plant's growth tips. The corresponding pattern then propagates as a front and
creates potential sites for phylla initiation. What we have obtained is some
stunning new results which demonstrate that the locations of the maxima of the
instability generated pattern fields coincide with the point configurations
generated by the teleologically inspired models. This suggests the exciting new
idea that in many circumstances nstability generated patterns may be the
mechanisms by which plants and other organisms can pursue optimal strategies. It
also suggests alternative approaches to investigate many of the open challenges
in optimal packing.