* 1308946
* Collaborative Research/GOALI: Engineered Crystallization Behavior of Phase Change Materials to Enable Advanced Optical Functionalities
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Kathleen Cerqua-Richardson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 87,500.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Tunable optical components, ones where their
properties can be altered to realize different physical and optical behavior,
are of widespread interest for diverse applications ranging from spectroscopy to
imaging. Most of these components sacrifice optical performance for tunability
and they are manufactured using structures and processes that are difficult to
miniaturize. In this collaborative project, researchers from the University of
Central Florida, Pennsylvania State University, and Lockheed Martin are
optimizing infrared chalcogenide materials and nanostructures that exhibit
reversible amorphous-to-crystalline phase transitions to have tailored
refractive index values and dispersive properties that are continuously tunable.
The availability of such chalcogenide phase change materials will enable the
development of new compact, tunable optical components by exploiting the
exceptionally large refractive index change associated with the phase
transition. The chalcogenide materials and processes being developed in this
project are broadly available through the NSF-funded National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Optical
materials with compositionally tailored properties that are spectrally tunable
and reversible are attractive for producing optical components with unique
functionalities. Chalcogenide phase change materials (PCMs) exhibit rapid and
reversible amorphous-to-crystalline phase transitions in response to pulsed
thermal, optical, or electrical stimuli. However, current optical devices based
on chalcogenide PCMs have only exploited the large change in optical reflectance
associated with the transition between the pure amorphous and the pure
crystalline states of the material. In this collaborative project, researchers
from the University of Central Florida, Pennsylvania State University, and
Lockheed Martin are conducting experimental studies to identify a chalcogenide
composition that enables controlled nucleation and growth of spatially dispersed
nanocrystals, which will produce a continuously tunable and reproducible change
in the infrared refractive index and dispersion of the composite glass ceramic
material. For each composition, bulk, thin film, and nanopatterned films are
being characterized to understand the role of device-relevant boundary
conditions on the nucleation and growth process induced by external optical or
thermal excitation. Complementary techniques are being applied to understand the
fundamental relationship between the intrinsic material response and the
tailored optical performance, including thermal, structural, and optical
measurement and analysis. The structure-property data being collected during
this project will provide the critical input needed to design fully tunable
optical components using chalcogenide PCMs. A new mentoring team program, which
links university and industry partnered researchers, trains graduate and
undergraduate students to have globally-relevant workforce skills. The
chalcogenide phase change materials and processes being developed in this
project are available to the broader external academic and industrial community
through the NSF-funded National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network (NNIN)
located at Pennsylvania State University.