* 1308763
* Exploring the Unique Electrochemical Reactivity of Metallic Nanoparticles Less Than 4 nm in Diameter
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Francis Zamborini, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

Francis P. Zamborini from the University of Louisville is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program to explore the unique
electrochemical reactivity of metal nanoparticles, focusing on oxidation and
galvanic displacement reactions for those with diameters below 4 nm. The team
has shown that there is a negative shift in oxidation potential for Au
nanoparticles with decreasing size from diameters of 250 nm to 4 nm. The shift
increases significantly below 4 nm. A goal of the work is to characterize the
specific shift in oxidation potential for Au nanoparticles ranging from 250 nm
down to 1 nm in diameter. A combination of mass spectrometry and electrochemical
methods is being used to correlate the exact nanoparticle/cluster size with the
oxidation potential. This provides important fundamental information about the
stability of metal nanoparticles against oxidation as a function of size and a
new electrochemical method for characterizing the size of metal nanoparticles.
They have discovered that the oxidation of small metal nanoparticles also
depends on the electrode material, the method of attachment to the electrode,
their aggregation state, and the ligands used to assist in their oxidation. They
are exploring these parameters systematically in order to gain a full
understanding of all of the factors affecting metal nanoparticle oxidation.
Galvanic displacement is an electrochemical reaction involving the replacement
of one metal with another metal, which has been used to form interesting alloys,
but has not been fully studied as a function of size. This reaction is also
being explored with nanoparticles of varied size and focusing on those below 4
nm. Since the oxidation behavior changes dramatically below 4 nm, it is expected
that the galvanic displacement reaction will show unique reactivity in this size
regime, allowing for nanoparticle transformations and alloy formation not
possible with larger sizes. The exploration of the oxidation and galvanic
displacement of very small metal nanoparticles will lead to the discovery of new
chemistry, synthesis of unique metal nanomaterials, and development of a new
method of metal nanoparticle characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has broad significance and importance in many ways. In terms of the impact on
the scientific community, this research is relevant to the discovery of new
chemistry involving small metal nanoparticles, a new method for characterizing
the size of metal nanoparticles, and new methods of synthesizing unique metal
alloy nanomaterials. It also provides important fundamental information about
metal nanoparticle stability, which is crucial for the numerous potential
applications in medicine, chemical analysis, and energy. It further provides
significant, multidisciplinary training of students of all levels, including
high school, undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate students. The results of
this research are being incorporated into the undergraduate chemistry curriculum
to educate students about the important size-dependent properties of materials,
which is at the heart of nanotechnology research. This information is being made
available to other educational institutions for broader dissemination. A one-day
symposium is being hosted dedicated to women in science, with an emphasis on
biotechnology and nanotechnology research. This includes participation from
middle school students up to science professionals, including poster and oral
presentations and a keynote lecture from a prominent female scientist. The
program is being publicized to broaden the impact.