* 1308123
* De Novo Design of Protein Transduction Domain Mimics Enabling New Opportunities
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Gregory Tew, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 440,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Massachusetts Amherst is in developing an understanding of the
fundamental connections between polymer chemistry and biomembrane transduction
activity. This project is cofunded by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and
Biomass Engineering program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems. Learning to build simple polymeric
structures with protein-like activity is a critically important goal of modern
science. Comprehensive structure-activity relationships will be essential for
gaining novel insights and laying a foundation for understanding the mechanistic
origins of these unique molecules. Because these molecules transverse the
phospholipid membranes, new insights will be gained on how molecules bind with
and move across this critically important biological barrier. This project
combines state-of-the-art organic and polymer chemistry with translocation and
delivery across biological membranes. Educating and training students within
this multi-disciplinary proposal will prepare these young scientists with a
broad technical background ready to work across traditional disciplines to join
the modern workforce.

Research is the engine that has driven and will continue to drive the U.S.
economy. As a result, continued and growing investments in fundamental
discoveries remain essential. This current proposal focuses on discoveries at
the interface of organic chemistry, polymer science, and biology. Using natural
systems for inspiration, a novel series of synthetic molecules will be designed
that capture the essential features of these natural systems. In the long run,
research like this will impact many fields of science and lead to new
fundamental knowledge at the interface of materials science and biology. This
project will also train graduate students and serve as advanced training for
post-doctoral fellows. With experience spanning from organic chemistry to cell
culture, students will be trained broadly to revolutionize the American
workforce. Specific efforts will focus on continuing to broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities to ensure we utilize all of our
countries talent.