* 1308235
* Studies of random packings of non-spherical objects
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Hernan Makse, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 284,999.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and educational
activities focused to develop a theory that can be used to estimate the packing
density of objects of arbitrary shapes in random configurations. The PI will use
the theory to search for the best random packing in the space of object shapes.
This research will bring together mathematical formulations from spin-glass
theory such as cavity methods and belief propagation to calculate the force
distribution and the coordination number, and the statistical mechanics
formulation of volume fluctuations. The PI expects that this synergistic
approach will produce a more comprehensive picture of the packing problem of
non-spherical particles than before. The theory will estimate the optimum
packing fraction for a class of shapes as an analytical continuation from the
spherical point, thus paving the way for a systematic investigation of an
extension of Ulam's conjecture for random packings.

The development of a theoretical framework to solve a fundamental and ancient
problem in physics and mathematics will have applications in diverse industries
that employ particulate matter, and is therefore of great interest to engineers,
material scientists, physicists and mathematicians alike.

The PI is committed to involve students from underrepresented groups in the
project. The research will also contribute to curriculum development by
enriching instruction in granular matter. Data obtained from simulations will be
made available to the broader research community through the project website.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and educational
activities focused to study non-spherical particles pack. Finding the densest
packing of objects is an outstanding materials science problem that originated
with Kepler's conjecture more than 400 years ago. Almost all shapes existing in
nature are non-spherical and it is believed that non-spherical particles or
grains can pack more densely than spheres. This opens the exciting possibility
for efficient packing optimization by shape variation. The packing problem
appears in a broad range of scientific disciplines from self-assembly of
nanoparticles to virus assemblies. It has also potential impact on industries
involved in the processing of granular materials from concrete to nanocomposite
materials.

The PI is committed to involve students from underrepresented groups in the
project. The research will also contribute to curriculum development by
enriching instruction in granular matter. Data obtained from simulations will be
made available to the broader research community through the project website.