* 1308613
* Magnetism and Spin-Dependent Electronic Properties of Tailored Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Stephan von Molnar, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 560,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of two research
thrusts on the magnetic and spin-dependent electronic properties of tailored
semiconductor nanostructures. The first utilizes the persistent
photoconductivity (PPC) in AlGaAs for a detailed examination of the electronic
spin transport/relaxation as a function of its carrier concentration. PPC
permits in situ photodoping of the semiconductor channel, thus enabling
measurements of spin accumulation and lifetime over broad carrier concentration
ranges in one and the same sample. The research is expected to produce
comprehensive and detailed knowledge of the spin lifetime as well as various
carrier scattering processes relevant to spin relaxation. The second line of
research employs high-sensitivity semiconductor Hall magnetometry techniques to
study the static and dynamic magnetic properties of transition metal-doped InAs
quantum dots (QDs) grown by MBE. The goal of the proposed research is to measure
the magnetization of a small array of, even an individual, QDs via an integrated
micro/nano Hall magnetometer. The scheme may facilitate a direct correlation of
the measured magnetic properties of the QDs with their structural/chemical
characteristics, potentially enabling a definitive understanding of the origin
of the ferromagnetism in the nano-structured diluted magnetic semiconductors.
This grant supports directly the research and education of a PhD student and
indirectly other students already involved with this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Spintronics is an emerging technology which utilizes the
electronic spin to provide new and improved electronic device functionality. For
more than two decades spintronics in metallic devices has enjoyed great
scientific, technological and commercial successes. However, the utilities have
been limited to passive devices such as sensors and memory elements. The
research into semiconductor spintronics is motivated by the need to produce true
three-terminal spintronic logic devices for potential transformative
applications such as nonvolatile reprogrammable logic, spin-based opto-
electronics, and quantum computation. The research here addresses two key
challenges in semiconductor spintronics: coherent manipulation, transport and
detection of electron spins in a semiconducting medium and the understanding of
the ferromagnetism in transitional metal-doped semiconductors. The first project
utilizes light (photo-excitation) to tune the carrier density of an AlGaAs
semiconductor channel, enabling a detailed examination of the electronic spin
transport/relaxation over a broad carrier concentration range in one and the
same sample. The latter employs a high-sensitivity integrated micro/nano Hall
magnetometer to study the static and dynamic magnetic properties of a small
array of, even an individual, transition metal-doped InAs quantum dots. This
grant supports directly the research and education of a PhD students and
indirectly other students already involved in this project. It affords them the
opportunity to interact closely with the students and researchers at the
Institute of Semiconductors, a premiere materials research institution in China.