* 1308970
* Preparing Carbon-Rich and All-Carbon Materials Via Self-Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Nancy Goroff, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 435,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program supports Professor
Nancy Goroff of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, to prepare
novel conjugated polymers and graphitic structures for optoelectronic
applications. The focus of this work is to create new high-carbon or all-carbon
materials with unusual structures that impart unique and desirable physical,
chemical, and electronic properties. Careful characterization determines the
molecular and supramolecular structure for each, and through collaborations with
analytical and physical chemists, the electronic and optical properties and
possible applications for these materials are explored. The research involves
the use of poly(diiododiacetylene) as a precursor to ordered high-carbon
materials, including the linear carbon allotrope carbyne. Also, the preparation
of new ordered polymers from other diynes, triynes, and tetraynes.
Poly(dibromodiacetylene) is a primary target for a highly planar conjugated
polymer with a broader absorption spectrum and greater photostability than
poly(diiododiacetylene), and as a precursor to other materials via post-
polymerization modification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides methods
for preparing new carbon-based semiconducting materials. One application for
these materials is in thin-film solar cells. A key goal is to find new carbon-
based semi-conductors that can absorb a greater percentage of the visible and
infrared solar spectrum, increasing the efficiency of the resulting solar cell.
These materials can also be prepared completely free of toxic metal contaminants
such as palladium or zinc. New materials are critical to the development of the
important field of optoelectronics. A major component of the work involves
collaborative research, which brings together scientists with different
expertise and research focus, increasing communication across disciplinary
boundaries. Graduate students and undergraduates gain experience in making new
materials and studying their properties, skills that can be used in industries
as varied as pharmaceuticals and electronics. Professor Goroff is deeply
involved in outreach activities, notably through the Alan Alda Center for
Communicating Science, housed in the School of Journalism at Stony Brook. She
serves on the Steering Committee for the Alda Center, and acts as a judge for
the Center's annual Flame Challenge, a competition that has attracted
international attention and led to significant insights about how to communicate
scientific ideas most effectively to children.