* 1308656
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jeffrey Pigott, Pigott                  Jeffrey        S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Jeffrey S. Pigott of The Ohio State University to conduct a
research project in Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at Curtin University
in Perth, WA, Australia. The project title is "Calculation of the Water Storage
Capacity of Garnets in the Earth's Deep Interior." The host scientists are
Professor Kate Wright and Professor Julian Gale.

This study addresses the Earth's water budget by calculating the water storage
capacity of garnet, a mineral found in the Earth's upper mantle (~60 km - 410 km
depth) and transition zone (410 km - 660 km depth). Garnet accounts for as much
as 40 percent of the rock volume at 500 km. The water storage capacity of garnet
depends on the mechanism by which the crystal structure incorporates hydrogen
and is also a function of pressure, temperature, and garnet composition. At low
pressures, hydrogen can substitute for silicon in the garnet structure and has
been termed the hydrogarnet substitution. It is likely that the hydrogarnet
substitution becomes less energetically favored when compared to other
mechanisms at greater depths due to pressure. This study calculates the
energetics of different defect mechanisms to pressures equivalent to 660-km
depth for garnets in the pyrope-almandine system. The disseminated results of
this work will compliment experimental studies and can be used by
geodynamicists, geochemists, mineral physicists, and seismologists that model
and predict the state and evolution of the Earth's mantle. Broader impacts of an
EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand research experience
outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science policy, and scientific
infrastructure of the respective location; and an orientation to the society,
culture and language. These activities meet the NSF goal to educate for
international collaborations early in the career of its scientists, engineers,
and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific workforce.
Furthermore, the Fellow plans to publish the results of this research in peer-
reviewed journals and present at international conferences as well as
departmental seminars and colloquia at both Curtin University and The Ohio State
University.