* 1308928
* Self-organizing Control and Scalable Game-theoretical Dispatch of Distributed Generations for High-Penetration Smart Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Marwan Simaan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 331,662.00

The proposed research is concerned with optimizing the performance of a smart
power grid in which heterogeneous and distributed generation sources (DGs)
intermittently and locally communicate with each other and with the grid. As
renewable energy sources become more cost effective and hence more accessible to
the power grid, the current centralized optimization and individual dispatch
approach become unrealistic. Furthermore, because of the generally intermittent
and asynchronous flow of information through local wireless communication
networks, appropriate distributed control mechanisms and optimization methods
need to be implemented. The application of distributed cooperative control,
distributed optimization and distributed game strategies will enable the DGs to
competitively and collaboratively provide power to both local loads and the main
grid. The implementation of these concepts is transformative by ensuring that a
power grid with a high penetration of DGs is efficient and
reliable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research
addresses the fundamental challenges faced by smart grid operators in optimizing
the grid performance and reliability while dealing with unpredictable and
variable power generations of geographically dispersed DGs. We propose a new
framework of distributed control and optimization designs that enable autonomous
dispatch of the aggregate DG generation and automatic voltage control in
distribution networks. This framework consists of investigating in an integrated
manner three interdepended analysis and design methodologies to improve the
operation of the power grid. First, since active power outputs of individual
renewable energy DGs are generally variable and unpredictable, we will design
distributed controls utilizing shared local communication networks in order to
enable them to form collaborative and self-evolving microgrids so that aggregate
generation outputs of the microgrids, instead of the single DG outputs, can be
dispatched. Second, we will formulate distributed optimization and control
algorithms so as to ensure robustly convergent solutions for: regulating
reactive power and maintaining voltage stability within distribution networks,
as well as effectively coordinating among multiple-time-scales of static on-load
tap changers, static var compensators and distributed generation sources.
Finally, through a Stackelberg (Leader-Follower) game algorithm, we will explore
strategies that will allow the grid operator, acting as the leader, to
autonomously interact with the DGs and develop pricing controls to optimize the
operation of the entire grid regardless of the strategies adopted by the
microgrids, either individually or collectively, to optimize their own economic
benefits. The proposed research will focus on integrating these three principles
to derive a revolutionary holistic and multi-level approach to the challenges
involved in optimizing the operation of the grid with a high penetration level
of DGs. The proposed framework has the prominent features that both the
distributed control and optimization algorithms only require local information
but make distribution networks adaptive as a whole and that performance of the
proposed algorithms can be analytically quantified. Preliminary results obtained
by the PIs have demonstrated success of the proposed framework on the IEEE
34-bus distribution network and the IEEE 399-1997
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The technological impact of the
proposed research on the operation of smart power grids will be transformative
and far reaching. More specifically, the proposed new framework not only
optimizes power grid's operation and reduces loss in distribution networks but
also enables a game-theoretic relationship between utility and customers so that
more customers have economic incentives to install plugand- play-ready DG units
and optimize their own benefits. From a broader perspective the proposed
research will have a major impact on the performance optimization of large
complex systems, similar to the smart grid, in formulating member participation
rules so that the behavior of multiple independent agents whose intent is to
pursue their own objectives can be guided and enforced to accomplish system-wide
benefits. Through student training and course development, the project will also
contribute to workforce development in training students in the areas of
renewable energy and power systems where there is currently a shortage.