* 1308621
* Collaborative Research: Loud, Bright, and Hot Compact Binary Mergers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Steven Liebling, Long Island University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 180,463.00

Observing highly energetic astrophysical sources through fundamentally different
radiation channels will be crucial in order to better understand some of the
most intriguing, even exotic, objects and events in our universe. Included among
these are compact binary objects, composed of black holes and neutron stars, as
well as gamma ray bursts and related phenomena. Such objects are powerful
engines for the production of gravitational, electromagnetic and neutrino
radiation. Many research groups as well as observatories and experiments (both
planned and already in operation), are engaged in attempting to observe,
interpret and understand these emissions. Their overall understanding will be
enhanced and furthered as theoretical insight and predictions are used to aid in
their detection and in testing fundamental theories and phenomena. Our purpose
here is to systematically consider non-vacuum compact binary systems and to do
so with sufficient fidelity to obtain their emissions in gravitational and
electromagnetic waves. We will do so by incorporating realistic equations of
state, electromagnetic interactions and cooling effects. In particular, our
approach is to tie ever more tightly together our theoretical understanding of
the possible components and sources of multi-messenger astrophysics. We will
build our efforts on a strong computational foundation, namely a robust
implementation of the equations of general relativistic, resistive
magnetohydrodynamics with adaptive mesh refinement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is of broad interest and naturally combines expertise and know-how that
reaches beyond physicists to astrophysicists and mathematicians. It will advance
our understanding of some of the most intriguing processes in the universe, and
will provide valuable candidate waveforms for gravitational wave observatories
(e.g. LIGO). Our participation in multinational efforts to compare waveforms and
approaches will be especially valuable to the gravitational wave and
astrophysical communities. The activities described here will help further
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral research and training, including a
number of underrepresented individuals. Also, this work uses the HAD
infrastructure and thus helps support broadly useful, publicly released,
software. Additionally, this research involves some of the most exotic objects
in our universe that captures the imagination of the general public.