* 1308457
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The role of biotic association in the evolution of a megadiverse marine bivalve clade
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Jingchun Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 18,722.00

The enormous biodiversity on earth not only provides humans valuable biological
resources, but also serves as a crucial component of our highly interdependent
ecosystem. How this great biodiversity is generated remains a central question
of biology. While much of the tree of life can be generated through abiotic
(non-living) processes, such as climate change or tectonic movements, some of
the most striking diversities arise from biotic interactions between species.
Evolutionary studies of contemporary marine lineages are typically framed within
abiotic hypothesis-testing contexts and have collectively lagged behind
terrestrial studies in developing an integrated framework that includes a
meaningful biotic perspective. The proposed research addresses this deficiency
by studying the evolution of the hyperdiverse clam group Galeommatoidea. It is a
particularly apt group because it contains large numbers of free-living as well
as symbiotic (living with a host) species and is therefore amenable to
comparative approaches. The evolutionary pathways of both free-living and
symbiotic clams are affected by abiotic factors, but the symbiotic species are
influenced by an additional biotic factor: their ecological interactions with
hosts. By comparing the evolutionary patterns of the two groups, the relative
roles of abiotic and biotic factors in driving the diversification of this
species-rich marine lineage can be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research complements the NSF-funded ?Assembling the Bivalve Tree of Life?
initiative and involves extensive collaboration with national and international
museum collections. One graduate student is receiving in-depth research training
in phylogenetic, morphological and macroevolutionary analysis. Four
undergraduate students have been receiving training in molecular phylogenetic
techniques. Many specimens involved in the project will be deposited into the
Museum of Zoology, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan. The
graduate student and two other undergraduate students will be trained to
computerize museum collections and manage electronic taxonomic databases. In
addition, biodiversity data of selected galeommatoidean clams will be
contributing to the Animal Diversity Web (ADW), a premier source of public
biodiversity information that also directly feeds into the online Encyclopedia
of Life. The ADW also serves as a free biodiversity database that allows
students/researchers to conduct comparative meta-analysis across the tree of
life.