* 1308312
* Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry Methodology for Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Emile Schweikert, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,080.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Schweikert at Texas A&M University and his group will
develop an innovative methodology for the analysis of individual nanoparticles,
NPs. The uniqueness of NPs, due to their functionalities not present in bulk
size, is well documented. A nuanced understanding of their functionalities
depends on their accurate characterization. Generally the analysis is done on a
large number (ensemble) of NPs. However, there is likely some variation in the
NP population and ensemble averaging can limit insight into the relationships
between size, composition and chemical reactivity of NPs. This is especially the
case for very small NPs, where minor changes in size, shape, and composition can
significantly affect chemical reactivity. The research involves custom-built
instrumentation and will focus on probing very small NPs (< 50 nanometers) one
by one. Briefly, a NP is bombarded with an individual cluster of 400 gold atoms.
The impact of such a "nanoprojectile" at hypervelocity (30 km/s) generates
abundant ion emission from an area of ~10 nanometer in diameter. The ejecta from
each impact are mass-analyzed and recorded individually. NPs representative of
current nanomaterials research will come from laboratories in the US, UK, France
and Australia. The new tools for investigating NPs will facilitate the
development of efficacious and safe nano-scale materials.