* 1308192
* Scalable Intelligent Power Monitoring and Optimal Control of Distributed Energy Systems Using Adaptive Critics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Keith Corzine, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 368,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to achieve dynamic optimization of micro grid components, especially
power converters, which provide important new opportunities for high bandwidth
intelligent control. With this innovation, cost and reliability can be optimized
with minimal use of fossil fuels. The approach for this research project relies
on adding global positioning type capability to the control of renewable energy
sources which will transform the way in which they operate and make them amiable
to dynamic optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future electric power grid will contain a greater
degree of renewable and alternative energy components (solar panels, wind
generators, fuel cells, hybrid vehicles, etc.). All of these components contain
controllers which are highly capable controllers but, ironically, are
uncoordinated and merely performing necessary control functions. This project
aims at fully utilizing the control capability as well as adding global
positioning circuitry for time-stamping and coordinating power flow. In this
way, the overall power system becomes more intelligent and optimally
controlled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this project is the more-ready incorporation and control of
renewable energy sources and energy storage into the power grid. Furthermore,
dynamic optimization ensures that these energy sources are utilized to their
fullest capacity. This will lead to a significant reduction in the use of fossil
based fuels. The social impact of reducing fossil fuel use tends to attract
women and minorities and this factor will be exploited to increase participation
from these groups. The dissemination of the results will be such as to educate
future engineers and allow adoption of the methods by other researchers.