* 1308952
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Ashley Heers, Heers                   Ashley         M
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 08/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

Building a bird: developmental and evolutionary construction of the avian body
plan

In the process of acquiring the ability to fly, birds and their dinosaur
ancestors have undertaken some of the most dramatic morphological and functional
transformations in vertebrate history. Flight is the most challenging form of
locomotion, and living adult birds have unique anatomical features that permit
them to meet the demands of aerial locomotion. Early winged dinosaurs lacked
many of these features, and consequently, it has long been assumed that early
dinosaurs were incapable of powered flight. Yet baby birds with dinosaur-like
anatomies elude predators by flap-running up slopes and even briefly flying. How
is this accomplished? Whereas locomotion of adult animals is well studied, very
little is known about locomotion of animals with transitional (developing or
evolving) anatomies. Many features change during development and evolution, and
parsing out their effects on locomotion is challenging. However, biomechanical
modeling with programs like SIMM allows scientists to explore the functional
consequences of changes in anatomical design, by manipulating anatomical
parameters individually to determine their effects. Using birds and dinosaurs as
a case study, this project aims to bridge biological, paleontological, and
engineering disciplines to explore biomechanical underpinnings of developmental
and evolutionary transformations in locomotor capacity and ecology.

The primary training objectives are: learning bioengineering approaches to
examine form-function relationships and gaining experience making museum
exhibits that let students see science in action. Anticipated outcomes include
an exhibit that helps students build a digital dinosaur to explore how changes
in anatomy might affect locomotion and presentations to academic and public
audiences.