* 1308197
* Ultracompact Graphene Optical Modulators
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Zhaolin Lu, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2017
* USD 321,238.00

The objective of this research is to explore ultracompact graphene optical
modulators for future on-chip optical communications. The approach is to
systematically explore the unique electro-optic properties of graphene, and to
greatly enhance the interaction of graphene with light based on novel waveguides
and platforms. In particular, graphene in a waveguide can be tuned with
anomalous optical properties with a suitable gate voltage, which will be
employed to develop the proposed modulators.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will systematically explore novel graphene-
sandwiched optical waveguides based on the unique properties of graphene. This
proposed research will be one of the first experimental attempts to demonstrate
optical modulators at nanoscale, and one of the first systematic explorations of
graphene for all-optic modulation. The research results may revolutionize
nanophotonic technology and on-chip optical interconnects, and will contribute
the fundamental theory and techniques for newly developed Graphene
Optoelectronics and Graphene and 2D Semiconductor Physics.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts &lt;br/&gt;Graphene is a topic that is of great interest to the general
public. The outreach activity, "From Graphite to Graphene", will help STEM
education by introducing K-12 students to the science and fabrication of
nanotechnology for a wide range of applications. The students involved in this
research will participate in nanotechnology development, and the results
developed from the research activities will be incorporated into several college
courses. Collaboration with external companies may commercialize valuable
products for industrial and military applications. Under-represented students
from Women in Engineering and North Star Program will be involved in this
project.