* 1308307
* Multidimensional Mass Spectrometry Methods for the Study of Polymer Structures, Architectures, and Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Chrys Wesdemiotis, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2017
* USD 440,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Chrys Wesdemiotis at the University of Akron and his
group will develop multidimensional mass spectrometry methodologies for the
microstructure characterization of synthetic polymers. Liquid chromatography and
ion mobility separation will be combined with tandem mass spectrometry to
characterize novel amphiphiles, hybrid materials, glycopolymers, biodegradable
polymers, and self-assembled macromolecular systems. The ultimate goal is
accurate identification of the corresponding compositions, connectivities, and
architectures in order to ascertain the structural elements that control
macroscopic properties and, thus, facilitate the design of advanced materials
for specific tasks. Many synthetic polymers are engineered for biomedical
applications. These materials are invisible to cells unless proteins attach to
their surface. A second goal of this project is to probe if changes occur to
proteins that interact with synthetic polymers and to quantify protein adhesion
on polymers prepared for biomedical and clinical use. A third, related objective
concerns the advancement of methods that probe the surface layer of synthetic
polymers, so that alterations resulting from environmental factors or
segregation phenomena can be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major motivation
for the planned studies is the need for sensitive chemical analyses of the novel
materials produced for industrial and clinical purposes at the University of
Akron and its industrial partners in Northeast Ohio. The methods developed in
this project will help chemists to design and produce better performing and
commercially important materials for a variety of uses such as medical implants,
drug delivery compounds, and high performance plastics. At the same time, the
planned research activities will educate and train American undergraduate,
graduate, and postgraduate students, including students from underrepresented
groups, in modern materials research and mass spectrometry techniques, two areas
with growing employment opportunities that are vital for the nation's
technological progress.