* 1308818
* Dissertation Research: Phosphorus mobilization by legume cover crops in agricultural systems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Peter Vitousek, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,812.00

Agricultural productivity is often limited by the availability of soil
nutrients, including phosphorus (P). Phosphorus availability in soils is limited
because most soil P is not directly available to plants and natural inputs are
insufficient to replace P removed by harvest. Applications of fertilizers or
manures are thus required to maintain soil fertility and yields, but
economically viable P reserves are declining and P losses from agricultural
systems degrade aquatic ecosystems. This project evaluates whether cover crops,
especially legumes, could provide P fertility for cash crops while reducing P
input requirements by mobilizing soil P (converting P bound to soil minerals and
organic matter into plant-available forms). The central objective is to identify
how different species of cover crops could mobilize P. To do so, complementary
approaches ? field measurements in long-term experiments, greenhouse studies,
and computation of P budgets ? will be used. Measures will be taken of different
forms of soil P, processes that mobilize P, transfer rates of P from cover crop
to cash crop, and the overall importance of P mobilization by cover crops
relative to other P fluxes at the farm scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will contribute to the development of alternative fertilization strategies that
could maintain soil fertility while reducing costly P inputs. It will test
whether using cover crops could contribute to this goal and provide a better
understanding of P transformations in soils where different plant species grow.
Because results from this project should be directly relevant to farm
practitioners, this research will be coupled with outreach activities to
disseminate results widely, including making the data publicly available,
contributing to cover crop databases, and transferring knowledge through
activities held outside of academic circles (field days, non-technical
publications). This project will also involve undergraduate students and provide
them with basic training in ecosystem science.&lt;br/&gt;