* 1308231
* Switched angle spinning NMR probes and stabilized membrane mimetics for oriented biomolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Rachel Martin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2018
* USD 425,000.00

In this award, the Chemical Measurements and Imaging program of the Chemistry
Division supports Dr. Rachel Martin and her students at the University of
California at Irvine, to develop novel switched-angle NMR probe and methodology
for studying the structure of membrane proteins in their native environment,
building on her previous work in this area. In addition to developing
experimental and instrumental tools that are optimized for studying oriented
liquids, Dr. Martin's group will develop methods for preparing and optimizing
model phospholipid membranes based on mixed lipid bicelles, which will
facilitate solving the structures of membrane proteins. These lipid membrane
systems are lyotropic liquid crystals, and as such they also are themselves an
interesting chemical system for study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane proteins
are essential for transport of everything that passes in or out of a cell,
including nutrients, waste, signaling molecules, and even information. Due to
their multi-functionality, these proteins are critical to understanding how
cells grow and communicate. In order to understand the function of membrane
proteins and find cures for diseases, the structure of the protein in its native
environment, that is, embedded in a lipid membrane, is necessary. Despite their
importance, there is a paucity of structural information about membrane
proteins, because they are difficult to study using traditional techniques. The
sophisticated experimental tools that Dr. Martin will develop will help generate
the structural information about membrane proteins other scientists need to
develop new pharmaceuticals, engineer biomimetic systems, and understand the
differences between healthy biological processes and the development of disease
states. Dr. Martin is committed to training a diverse and international
workforce in issues ranging from scientific literacy to science policy through
participation in her research program at UC Irvine. The educational plan
comprises several components, including training of graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as outreach to middle school and high school students in
grades 6-12 in the framework of UCI's LEAPS program. The goals are increasing
interest in science by hosting students in Dr. Martin's lab, and piquing
interest in science via hands-on activities and interaction with undergraduate
researchers. Dr. Martin's work comprises elements of chemistry, biology, and
physics; she will engage students from the undergraduate to the postdoctoral
level in her work, and train them in thinking and problem solving across
disciplinary boundaries.