* 1308438
* RUI: Studying the Strong Nuclear Force at Augustana College
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Nathan Grau, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2017
* USD 149,312.00

This award makes possible the creation of a new scientic program and laboratory
at Augustana College in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, devoted to the study of the
strong nuclear force, the force responsible for the binding of protons and
neutrons in a nucleus. The central question that will be studied in this award
is an understanding of the kinematics of low-energy gluons, the particles that
mediate the strong force, in the nucleus. This will be studied with the
construction of a new detector component to be added to the PHENIX experiment
that will measure small angle production of neutral pions and direct photons in
p+A collisions. The rate of production is directly related to the kinematics of
the gluon in the nucleus A. In parallel, the group will be performing data
analysis to become familiar with the existing detector and learn how to best
combine the current detector and the new extension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program in strong nuclear physics will be the first of its kind in South Dakota.
It provides those in the state and the region access to studying this physics
where they have little opportunity. The award will fund research for
undergraduates studying both physics and pre-engineering. The educational
benefit for the students is broad. Both data analysis and detector development
will be conducted, skills which are of general use to any physics or engineering
field. Their research experience will teach or reinforce skills learned in
computer science, mathematics, and in physics. For beginning undergraduates,
research in this area will introduce them early to more advanced concepts giving
them additional exposure aiding the learning process. Those interested in
engineering will benefit from the detector testing and development that will be
done on site. Further, since science is not done alone, students will travel to
other institutions and to Brookhaven National Laboratory to help install and
maintain the detector. This will provide them with opportunities to meet
scientists from around the world and put them in contact with potential graduate
schools.