* 1308527
* RUI: Issues in Modeling Gravitational-Wave Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Marc Favata, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 126,000.00

With the installation of the upgraded Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave
Observatory (LIGO) nearing completion, we expect to detect multiple
gravitational-wave (GW) sources before the end of the decade. The primary goal
of this award is to help ensure that we understand the GW signals as accurately
as possible so that we can extract the best science from the expected
detections. To do this, the gravitational-wave group at Montclair State
University will implement improved waveform templates focusing on (i) binaries
with precessing spins, (ii) tidal interactions in binaries containing neutron
stars, and (iii) binaries with small orbital eccentricity. These improved
templates will be used to quantify the amount of systematic bias in our
estimates of the GW source parameters. This bias arises from uncertainties in
our knowledge of the actual GW signal. We will also test the effectiveness of
simple waveform templates that will search for the GW "memory" effect. The
memory is a non-oscillatory piece of the GW signal that is particularly evident
in signals from supernova explosions and binary black hole
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational wave detection provides a new and
powerful way to observe some of the most violent events in the universe: the
collisions of black holes and neutron stars. Observing these collisions with GWs
will test our understanding of Einstein's theory of gravity and also probe
aspects of nuclear physics that are inaccessible in terrestrial laboratories
(such as the nature of ultra-dense matter). This award will advance the effort
to model and understand these collisions with high accuracy. Much of this work
will involve the education and training of undergraduate and graduate students.
By applying physics, mathematics, computation, and critical thinking to an
important scientific problem, these students will acquire technical skills that
are in increasingly high demand. Black holes and general relativity continue to
fascinate citizens of all ages. This award includes a strong educational
outreach component that communicates the excitement of this field to K-12
students, undergraduates, and the general public.