* 1308247
* SusChEM: Sustainable Polymeric Materials Based on Catalytic Transformation of Renewable Resources
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Robert Mathers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Robert Mathers of the Pennsylvania State
University at New Kensington will study pathways to synthesize polymers from
renewable bio-based molecules that also display tunable physical properties and
multiple modes of degradation. First, combinations of atom efficient reactions
will be linked together to synthesize monomers from bio-based reagents. Then,
the monomers will be polymerized using free-radical chemistry and the resulting
polymers will be characterized. The broader impacts of the project involve
developing a teaching module targeted towards middle and high school students on
the topics of sustainability, the use of renewable resources, physical
properties of materials, and chemical reactions. This module allows students to
experience the concept of a sustainable material through the preparation of a
degradable and non-toxic polymer based on glycerol and citric acid.

Plastics are long chain organic molecules and are found in many facets of
everyday life, including food packaging, structural materials for automotive and
aerospace transportation, and lightweight electronic devices. At present,
plastics are derived predominantly from petroleum based resources. This research
focuses on developing sustainable synthetic routes into plastics based upon bio-
derived feedstocks.