* 1308896
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Ellen Lamont, Lamont                  Ellen          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Ellen A. Lamont of the University of Connecticut, Center for
Integrative Geosciences to conduct a research project in Geosciences during the
summer of 2013 at National Cheng-Kung University, Department of Earth Sciences
Tainan, Taiwan. The project title is "Using Earthquake-Generated 3-D Imagery and
GPS-Based Deformation Models to Understand a Plate Collision Zone in Taiwan."
The host scientist is Dr. Ruey-Juin Rau.

This grant funds an integrative study of the geologically young Taiwan
collisional zone that utilizes seismic, tomographic, and geodetic datasets
(previously collected by a series of NSF supported instrumentation arrays). The
anomalously high convergence rate (82mm/yr toward 330°) (Lee and Chan, 2007) has
created spectacular topography (~3km) adjacent to large coastal planes and has
caused a complicated crustal architecture to develop. The study area occurs at
one of the youngest portions of the developing orogen and allows us to study
these fundamental processes as they occur. Preliminary investigations of the
area reveal a suite of earthquakes beneath the deforming orogenic material (i.e.
beneath the decollément) and a conspicuous, high-velocity zone at 40km depth in
tomographic imagery that may be controlling how the orogen deforms. From such
findings, the Fellow hypothesizes two possible scenarios: 1) the primary
decollément is stepping down into deeper continental basement possibly creating
a new detachment over which the orogen is growing; 2) the deep seismicity and
high velocity zone represent a change in the chemical composition of the lower
crust. A different type of crust would behave differently under stress and may
well be the source of the deep seismicity.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Further knowledge about the fundamental processes
occurring in collisional systems is applicable to the study of other collisional
systems, modern and historical. A protocol could also be developed pertaining to
acceptable ways to integrate non-related datasets effectively. More directly,
active collision zones are sources for great earthquakes (i.e. the 1999 Chi-Chi
Earthquake in Taiwan, the Chilean Earthquake, the 2011 Japan Earthquake, etc.)
that cause millions of dollars in damage and the loss of countless innocent
lives. Advancing our knowledge of the way in which the crust deforms during
collision would move us one step closer to developing more accurate models of
fault locations, hazard identification and early warning systems, affectively
reducing costs, both economic and human. Furthermore, Components of this project
will also be used to supplement classroom lectures/activities and will enhance
the research experience of early-career students in the United States and
abroad. The results of this project will be made available to the wider
tectonics and structural geology community through presentations at scientific
conferences and the publication of the Fellow's master's thesis.