* 1308087
* Program management support for the integrated, multidisciplinary Bering Sea Project:   Maximizing return on investment
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Thomas VanPelt, Alaska SeaLife Center
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 324,791.00

This award will support program office and synergistic activities to conclude an
integrated, multidisciplinary research program in the eastern Bering Sea, funded
through a partnership between the National Science Foundation and the North
Pacific Research Board (NPRB). Underway since 2007, the Bering Sea Project has
involved dozens of individual research projects and more than 100 investigators,
all working toward the goal of improving our understanding of how this highly
productive (and economically critical) marine ecosystem may respond to climate
change, particularly as mediated through changes in seasonal ice cover. This
award seeks to maximize the return on NSF?s and NPRB?s investment during the
final two years of the program, through several key activities deemed most
critical to capturing and communicating the program's scientific
accomplishments. The project would provide funds for 1) publication of thematic
special issues of the scientific journal Deep-Sea Research II, 2) travel for
members of the Bering Sea Project Science Advisory Board (SAB) to one in-person
meeting in Arlington, Virginia and a scientific meeting (the 2014 Alaska Marine
Science Symposium), and 3) travel and meeting expenses associated with a
capstone open science meeting in 2014. From the start, the Bering Sea Project
has incorporated a diverse suite of communication, outreach, and education
activities to convey the scientific discoveries of the program to stakeholders,
teachers, students, and the public. Funding would support print and electronic
publication of short "headlines" scientific synopses, a longer Bering Sea
Project magazine, and a programmatic "lessons learned" article.