* 1308655
* Chemical Approaches for Quantification and Visualization of the Prenylome
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mark Distefano, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 387,185.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Mark Distefano from the University of Minnesota to
develop methods to quantify and image the prenylome. Overall levels of
prenylation will be measured by metabolic labeling with alkyne- or azide-
containing substrate analogues followed by click reaction with a fluorescent
reagent and subsequent quantification via flow cytometry. To selectively observe
the localization of prenylated proteins such as K-Ras, alkyne- or azide-
containing substrate analogues will be metabolically incorporated followed by
click reaction with fluorescent probes and visualization via confocal
microscopy. FRET-based methods and a strategy involving proximity-induced
amplification will also be investigated to increase visualization sensitivity
and selectivity. Results from the first objective will improve the understanding
of how differences in prenylation levels correlate with various drug treatments
and disease states. Results from the second objective will help clarify how the
activities of prenylated proteins are regulated via changes in their subcellular
localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein prenylation involves the attachment
of a lipid group to a protein; several hundred of such proteins are present in
human cells. Prenylated proteins are involved in regulating many features of
cellular behavior including growth and communication and a number of diseases
require the participation of such proteins. The focus of this proposal is to
develop new methods to monitor the levels of prenylated proteins and track their
location within cells. If this can be accomplished, new approaches to combat an
array of diseases ranging from cancer to aging may emerge. This project will
also be used as a vehicle to introduce a group of undergraduates to research by
having them use the methods developed here to investigate protein prenylation in
a wide variety of cell types and model organisms.