* 1308435
* Non-equilibrium dynamics of quantum many-body systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2018
* Eugene Demler, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports fundamental theoretical research and
education to advance conceptual understanding of quantum mechanical systems of
many particles that are far from the balanced state of equilibrium, such as
electrons in materials or large molecules in a strong electric field. As
electronic devices shrink to ever smaller sizes, quantum mechanics becomes
increasingly important to describe their operation which becomes further from
equilibrium than current device technologies. Motivation for this research comes
from experiments on nanostructures, assemblies of atoms that are on a scale some
100,000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair, nanomechanical systems
such as biomolecular motors, systems of atoms that are trapped by light and
cooled near the absolute zero of temperature, and as well as optical systems.
This award supports theoretical research to develop concepts that are
universally applicable across diverse quantum systems such as these by
exploiting the ability to carry out carefully controlled experiments in one
area, for example systems of ultracold atoms to advance understanding in
another, such as transport of electrons in nanostructures, in which owing to
contact with the environment, it is difficult to achieve the same level of
control in experiments. The research will be integrated with education at
several levels from graduate level course development to pedagogical lectures at
international summer and winter schools.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education to
discover emergent universal behavior and to identify paradigms in the
nonequilibrium dynamics of quantum many-body systems. The PI seeks to develop
new concepts and new theoretical techniques motivated by experimental advances
across condensed matter physics, ultracold atoms, and optics. The PI will use
models, and theoretical and computational methods in close contact with
experiments to study: relaxation and thermalization in nearly integrable
systems, the conditions under which a hydrodynamic description is valid, the
extent to which concepts from phase transitions and criticality apply, open and
driven systems, and phenomena at the intersection of condensed matter and
ultracold atom physics. The PI will develop new analytical and numerical methods
aimed at understanding dynamical evolution of complex many-body systems.
Analytical techniques will use exact Bethe ansatz solutions, perturbative
expansions using nonequilibrium Keldysh formalism, the renormalization group
approach, and analysis of effective field theories. Numerical approaches will
include truncated Wigner approximation, time dependent dynamical mean-field
renormalization group method, and dynamical mean-field theory calculations. The
PI aims to exploit well controlled experiments on ultracold atoms together with
theoretical advances to address the fundamental questions: Is there universality
in nonequilibrium quantum dynamics at all? Is there emergent collective behavior
which would enable the classification of quantum dynamics into several
fundamental categories? The research will be integrated with education at
several levels from graduate level course development to pedagogical lectures at
international summer and winter schools.