* 1308084
* RUI: Experimental Studies of Isotropic Disordered Photonic Band Gap Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Weining Man, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2018
* USD 400,028.00

Technical Description: The goal of this project is to understand electromagnetic
wave propagation in disordered photonic media and to uncover novel mechanisms
that control and guide light in a new class of engineered disordered photonic
band gap materials. In contrast to the conventional photonic bandgap formation
theory, it has been recently predicted by the PI and her collaborators that a
large isotropic complete energy gap (forbidden frequencies for all
polarization), rather than a mobility gap associated with localized states,
exists in certain hyperuniform disordered dielectric systems. In this research
project, the PI and her laboratory bridge two areas previously considered
separate: photonic bandgap, usually associated with periodicity (Bragg's
scattering), and light localization, usually associated with disordered systems.
They use microwave and centimeter-scale samples to uncover the nature of various
electromagnetic wave modes (photonic states) in the disordered materials,
measure bandgap width, robustness and dispersion, and compare their dependence
on the geometry of the disordered structures to determine the properties
essential for photonic bandgap formation. By exploring the functional waveguide
and cavity architecture in these systems, the PI's laboratory tests these
disordered bandgap structures as isotropic platforms for freeform optical
circuits and demonstrates their advantages over photonic crystals in controlling
photon propagation. The PI also fabricates and characterizes these disordered
structures at sub-micrometer scale to explore their properties and applications
in the infrared.

Non-technical Description: Photonic bandgap materials are artfully made
materials designed to manipulate light propagation and have applications in many
fields, including signal processing, telecommunication, lasering and solar-
energy harvesting. This research project lays the experimental foundation for
using isotropic disordered photonic bandgap materials for applications at
microwave and infrared frequencies. The isotropic disordered photonic bandgap
materials offer flexibility and versatility in device design that are prohibited
by the crystalline structures in conventional photonic bandgap materials. They
have a potential to advance the abilities to control and guide light and to
impact the photonics industry by inventing novel photonic devices. This project
integrates education and research and incorporates the research methods and
results into lecture and laboratory courses at San Francisco State University
(SFSU). It offers opportunities for research and career development to SFSU
students and greatly enriches the learning experience of students, including
large numbers of minority and economically challenged students. The PI reaches
out to California educators to recruit, train, and nurture the professional
development of K-12 and college teachers preparing them to integrate modern
optics, materials science, and advanced geometry into their teaching, thereby
enriching the education of many K-12 and college students from diverse
backgrounds.