* 1308211
* Instrument Development:  A Miniature, High-resolution, Stationary Grating Spatial Heterodyne UV Raman Spectrometer-Towards Miniature UV Raman Sensors and "Raman on a Chip"
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Stanley Angel, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 07/31/2017
* USD 444,500.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Stanley M. Angel and his students at the University of South
Carolina, will develop miniature deep-UV Raman spectrometers of unprecedentedly
small size. The miniature Raman spectrometer design is based on a stationary
grating, spatial heterodyne spectrometer (SHS) and will have high spectral
resolution, a large spectral range and high light throughput. The proposed UV
Raman spectrometer is a radically new design that allows mm-size spectrometers
with spectral characteristics equal to or better than larger instruments and
with higher light throughput than conventional Raman instruments of comparable
size, and with high acceptance angle. The proposed work is designed to move
towards miniature Raman chemical sensors. The spectrometer will substantially
broaden the applicability of Raman for on-line, in-situ, in-vivo, and standoff
measurements, in wide-ranging applications. This project will include studies in
four major areas: 1) what are the fundamental size limitations of a SHS based
Raman spectrometer, 2) how do noise and background sources scale with instrument
size, 3) how can an interferometer output be coupled to an external detector,
and 4) what new applications are made possible by the availability of a
miniature UV Raman spectrometer. The implications of on-line spectroscopic
sensors to chemical process monitoring and advanced and additive manufacturing
will be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman spectrometers provide
information about the molecular composition of samples by recording small
changes in the wavelength (color) of incident light produced by molecular
vibrations in the sample. In this project, miniature spectroscopic tools will be
developed using cutting-edge technology, opening up whole new areas of
analytical measurement possibilities because the small size and UV spectroscopic
performance of the miniature SHRS proposed will substantially broaden the range
of Raman spectrometer applications. Areas of potential use include chemical
process monitoring, on-line chemical kinetics measurements, imaging of
biological tissues and cells, standoff forensics analysis, planetary
exploration, hand held geological instruments, deep-ocean oceanographic
measurements, electronics device characterization, high explosives detection,
and many others. This project also provides outstanding opportunities for
undergraduates and graduate students to acquire knowledge and skills in
spectroscopy, lasers and optics as well as applications of analytical chemistry.