* 1308890
* Nonregular asymptotics under dependence and inference on change points in graphical networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Moulinath Banerjee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 115,000.00

The proposed project will make two main intellectual contributions: (i) the
development of non-regular asymptotic theory for a class of problems involving
dependent data (time series models, for example), (ii) inference on change-
points for time-varying graphical networks. Non-regular problems, of increasing
importance in modern statistics, are those where natural estimators are highly
non-linear in the data and deriving their asymptotic properties requires the
application of sophisticated tools (like modern empirical process methods), in
contrast to the asymptotic linearization techniques that work for estimators
arising in `regular' parametric and semiparametric problems. Shape-restricted
inference for time series data, for which not much is yet known, and which has
important implications for some pressing problems (as in the monotone trends
observed in global warming and environmental pollution) will be one important
focus in the proposed study of non-regular methods. Another goal is to develop a
unified theoretical framework for the study of M-estimators (i.e. estimators
obtained by minimizing/maximizing a random criterion function) for finite
dimensional parameters in the dependent data setting, which will provide a
generic approach (a paradigm as well as a set of tools) to the study of a
variety of problems that have been, hitherto, solved on a case-by-case basis and
other similar problems that arise in important applications in economics and
biology. As far as (ii) is concerned, the problem of time-varying graphs, either
observed or unobserved, whose structures undergo sudden massive changes at
certain points in time, is of prime importance in a variety of examples, ranging
from biology and engineering to social sciences and economics. Rigorous
inferential procedures for determining such `change-points' in time -- regime
changes -- in a variety of network models (like Markov transitioning random
graphs, Markov random fields), that are interesting both from a mathematical
perspective and in that they provide useful models for many observed phenomena,
will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program is
motivated by problems arising in a variety of fields, ranging from climatology
and environmental studies to economics and genomics. More specifically, part of
the proposed project deals with making intelligent predictions on increasing or
decreasing `trend' functions, e.g. the GDP output of a rapidly developing
country, global temperature trends over time, by taking advantage of their pre-
known monotone shape. The proposed techniques are novel and expected to enjoy
considerable benefits over existing statistical procedures. A related goal is to
develop new theoretical tools for addressing a wealth of statistical procedures
that share some key common features and are of considerable importance in
problems arising in economics. The second part of the project is focused on
investigating sudden `regime' changes in mechanisms called `networks' which
describe interactions among a collection of entities: for example, genetic
networks which capture how genes interact with each other and with proteins to
regulate bodily functions, social networks where a group of people interact on
sites like Facebook or Twitter and exchange information in the process. Drastic
changes in network behavior typically represent the onset of a critical event,
say a disease in the gene network setting, or socio-economic upheaval in the
social network setting, and it is therefore important to identify them. Inter-
disciplinary collaborations with biologists, economists and environmental
scientists will be pursued actively to enhance the impact of the proposed
research.