* 1308872
* Structural-Information Enhanced Inference for Large-Scale and High-Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Chunming Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2016
* USD 130,001.00

A fundamental research issue for large-scale and high-dimensional inference
procedures is how can we incorporate the structural information from the data to
enhance large-scale computing, machine learning and statistical inference.
Learning and exploiting such structure is crucial towards better analysis of
complex datasets. This proposal aims to incorporate important structures of the
data and association among feature variables and the response variable into
devising efficient experimental approaches and algorithms for large scale
problems and understanding theoretical properties of the procedures. Project 1
develops a feature screening approach in the high dimension, low sample size
paradigm which takes into account the correlation structure among the features.
The PI proposes a framework of inference for selecting feature variables
relevant to the response variable. In the context of large-scale simultaneous
inference, the hypotheses are often accompanied with certain structural prior
information. Project 2 proposes a new multiple testing procedure, which
maintains control of the false discovery rate while incorporating the prior
information. Large-scale multiple testing tasks often exhibit dependence, and
leveraging the dependence among individual tests is an important but challenging
problem in statistics. Project 3 proposes a multiple testing procedure which
allows general dependence structures and heterogeneous dependence parameters.

This proposal aims to tackle some challenging research problems, arising from
frontiers of biological, medical and scientific research, with a common theme of
exploiting structural information in high-dimensional data. New tools for
stochastic modeling, computational algorithms, parameter learning, and
statistical inference applied to large-scale and high-dimensional data, for
example, brain fMRI imaging data and datasets from genome-wide association
studies on breast cancer, will be developed. Dissemination of these developments
will enhance new knowledge discoveries, and strengthen interdisciplinary
collaborations. The research will also be integrated with educational practice
through multi-disciplinary courses on the contemporary state-of-the-art data
mining and machine learning, and benefit the training and learning of
undergraduate, graduate students and underrepresented minorities.