* 1308384
* Spectroscopy of Early Intermediates in Nitrogenase Catalysis - From Steady State to Femtoseconds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Stephen Cramer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2017
* USD 417,021.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division supports Dr. Stephen P. Cramer at the University of California, Davis
to characterize the earliest stages of biological nitrogen fixation and CO
reduction using advanced, high-speed vibrational spectroscopy techniques. These
species are prepared either by flash photolysis of trapped intermediates or by
photochemical delivery of substrates or electrons. A variety of CO species have
already been observed by IR spectroscopy, but some reactions occur too fast to
be seen by stopped-flow FT-IR methods. Instead, a spectrograph and array
detector are used to push into sub-millisecond time scale. As for N2
intermediates, there is no information about the earliest steps in N2 binding,
and a combination of IR and femtosecond pump-probe methods is utilized to search
for these species.

Nitrogenase is a metal-containing enzyme with extraordinary catalytic
activities. For example, it can reduce nitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3), something
that no other enzyme can do. But, it can also reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) to
methane (CH4) and CO to alkenes (so-called Fischer-Tropsch chemistry), and
finally, it can produce hydrogen. Although these net reactions are well
established, the detailed steps for how this occurs are poorly understood. Some
1-2% of industrial energy production is used to fix nitrogen. Any improvement or
optimization of the biological process offers enormous potential economic and
societal benefits. Even small improvements in natural N2 fixation, or use of
nitrogenase for Fischer-Tropsch fuels production or as an efficient hydrogenase,
would contribute to areas with enormous economic and environmental leverage.
This project allows graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to acquire
specialized training in lasers and high-speed spectroscopy. They also interact
with fellow scientists around the world, including Milan, Madrid, Berlin and
Japan. During the summer they share their skills and help train undergraduates
from around the country.