* 1308654
* Doping in Non-Planar Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Lincoln Lauhon, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 380,832.00

Technical Description: Non-planar heterostructures, particularly core-shell
nanowires, exhibit a number of comparative advantages for optoelectronic
applications with respect to conventional planar heterostructures. The analysis
of dopant distribution and interface morphology is extremely challenging,
however, limiting the understanding of fundamental growth processes that is
needed to optimize the structure and properties. This project investigates the
driving forces that control dopant and alloy element incorporation, diffusion,
and segregation in non-planar heterostructures consisting of both Si-Ge and
GaAs-AlGaAs core-shell nanowires. To this end, atom probe tomography, Hall
effect measurements, Kelvin probe force microscopy, and micro-photoluminescence
are used to relate doping levels, and fluctuations in composition, to electronic
and optical properties. Numerical modeling of dopant diffusion during processing
and electrical transport in device structures is based on and compared with
quantitative, atomic scale composition information provided by the atom probe
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: New materials, and
conventional materials in new forms, can improve existing technologies and lead
to the creation of new technologies. This project is developing a fundamental
understanding of how known semiconductor materials, such as silicon and gallium
arsenide, can be put together in new ways to better perform important functions,
such as the efficient conversion of light to electrical energy and vice versa.
The research activity is specifically focused on non-planar heterostructures,
where "heterostructure" indicates the combination of two distinct materials and
"non-planar" indicates that the junction between these materials has a complex
three-dimensional form so as to better carry out key device functions. To
analyze the shape of non-planar heterostructures and the distribution of tiny
quantities of charge-controlling dopant atoms within them, a highly specialized
microscope known as an atom probe tomographic is employed. The atom probe can
look inside the very smallest devices that have ever been made and map out the
distribution of all the elements that are present. The project incorporates an
industrial perspective on the development of materials for new technologies by
including a "co-op on campus" program, in which undergraduate research projects
of relevance to the larger goals of the research are solicited from industrial
partners.