* 1308381
* Zero and ultra-low-field nuclear magnetic resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Dmitry Budker, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,750.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, Profs. Alexander
Pines and Dmitry Budker and their groups at the University of California -
Berkeley are developing nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) in zero magnetic field
as a subject of basic research and as a practical tool in chemistry and
materials science. This work will uncover new phenomena in magnetic resonance
and will eventually free NMR from its reliance upon externally imposed magnetic
fields, leading to new technologies in portable NMR for chemical analysis and
imaging. At zero magnetic field, nuclear spins in isotropic liquid samples
evolve only under the electron mediated scalar couplings (J-couplings) between
spins. Despite the absence of chemical shift information in zero-field NMR, the
J-couplings are very sensitive to subtle changes in geometry and electronic
structure and are thus a source of precise chemical information. As such, a
primary goal of this research program is the demonstration of zero-field NMR
J-spectroscopy as a technique for high-precision chemical fingerprinting and
analysis. Furthermore, in order to disentangle chemical information from complex
spectra, efforts will focus on the development of multi-pulse sequences for
decoupling and recoupling specific heteronuclear and homonuclear couplings in
zero-field multidimensional spectroscopy. This will involve advances in
instrumentation and development of a theoretical understanding of average
Hamiltonian theory and coherence transfer in the isotropic zero-field
environment, as the symmetries are fundamentally different from those
encountered in high-field NMR. The research program will also investigate
nuclear-spin singlet state dynamics at zero magnetic field as a subject of basic
research that will provide insight for the implementation of long-lived
hyperpolarized states for biomedical applications.

NMR is a widely used technique in the physical and biological sciences for
chemical detection, characterization, and structure elucidation. It is also the
basis of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This research program is expanding
the capabilities of NMR by moving in a new direction; one that does not require
costly and immobile superconducting magnets. By employing sensitive atomic
magnetometers to measure NMR signals, this work will enable portable and low-
cost zero-field magnetic resonance sensors with potential applications ranging
from environmental testing to geophysical and space research to medicine to
fundamental physics. This project is providing training to graduate and
undergraduate students in multiple disciplines, as well as mentoring for
postdoctoral researchers, and is catalyzing research collaborations with
scientists from the USA and abroad.