* 1308458
* Scalable Spectral Methods for Statistical Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Tao Shi, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2014
* USD 1,390.00

Recent rapid developments in information technology, fast computation, data
collection methods and storage capacity have lead us to an uncharted territory
of data analysis.The scientific research community encounters not only massive
volume of data, but also datesets with complicated and nontraditional
structures. For example, NASA's satellites generate a massive amount of high-
dimensional datasets for climate studies and it is critical to pull out
important climate features that may help explain climate changes and predict the
future. Meanwhile, the advance in communication technology leads to recent
surges on the usage and studies of massive networks such as computer networks
and social networks. The emergence of these massive data with nontraditional
structures presents new challenges in statistical methodology developments, and
even more importantly, algorithm innovations. To address these challenges in
this proposal the PI intends to develop scalable spectral methods for
statistical inference on Euclidian data, non-Euclidian data, and relationship
data. These newly emerging nontraditional type of data and problems provide us
with great opportunities for exciting scientific discovery. Spectral methods are
natural tools for extracting information and knowledge from these nontraditional
data. Along with theoretical analysis of the properties and accuracies of these
spectral methods, the PI will develop scalable algorithms and test them in real
world applications like climate study and network analysis.

The project is motivated by real scientific problems and real world applications
related with massive datasets with nontraditional data structures. Besides
theoretical development in statistical methodology,the PI will work with
collaborators in the fields of Atmospheric Science, Computer Science,
Meteorology, and Statistics to apply the proposed inference tools to climate
change study. This new set of methods and related softwares for inference on
massive datasets will greatly help geoscientists and climate modeler in
analyzing climate records and calibrating climate models. Collaborating with
Computer Scientists and Statisticians, the PI will also develop scalable
spectral algorithms for network analysis, with applications to biological
networks and social networks. These tools will assist a broad range of
scientists, engineers, and business analysts in scientific exploration,
technology innovation, and service improvement.