* 1308641
* Hydrogen at Ultra-High Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* Isaac Silvera, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 851,287.00

****Technical Abstract**** One of the outstanding problems and challenges to
condensed matter physics is to produce hydrogen in the metallic phase at ultra
high pressures. Metallic hydrogen (MH) has been predicted to be a room
temperature superconductor, and may be metastable, that is, it remains metallic
when the pressure is released. If metastable MH would be the most powerful
rocket propellant known. There are two pathways to MH: at high pressure hydrogen
can be heated above the melting line to a new phase, the plasma phase
transition, or PPT, where in the liquid phase it dissociates to become an atomic
metallic liquid. The second pathway is to pressurize along a quasi-isotherm
until it dissociates and becomes atomic metallic. Ultrahigh pressures are
produced in diamond anvil cells and must be extended to pressures ~5 megabar to
produce the predicted phases. Techniques have been developed for processing
diamonds to increase their useful range of pressure and temperature with
hydrogen samples. Using pulsed lasers, samples of hydrogen in the megabar
pressure range have been heated to temperatures of a few thousand Kelvin and a
phase transition has been observed. Measurements will be made to show that this
phase is metallic or the PPT. Recent quasi-isothermal experiments have revealed
a new phase above ~2 megabar, but not metallic. Experiments to study hydrogen to
much higher pressures, beyond those of the new phase will be carried out by
postdoctoral fellows, graduate, and undergraduate students in their educational
development.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** The most prevalent element in the universe is
hydrogen; pure hydrogen is found on earth bound together as diatomic molecules,
that liquefy and solidify at very low temperatures as a transparent molecular
insulator. For over 75 years it has been speculated that when pressurized, the
molecules would dissociate to form an atomic solid or liquid that is metallic,
with spectacular properties. These include room temperature superconductivity,
existence of a liquid at absolute zero of temperature and millions of
atmospheres pressure, superfluidity. Moreover metallic hydrogen is predicted to
be metastable, that is, it would remain in the metallic phase when pressure is
released, just as diamond made from carbon at high pressure does not revert to
graphite when pressure is released. If metastable, metallic hydrogen would be
the most powerful rocket fuel known and would revolutionize rocketry. Using
diamond anvil cells to generate high pressures and optical techniques of study
the pressure range will be extended, aiming to achieve pressures up to 4 to 5
million atmospheres and heating samples with lasers to thousands of degrees.
Success in this program, carried out by postdoctoral fellows, graduate, and
undergraduate students, and where possible high school students, will extend our
knowledge and understanding of this simplest, but most complex atom in the
periodic table of the elements.