* 1308006
* Collaborative Research: C-HetNet -Towards Spectrum and Energy Efficient Next Generation Wireless Access Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Rose Qingyang Hu, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 205,548.00

The objective of this research is to exploit and establish the theoretical
foundations to support the design of next generation cooperative, clean and
centralized heterogeneous wireless access networks, or, C-HetNet. The approaches
include designing novel algorithms for spectrum efficiency, energy efficiency
and quality of service based mobile association, multi-layer interference
management and power control, network wide cooperation and dynamic resource
allocation in the C-HetNet; and seeking the design principles of balancing and
optimizing spectrum efficiency, energy efficiency and quality of service in the
C-HetNet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is expected to significantly advance the understanding in the
heterogeneous wireless networks, which are expected to play a key role in
meeting the future data capacity explosion and energy consumption escalation.
The project will address the unique technical challenges in the C-HetNet and
explore new solutions to spectrum and energy efficiency in mobile association,
multi-layer interference management and power control, and dynamic cooperative
resource allocation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The C-HetNet research activities have significant
potentials to revolutionize wireless access networking technologies and wireless
cross-layer design approaches. The research will provide a new wireless network
paradigm to meet the ever-increasing wireless traffic demand and to address the
needs on network cost reduction and global environmental protection; and will
improve many application scenarios such as coverage extension, hotspots, and
emergency network deployment for public safety, disaster rescues and medical
applications. The research outcomes will be disseminated through publications
and seminars and will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses
taught by the PIs.