* 1308298
* MOLECULAR DYNAMICS SIMULATIONS AND SMALL ANGLE NEUTRON SCATTERING STUDIES OF LIGHT- EMITTING POLYMERIC NANOPARTICLES
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Dvora Perahia, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dvora Perahia of Clemson University will
resolve the internal structure and dynamics of poly-dots, new soft
nanoparticles, and probe their interaction with the environment. The research
will provide a fundamental structural understanding of the factors that control
the light emitting and absorbing properties of these particles through the
combination of molecular dynamics simulations and neutron scattering methods. In
the first stage, nanoparticles will be made from di-alkyl poly(paraphenylene
ethynylene)s, and then the complexity of the nanoparticle will be increased by
substituting the side chains of the polymer with various types of groups. The
broader impacts of the research project include training graduate and
undergraduate students in combined neutron scattering and computational methods,
and engaging local high school students via a science club and directing them
towards summer research experiences.

Plastics are long chain organic molecules and are found in many facets of
everyday life, including food packaging, structural materials for automotive and
aerospace transportation, and lightweight electronic devices. Electrically
conducting carbon-based (organic) molecules and polymers hold enormous promise
for realizing highly efficient, affordable, and broadly available electronic and
optical devices. This research explores the molecular picture of a new type of
very small conducting polymer particle, and resolves the effects of specific
chemistries on the structure and behavior of the molecules that build these new
materials.