* 1308415
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kathleen Foote, Foote                   Kathleen       T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Kathleen Foote of North Carolina State University to conduct a
research project in the Education and Human Resources area during the summer of
2013 at National University of Singapore in Singapore. The project title is
"Characterizing the Evolution of University Physics Reform in Different Cultural
Settings." The host scientist is Dr. M. V. Venkatashamy Reddy.

SCALE-UP, "Student Centered Active Learning Environment with Upside-Down
Pedagogies," is a reformed pedagogy and classroom design originally developed
for large enrollment university physics courses at North Carolina State
University. Now, almost two hundred institutions worldwide use this approach to
teach over thirteen disciplines in various types of institutions. This project
examines the transfer and evolution over how three generations of transfer have
caused the reform to evolve over cultural and geographic boundaries. Results of
this study promote the successful spread of this reform in diverse settings.
Since this collaborative, interactive and technology-rich approach to learning
physics has been shown to reduce failure rates, improve performance and increase
interest in STEM fields, studying and aiding the implementation process spreads
these benefits to more students worldwide.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the SCALE-UP reform has been shown to improve
student problem solving, conceptual understanding, student attitudes and
retention rates in introductory courses, especially for females and racial
minorities. This project documents the transfer process, using the challenges
and successes of the case study sites to improve professional development of
instructors and simplify future implementation efforts. Sample course materials
and classroom videos will be added to the website of existing resources for
implementers and instructors.