* 1308966
* Nucleation in Solid Metallic Solutions with Steep Composition Gradients
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Timothy Weihs, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: When intermetallic phases form through diffusional mixing of
elements steep chemical gradients can inhibit nucleation, often leading to the
formation of nonequilibrium or metastable phases. The proposed effort applies
experimental and computational tools to increase our understanding of solid-
state nucleation within these steep composition gradients. More specifically, a
unique combination of nanocalorimetry, in situ DTEM, in situ TEM, and critical
concentration gradient theory is used to identify and predict which phases form
first and at what temperatures in a model, layered material system (Ni-Al) under
both slow (10^1 K/s) and fast heating rates (10^5 K/s). The Ni-Al samples will
be deposited on nanocalorimeters with a range of bilayer thicknesses (10 to 150
nm) and average compositions (0.1 to 0.9). In addition, inputs to the
concentration gradient model will be enhanced to improve predictions by
calculating interface energies for the relevant phases and by quantifying the
rates and paths of interdiffusion in the Ni-Al bilayer samples. With these
enhancements in hand, heating rate, bilayer thickness, and average composition
will be varied experimentally and computationally to assess the effectiveness of
this concentration gradient model in predicting which phase nucleates first.

NON-TECHHNICAL SUMMARY: The proposed effort is designed to enhance our
understanding of how compounds form during the fabrication of solid components
such as metallic and ceramic protective coatings, porous materials and MEMS
devices. Unique experimental and computational tools will be used and a series
of experiments will be performed to assess the ability of a critical
concentration gradient model to predict the first phase to nucleate. Improving
our models and understanding of nucleation will help future researchers develop
improved materials for a variety of industries including aerospace, automobile
and microelectronics. The PI will involve at least one female high school
student from Western High School in Baltimore. The high school student will be
teamed with a PhD student on this project, who has already mentored
undergraduate students at Hopkins. Summer salary will be provided for the
student through the proposed budget. The PI also plans to recruit one
undergraduate student to join the project during the school year and efforts
will be made to recruit under-represented groups such as women and minorities.
Lastly, the PI will promote entrepreneurial activities on the Hopkins Campus by
overseeing the introduction of professional development modules for PhD students
and Postdocs through the Center for Leadership Education that he directs. He
will also draw on his own entrepreneurial experience to promote similar efforts
on campus by helping to grow an incubator and an entrepreneurial culture.