* 1308099
* Investigations of Deeply Undercooled Liquids and High Temperature Phase Formation using Electrostatic Levitation and Contactless Measurement Techniques.
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Alan Goldman, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2017
* USD 420,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;A team of scientists and students at Iowa
State University will study the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties
of deeply undercooled liquids and metastable crystalline phases using a newly
constructed Electrostatic Levitation (ISU-ESL) facility. Measurements of the
thermophysical properties (density, surface tension, viscosity and calorimetry)
as well as magnetic susceptibility and electrical resistance (using a novel
tunnel diode resonator technique) can be done at temperatures up to 2500 K.
These property measurements will be correlated with x-ray and neutron scattering
measurements of microscopic structural properties performed at the Advanced
Photon Source and Spallation Neutron Source using ESL chambers specifically
designed for scattering measurements. The coordinated use of these facilities
will provide new information on liquid-liquid phase transitions, phase-
transformation kinetics during solidification and their effect on materials
processing, evolving order in systems undergoing structural and magnetic
transitions, the detection and characterization of metastable phases and the
influence of magnetic fields on the solidification
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Liquid
and glasses are around us everyday, yet in many ways they are only poorly
understood. Neither their atomic structures, the phase changes that occur within
them, nor their electrical and magnetic properties are well known. For example,
in 1721 Fahrenheit discovered a tendency for water cooled to below its freezing
temperature (a supercooled liquid) to resist the formation of the crystalline
phase, ice. Supercooling is now known to be possible in all liquids. Why it
happens, however, and what changes occur in the supercooled state of the liquid
before it crystallizes, are questions of current interest. As some liquids
solidify, they can form metastable phases that exist only at high temperature.
The properties of these metastable phases remain relatively unexplored, and they
can strongly influence the specific path to the final product. A team of
scientists and students will use a novel facility recently commissioned at Iowa
State University that enables measurements of thermophysical properties, such as
the density, surface tension, viscosity, as well as electrical and magnetic
properties, of liquids above and below their melting temperatures and high
temperature metastable solid phases. To avoid contamination during the
measurements, the liquids are levitated in an electric field (electrostatic
levitation, ESL) and heated in vacuum. Taken together with a sister ESL
facilities at the Advanced Photon Source (Argonne National Laboratory), designed
for x-ray studies of liquids, and neutron scattering investigations at the
Spallation Neutron Source (Oak Ridge National Laboratory), they will be able to
correlate measurements of atomic structure and physical properties, which will
add tremendously to our understanding of complex systems at high temperatures.