* 1308667
* Thermodynamics of Interfaces: From Theory to Atomistic Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Yuri Mishin, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Materials interfaces play a critical role in many
areas of science and technology. The goal of this project is to advance the
fundamental understanding of interface thermodynamics and investigate the
effects of applied mechanical stresses, chemical composition, strong interface
curvature other critical factors on interface properties. The existing
formulations of interface thermodynamics will be extended to more general
conditions, including solid-fluid interfaces in complex multicomponent systems
subject to strongly non-hydrostatic stresses, incoherent and semi-coherent
solid-solid interfaces, and strongly curved interfaces at the nano-scale. In all
cases, new thermodynamic relations will be rigorously derived starting from the
fundamental principles of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. Atomistic
computer simulations will be performed using large-scale molecular dynamics,
Monte Carlo and other computational techniques. The goal of the simulations will
be to verify the new thermodynamic relations and generate quantitative data for
interface properties in specific materials systems. This work will provide a
theoretical framework for the development of predictive models of phase
nucleation, interface stability and other materials properties and phenomena. It
will contribute to the knowledge basis enabling theoretical and computational
discovery of new materials for a broad range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Interfaces
between different materials are ubiquitous and critically important in many
natural phenomena and technological processes. This project will drastically
advance the fundamental understanding of interfaces and provide new capabilities
for computational prediction and discovery of new materials. The project is
expected to impact several areas of materials science, physics, chemistry,
biology and technology. It will enhance our ability to control many materials
processes, ranging from the strengething of superalloys to the growth of nano-
wires, to reactive wetting and self-assembly in nano-technology. The PI will
enhance the broader impact of the project by organizing workshops and symposia
on interdisciplinary topics highlighting interface thermodynamics across
disciplines. Students will gain advanced expertise in statistical and continuum
mechanics and high performance computing. The results of the project will be
incorporated into graduate courses, student projects and high-school
presentations.