* 1308548
* In Situ Neutron Diffraction and Fluid Dynamics Modeling of Dynamic Recrystallization in Mg Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Hahn Choo, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 12/31/2019
* USD 352,351.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The objective of this project is to investigate the
underlying physics of dynamic recrystallization in magnesium alloys during
severe plastic deformation at elevated temperatures. Dynamic recrystallization
involves the creation of new grains with low dislocation densities in a deformed
microstructure during deformation. Dynamic recrystallization can strongly
influence the mechanical properties in the variety of wrought metals and alloys
used for structural applications. Friction-stir processing will be used to
produce large plastic strains in specimens of commercial magnesium alloy AZ31.
The transient nature of dynamic recrystallization and the critical role that
twinning plays on grain refinement and crystallographic texture development in
this magnesium alloy will be studied using in-situ, real-time neutron and
synchrotron X-ray diffraction measurements and computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) modeling. The research consists of three primary tasks: (1) develop a
portable friction-stir-processing machine for use in in-situ diffraction
studies; (2) in-situ, real-time diffraction measurements during plastic
deformation to study the transient evolution of microstructure, namely texture,
internal strain, dislocation density, subgrain size and twin density; and (3)
computational fluid dynamics simulation of plastic deformation to study material
flow rate and flow patterns in reference to temperature distribution and
evolution. Simulation predictions will be correlated to microstructure evolution
data to identify the dynamic recrystallization mechanisms responsible for
microstructure development. Education, training and outreach activities will
include high-school, undergraduate and graduate students. A new course on
neutron diffraction will be developed.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Dynamic recrystallization is a complex phenomenon that
occurs in metals and alloys while they are deformed, usually at elevated
temperatures. It can significantly change the microstructure and properties of a
material, either detrimentally or advantageously. The objective of this project
is to investigate the mechanisms by which dynamic recrystallization occurs. This
research will incorporate a magnesium alloy, AZ31, of interest for light-
weighting vehicles. It will also use friction stir processing, which is of
interest for advanced manufacturing. These will be combined with advanced
diffraction experiments to study the underlying mechanisms of dynamic
recrystallization. Education, training and outreach activities will include
high-school, undergraduate and graduate students. A new course on neutron
diffraction will be developed.