* 1308124
* Black Holes in Globular Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jay Strader, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2017
* USD 268,339.00

The project follows up on a very exciting recent discovery: the potential
detection of stellar mass black holes in an old globular cluster, using the
NSF's Karl Jansky Very Large Array (VLA). Hundreds of stellar-mass black holes
are expected to form in the early lifetimes of most clusters, and theoretical
work suggests that these black holes quickly mass segregate to the cluster
center and are nearly all ejected through mutual gravitational interactions. The
existence of stellar-mass black holes in globular clusters would have broad
implications: (i) globular clusters would become important hunting grounds for
stellar-mass black holes, of which few are still known; (ii) globular clusters
might offer a less biased view of the black hole mass function than the field;
and (iii) the prospects for detecting gravitational wave sources such as black
hole?black hole or black hole?pulsar binaries would be improved.

Discovery of additional black holes in other globular clusters with VLA would be
highly significant, and require substantial re-assessment of our understanding
of these clusters. The impact of finding an intermediate mass black hole in the
survey of globular clusters would be very significant.

The broader impacts of this project focuses on three areas. The first is the
inclusion of female undergraduates in research, starting early in their
university careers. The second is the construction of new scientific exhibits
focused on black holes and globular clusters for installation in a campus
observatory. Finally, the broader scientific community and general public will
be engaged in the results of ongoing research through social media interactions.