* 1308916
* Local and Global Chromatic Stable Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Paul Goerss, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2017
* USD 290,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1308916, Principal Investigator: Paul
G. Goerss&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chromatic picture of stable homotopy uses the
algebraic geometry of formal groups to organize and direct investigations into
the deeper structures of the field. The program supported by this grant is to
gather local information - the data that can been seen from formal groups of a
single height - and then to assemble that data into a more global picture. It is
in the second step where we can use constructions and information from derived
algebraic geometry; these allow us to interpolate among heights. This proposal
focuses on four projects, all growing out of this local-to-global mixture. The
most computational is an investigation of the homotopy groups of the K(2)-local
sphere; that is, what we can see at height 2. This long-standing project, with
Hans-Werner Henn and others; we are seeing beautiful and unexpected phenomena at
low primes. A second, closely related project, is to investigate the fixed point
spectra of Morava E-theory for certain closed subgroups of the Morava stabilizer
group. These are much simpler than the sphere itself, but capture a great deal
of the important homotopy theory. The other two projects are more global in
nature. One is to investigate the existence and non-existence of derived schemes
(or stacks) elliptic curves with level structure; that is, structured versions
of the Hopkins-Miller theory of topological modular forms. The point here is to
make a systematic investigation of the equivariant structure. The other project
is to look at the Chromatic Splitting Conjecture through the lens of p-divisible
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of these projects lie in homotopy theory, a
branch of topology. The main aim of this field is to study mathematical
phenomena which remain invariant under continuous transformations. Many familiar
geometric phenomena - such as angles - are not invariant in this fashion; yet
continuous transformations are natural and abundant. Long study has indicated
that the among the most fruitful invariant phenomena are classes of maps from
circles or, more generally, higher dimensional spheres, into the space to be
studied. These are the homotopy groups. Historically these groups were described
as a "milling crowd"; however, the recent introduction of techniques and
constructions from number theory and algebraic geometry have permitted us to do
detailed calculations and to uncover large scale patterns of remarkable
regularity and beauty.