* 1308229
* Hierarchical Metal-organic Framework Assemblies for Solar Energy Harvesting and Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Wenbin Lin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 04/30/2017
* USD 471,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials research, this project will study
metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) as a model material system to hierarchically
integrate functional molecular and nanoparticle components for solar energy
harvesting and storage. Solar energy harvesting provides a long-term solution to
meet our future energy needs. Converting solar energy to chemical energy
requires a material system to simultaneously perform three fundamental steps:
sunlight absorption by antennae to create charge-separated excited states,
creation of redox equivalents and their vectorial migration to reactive centers,
and catalytic reactions to store chemical energy in the products using
vectorially delivered electrons and holes. The research team will develop
synthetic methods to hierarchically integrate all of the key functional
components into the same system in order to uncover new strategies for solar
energy harvesting and storage. They will accomplish these objectives by
synthesizing stable and porous photosensitizing MOFs using phosphorescent
bridging ligands, incorporating water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) into MOFs to
drive photocatalytic water oxidation to generate dioxygen; incorporating proton
reduction catalysts (PRCs) into MOFs to drive photocatalytic water reduction to
produce H2, and integrating the photosensitizer (PS), WOC, and PRC into the same
MOF system to achieve total water splitting with sunlight. Their research
efforts have the potential to provide fundamental understanding of
photosensitization, charge injection, and water oxidation/proton reduction
reactions. The proposed research activities will also be integrated into the
training of postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduates, and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The sustainable production
of energy is one of humanity's greatest scientific challenges. As the fossil
fuel supply dwindles, new energy technologies must be developed to meet the
increasing global energy needs and to sustain the global society. Solar energy
is one of the few alternative energy sources that could be scaled up to meet our
future needs. Solar energy can be converted into heat, electricity, or fuels.
Among them, solar fuels are the most desirable because of the ease of their
storage and transportation. However, practical and cost-effective technologies
for ultralarge-scale solar fuel production do not currently exist and require
breakthroughs in basic sciences. The research team will use metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs) as a model material system to hierarchically integrate
functional molecular and nanoparticle components for solar energy harvesting and
storage. The proposed research activities will not only provide better
understanding of the three fundamental processes involved in solar energy
conversion, including photosensitization, charge injection, and water
oxidation/proton reduction reactions, but also promise to lead to new and better
material systems for solar energy harvesting and storage. The project will
involve students from all demographics and will teach skills and techniques that
are relevant to real-world needs, thus helping prepare a highly skilled
workforce for future clean technology.