* 1308726
* Reactions at iron-enriched mineral interfaces and implications for catalytic oxidation of aqueous contaminants
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Moira Ridley, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2018
* USD 390,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professors Weile Yan and
Moira K. Ridley both at Texas Tech University who will investigate the surface
chemistry of iron-enriched silica and alumina surfaces and their catalytic
reactivity towards model contaminants in water. The researchers will take a
multi-pronged approach to examine the surface and material chemistry of iron-
enriched mineral surfaces using a suite of surface and solid characterization
techniques, including HR-XPS, ATR-FTIR, TEM, AFM, and XRD. Additionally, solid-
solution potentiometric titrations and surface complexation modeling (SCM) will
be performed. This combination will establish an understanding of the surface
coverage, nature of dispersion, chemical state, and coordination environment of
iron attached to alumina and silica surfaces. Oxidative transformations of model
contaminants mediated by these iron-enriched surfaces will be investigated.
Findings from this study will provide fundamental insights into the relationship
between surface chemistry and the reactivity of iron-impregnated alumina and
silica surfaces and the role of these reactive interfaces in contaminant
degradation and redox cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will integrate
research and education in two closely related disciplines, Environmental
Engineering and Geosciences, by involving students in cross-disciplinary
research and by introducing the topic of interfacial aqueous geochemistry in
formal courses. Students will be trained in both experimental and computational
techniques, thereby building a well-rounded foundation critically needed by the
next generation of environmental professionals and educators. Additionally,
outreach activities will extend to supporting university-sponsored summer
science camps for girls in 5th through 11th grades, and providing students at
Angelo State University (ASU), a minority-serving institution in the TTU system,
an early exposure to ENVE and Geosciences trainings.