* 1308446
* GOALI: Charge Transfer in Semi-Insulating GaN
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Mary Ellen Zvanut, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2017
* USD 368,045.00

Technical Description: Although GaN is effectively used in lighting
applications, some electronic devices require high resistivity material. The
goal of this GOALI project is to investigate and understand charge transfer
mechanisms among the defects used to achieve insulating GaN and to assess the
influence of the intentional impurities on crystal quality. Specifically,
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy is used to probe charge
transfer between the intentionally added Fe impurities and intrinsic donors. The
EPR measurements provide a fingerprint of the Fe and donor defects, and,
combined with photo-excitation, are used to monitor various charge exchange
processes. Additionally, several different charge states of the Fe impurity as
well as other potential defect centers are probed with optical absorption
spectroscopy, and overall crystal quality is assessed with x-ray diffraction.
The experiments primarily address bulk Fe-doped substrates grown by hydride
vapor phase epitaxy at Kyma Technologies, the industrial collaborator of this
project. However, additional studies include comparisons with samples grown by
other growth techniques, such as high pressure solution, and doped with
different compensating impurities so that optimal growth parameters for stable
insulating nitride substrates may be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: The insights gained by directly probing defects in GaN
provide input for improved growth techniques, so that high-quality, high-
resistivity material needed for future power electronics can be realized. By
interacting with the industrial collaborators, students gain a view of science
not available in a classroom setting. Furthermore, a summer research experience
with Kyma is being offered to one of the graduate students working on this
research, and at least one seminar by a Kyma scientist is planned. Both are
intended to introduce students to the practical issues associated with material
growth and device development. At the pre-college level, the PI gives an
afternoon presentation on colloquial topics related to GaN devices at the week-
long high-school Physics Bridge workshop organized by a colleague in the
department.