* 1308333
* Random Graphs: A Mathematical Physics Perspective
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mei Yin, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 100,829.00

This project aims to investigate the structure and behavior of large exponential
random graphs, which have recently been the subject of intense research both
theoretically and experimentally. Their popularity lies in the fact that they
capture a wide variety of common network tendencies, for example connectivity
and reciprocity, by representing a complex global structure through a set of
tractable local features. The PI views these models mainly from a mathematical
physics perspective, and introduces various advanced statistical physics tools,
such as cluster expansion methods and renormalization group techniques, to the
study of these models. Special emphasis is given to the development of a
quantitative theory of "phase transitions", since in the vicinity of a phase
transition, even a tiny change in some local feature may result in a dramatic
change of the entire system. Multiple problems and avenues for research are
presented in this project. Particular examples of such problems are to
characterize the phase structure of attractive and repulsive exponential random
graphs, and to derive a convergent power series expansion for the limiting free
energy.

The proposed work is motivated by the interchange of ideas between mathematics,
physics, and computer science. The PI will establish a precise definition of
phase transitions in exponential random graphs and explore their connections to
other mathematical physics models. The main techniques used will be variants of
equilibrium statistical physics. Many of the questions under consideration have
broad applications to different areas of mathematics including combinatorics,
probability, and graph theory. A far reaching potential benefit of the proposed
research will be a better understanding of the influence of different local
features on the global structure of real-world networks, such as social and
biological networks, whose study is still in its infancy. The broader impacts of
the project will be achieved through integrating research into classroom
teaching and engaging students in learning and discovery. Broad dissemination of
the proposed research will also be realized through the PI's continued
participation in interdisciplinary conferences and workshops both nationally and
internationally.