* 1308675
* RUI: Copper(I) Interactions With Zinc Finger Domains
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Kathryn Splan, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2018
* USD 190,000.00

Through this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Professor
Kathryn Splan from Macalester College to study the interaction of copper(I) with
zinc finger protein domains. Cu(I) exhibits high affinity for thiolate ligands,
which suggests that thiol-rich metalloprotein binding sites such as the ones
present in zinc finger domains, may be disrupted at elevated copper
concentrations. Professor Splan uses spectroscopic methods to measure the
thermodynamic stability- and speciation of- copper-zinc finger peptide
complexes. The research tests the ability of Cu(I) to affect the interactions
between zinc fingers and DNA, and thus to modulate the function of zinc fingers.
The results of this research may be relevant for understanding the mechanism of
copper toxicity and homeostasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The function of
metalloproteins is linked to the metal ion(s) endogenous to the protein.
Substitution of the endogenous metals with exogenous ones is likely to alter the
structure and function of the protein. The research conducted by Professor Splan
and undergraduate students at Macalaster College addresses such a substitution
of zinc by copper in a zinc finger protein, which may underline the toxic effect
of copper. In conducting this research, the students are trained in methods
pertaining to both inorganic chemistry and biology. The research experiences
provide the students with skills useful in many areas of chemical and biological
research and prepare them for careers in STEM.