* 1308364
* High-Throughput Enantiopurity Measurement using Fluorescent Enantiomeric DNA Biosensors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Jennifer Heemstra, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Jennifer Heemstra at University of Utah and her group
will be developing new methods to enable high-throughput analysis of small-
molecule enantiopurity. Enzymes have recently emerged as promising alternatives
to traditional catalysts for directing stereoselective chemical transformations
in the laboratory. Libraries containing millions of enzymes can be obtained
rapidly using standard molecular biology techniques, but evaluation of enzyme
stereoselectivity is currently limited to tens of thousands of samples per day.
Professor Heemstra and her team aim to overcome this limitation through the
development and implementation of DNA-based sensors that provide a fluorescence-
based readout of enantiopurity. The use of a fluorescence-based readout will
improve throughput by more than an order of magnitude compared with the
currently available methods for enantiopurity measurement. The educational
broader impacts of this project include the training of graduate and
undergraduate students, the design of a new Chemical Biology course, and
encouraging the participation of women in science. Additionally, this research
will contribute significantly towards the development of environmentally
friendly methods for the large-scale synthesis of pharmaceutically relevant
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is anticipated to provide faster
and more efficient methods for measuring small-molecule enantiopurity. In
principle, the methods developed could be applied towards the testing and
optimization of both chemical and biological catalysts. Furthermore, it is
expected that new stereoselective enzymes will be discovered more rapidly, as
screening currently represents the bottleneck in this process. Improving access
to stereoselective enzymes will in turn allow for the implementation of more
efficient and environmentally benign methods for generating pharmaceuticals and
other high-value chemicals. This project will also provide excellent training
for students and broaden participation in science among underrepresented groups.