* 1308281
* Generation of Macroscopic Optical Polarization Bell States in Atomic Ensembles via Four-Wave Mixing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Irina Novikova, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The generation and applications of entangled optical quantum states (i.e. the
optical fields displaying correlations beyond those allowed by classical
physics) is one of the recently recognized challenges in quantum optics. The
intellectual merit of this project is to demonstrate a new approach for
generation of a complete set of special fundamental non-classical states of an
optical field, called Bell states, in which polarizations of two optical fields
with close frequencies become quantum-mechanically entangled. Such Bell states
are produced via nonlinear interaction of resonant light with Rubidium vapor.
They form a natural basis for characterization and manipulation of quantum
entanglement, and thus the findings will stimulate new developments in practical
realizations of both quantum information protocols and in quantum-enhanced
optical sensors. They will also be potentially transferrable to many other
coherent systems (atomic/ionic, solid-state and photonic), with warm rubidium
vapor serving as a prototype interaction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
offers a rich spectrum of educational opportunities by engaging graduate and
undergraduate students in meaningful scientific research. Particular emphasis
will be placed in attracting female and minority students, with the PI serving
as a mentor and as a role model. Added educational benefits arise from adapting
components of the experiments for advanced laboratory classes, and development
of exciting demonstrations and public events for broader community.