* 1308419
* Collaborative Research: Underwater Distributed Antennas Systems: Fundamental Limits and Practical Designs
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Zhengdao Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 06/30/2016
* USD 140,000.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this program is to conduct an in-depth
investigation of underwater distributed antenna system, where a large number of
spatially distributed underwater transducers / hydrophones are interconnected
via cable or radio links. Such systems are drastically different from their
terrestrial counterparts due to unique underwater channel characteristics. Field
engineers have relied on engineering intuition when building such operational
networks to support communication and navigation needs of autonomous underwater
vehicles. However, a systematic study of such systems is lacking. This program
will explore both fundamental limits and the design of practical communication
algorithms for different types of traffics in such a system. Selected designs
will be validated in real-world facilities with different channel conditions and
system characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit is to address realistic challenges in a unique underwater
distributed antenna system, which differs from the radio counterparts due to
long channel dispersion, fast channel variation, large propagation delay, and
half duplex operational constraint. This program will provide a rich set of
theoretical insights and practical algorithms, supported by extensive real-world
validations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts are: (i) fast transition of the project outcome to practical underwater
distributed antenna systems, providing tremendous benefits to various scientific
and homeland security applications; (ii) involvement of graduate students in
challenging research problems in the fast-growing field of underwater acoustic
networks; (iii) participation of undergraduates, women and other under-
represented groups, in advanced research and its practical applications.