* 1308102
* Towards a Fundamental Understanding of Hot-Carrier Transport across Materials Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Vincent LaBella, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 04/30/2017
* USD 280,427.00

Technical Description: The objective of this research is to develop a
fundamental understanding of carrier transport across materials interfaces.
Rectifying interfaces between different materials such as p-n junctions and
metal-semiconductor contacts are the foundation of modern digital logic and
optoelectronic devices. This research provides knowledge of how carrier
attenuation, parallel momentum conservation, and interface band structure affect
carrier transport. The scientific objectives are to: i) measure the effects of
interface band structure and parallel momentum conservation upon carrier
attenuation, ii) locally map these effects with nanoscale resolution, and iii)
develop custom materials interfaces which enhance or suppress these effects. The
technical approach consists of thin film deposition in a state-of-the-art
ultrahigh vacuum chamber, and carrier transport measurements using low-
temperature in-situ ballistic electron emission microscopy.

Non-technical Description: The project addresses fundamental areas of charge
carrier transport across materials interfaces that have high technological
relevance. Hot-carrier attenuation, conservation of parallel momentum, and
interface band structure are fundamental aspects of carrier transport in solid
state logic and optoelectronic devices. Advancements in this knowledge enable
improvements in functionality and efficiency that are critically needed to keep
pace with the ever increasing demands placed upon electronic devices. In
addition, a significant program in outreach and education is included that
enables research experience for high-school students, as well as the
participation in community and K-12 outreach events. Furthermore intensive
training and development of graduate and undergraduate students, including those
from underrepresented groups, is a significant part of the project.