* 1308766
* Mechanism-Based Probes of Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Activity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Amy Barrios, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 395,778.00

This award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division to Dr. Amy Barrios at the University of Utah provides support for a
project aimed at developing a platform-based approach for the discovery of
potent and selective mechanism-based probes for the protein tyrosine phosphatase
family of enzymes. Tyrosine phosphorylation is a key regulatory event in
multiple cellular signaling pathways. The phosphorylation and dephosphorylation
of tyrosine are catalyzed by protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and protein
tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), respectively, and are tightly regulated processes.
Despite the approximately equal number of PTKs and of PTPs in the human genome
and the fact that they have similar substrate selectivity and parallel
biological regulation, comparatively little is known about PTP activity in
contrast to the significant body of literature dealing with the roles of PTKs in
cellular signaling. In particular, mechanism-based chemical probes that form a
covalent bond with the catalytic cysteine residue of the PTPs are of great
interest because they would provide the means to create "chemical knock-outs" of
PTP activity and would facilitate the study of an individual PTP in complex
signaling pathways. The long-term objective of this project is to develop
chemical approaches for the study of PTP activity that can be used to answer key
questions about PTP biology. In this context, the Barrios lab will create a
library of electrophilic compounds capable of covalently labeling the catalytic
cysteine residue in the PTP active site and will incorporate them in peptides
with specificity for an enzyme of interest to create probes that are enzyme
selective. This approach could be applied to any enzyme in the PTP family and
could be useful in the development of generic PTP-targeted, mechanism-based
probes as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cellular signaling networks that
govern all life processes are extremely complex, but at the molecular level are
controlled by contributions from individual biomolecules. For example, it is
known that protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) form a family of enzymes that
play critical roles in biological cellular signaling. Despite their importance,
little is known about these key enzymes because there are few chemical tools to
study them. This project at the interface between chemistry and biology aims to
develop tools for studying PTP enzymes at the molecular level and make possible
the identification of specific PTPs activated in a cell at a particular point in
time. The trainees working on this project will acquire interdisciplinary
research skills useful for the members of the 21st century workforce. In
addition, Dr. Barrios participates in several outreach programs to introduce
non-science college students, high school students and elementary school
students to science.