* 1308640
* Manipulation of Coherent Dynamics in Dipole-Dipole Coupled Rydberg Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Robert Jones, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 11/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project will address several fundamental questions
relevant to how the quantum electronic behavior of electrons in isolated atoms
are modified in the presence of other atoms, and to what extent that behavior
can be controlled and manipulated using lasers and electric fields. The
experiments will utilize ultra-cold gases of atoms with one highly-excited
"Rydberg" electron. Such atoms are useful because: they are particularly
sensitive to neighboring atoms; the motion of electrons within them is
sufficiently slow that it can be probed with very brief laser pulses; and the
relative positions of the atoms themselves can be strongly influenced by the
forces between atoms. One experiment will attempt to induce electronic motion in
one atom and establish conditions where that motion can be spontaneously
transferred to an electron in a neighboring atom. Another will explore the
conditions in which a group of excited atoms act as a single quantum mechanical
unit, emitting radiation collectively rather than individually. Further work
will utilize lasers to induce transient repulsive interactions between pairs of
atoms, preventing hard collisions between them, and possibly creating ordered
atomic arrays that mimic condensed matter systems.

Broader Impacts: Results from the project have the potential to impact
fundamental science in several active research areas outside of atomic physics,
including condensed matter physics, quantum information, and quantum control.
Beyond these scientific connections and associated applications, the greatest
near-term societal benefit of the project will be the education of the
participating graduate and undergraduate students. Students involved in the
project will gain valuable experience with state-of-the-art laser equipment and
techniques as well as training in scientific ethics and methodology. They will
develop written and oral presentation skills, and travel to conferences where
they will present and defend their results as well as establish professional
contacts. They will participate in group meetings and develop group problem
solving skills in the laboratory. Moreover, their interactions with chemistry
and engineering students, postdocs, and faculty in a shared multi-disciplinary
laser laboratory will provide opportunities to learn about laboratory techniques
used in other disciplines, as well differences in scientific cultures, language
and terminology. These young women and men are the next generation of scientists
and engineers. Their experiences with the project will enable them to contribute
to laser, photonics, and other industries; develop new technologies for national
defense and security applications; and/or educate another generation of
scientists and engineers.