* 1308171
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* David Case, Case                    David          H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds David Hamilton Case of the California Institute of Technology
to conduct a research project in Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at the
Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) in Kochi, Japan.
The project title is "Understanding Which Microbial Species Live Below the
Seafloor and What They Eat." The host scientist is Dr. Fumio Inagaki.

Marine mud volcanoes are hydrocarbon-rich areas where sediment is moved upward
from deep within Earth's oceanic crust to the seafloor. Samples taken from the
top of a marine mud volcano (i.e., the seafloor) are often assumed to be
representative of geochemical and biological conditions deep within the oceanic
crust (i.e., 100s of meters below the seafloor). This study directly tests this
assumption by recovering biological samples from the top of a marine mud volcano
and 115 meters below the ocean floor. Starting in 2012 biological samples were
incubated with stable isotope-labeled food sources (e.g. 13C-methane,
13C-glucose, 15N-ammonium) for one year. Following incubation and with the
assistance of EAPSI 2013 support microbiological cells are (1) identified by
phylogeny and (2) analyzed for isotopic content to determine which cells
consumed which food sources. This informs the identity and metabolic function of
microbial communities in Earth's subsurface and tests the assumption that the
top and bottom of marine mud volcanoes contain identical conditions.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, society will benefit by increased knowledge
of the microbial controls on geochemistry in a hydrocarbon-rich environment
which has been proposed as a potential untapped source of natural gas.
Additionally, the Fellow is involved in teaching K-12 science through
activities, lessons, and talks. Sharing stories, photographs, and excitement for
science with a young audience promotes teaching, training, learning, and
inspiration of future generations of scientists.