* 1308209
* 3-Manifolds: Heegaard Splittings, the Curve Complex, and Hyperbolic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Tim Cochran, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 01/31/2014
* USD 18,420.00

"3-Manifolds: Heegaard Splittings, the Curve Complex, and Hyperbolic Geometry"
is a mathematics research conference which will be held April 19-21, 2013 at
Rice University in Houston, Texas. This conference will bring together senior
and junior researchers in the above areas of 3-manifolds in order to share
recent progress and reflect on the future direction of the subject. It will
feature approximately eight research lectures together with an introductory
lecture intended for graduate students. Ample time will be set aside for
interaction and collaboration among the attendees.

In its broadest terms this project is about the mathematical structure of the
"shape" of 3-dimensional objects (topology/geometry). Understanding complex
shapes has many diverse applications. The geometric structure of proteins and
other complex molecules is crucial to drug development. The geometric shape of
organs (especially the brain) is vital to the field of medical imaging. The
prediction of shape from incomplete data has important military and commercial
applications. The geometric configuration of cellular DNA is vital in
determining the precise mechanisms of cellular processes. In the past few
decades, topology has experienced fundamental and transformative developments.
This conference will fertilize new research directions by encouraging
mathematical interaction and collaboration among researchers. The budget will
help support the travel expenses of the speakers, and it will provide partial
support to graduate students and other young researchers to enable their
participation in this event. Every effort will be made to support and encourage
participation from underrepresented groups. Registration for the conference is
available at the conference website,
http://math.rice.edu/Conferences/3-Manifolds/