* 1308895
* Collaborative Research: Development of Novel Nonlinear Optical Contrast for High-Resolution Morphological and Chemical Imaging of Historical Artwork
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jennifer Mass, Henry Francis Du Pont Winterthur Museum
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Instrument Development for Biological Research (IDBR)
program in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI), Professors Martin
Fischer, Warren Warren, Robert Opila, Dr. Jennifer Mass and their groups will
develop a novel imaging method for nondestructive identification and high-
resolution, three-dimensional mapping of both tissue and a broad range of
pigment samples in historic works of art. The primary focus of the proposed
research will be to set up a multimodal nonlinear optical microscope for
noninvasive, high-resolution imaging and use pulse shaping and time-resolved
detection technology for simultaneous access to absorptive and refractive
contrasts and further develop novel analysis and characterization methods for
tissue samples and pigments. The groups will then set up three-dimensional (3D)
imaging of thick tissue, paint cross-sections and intact historic paintings and
further increase imaging depth for molecular absorption and nonlinear phase
contrast. The researchers will develop a portable microscope for applications in
the field and the core technology developed will then be disseminated through
industrial partners.

The proposed research, if successful, will enable in situ applications in a
conservation setting to avoid having to remove artworks from their climate-
controlled environment, which will dramatically impact conservation science by
providing a non-invasive imaging modality that can extract comprehensive
structural and chemical information from historic artwork, complementing
established mapping techniques. The technology developed will also provide tools
to the broad biology community to examine structural, metabolic and functional
contrast in biological tissue. The program will provide training opportunities
in an interdisciplinary environment spanning conservation science, art history,
physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering for graduate, undergraduate, and
high-school students.