* 1308369
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Investigating Restricted Knowledge in the Reproduction of Precontact Coast Salish Lithic Traditions
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Colin Grier, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 25,179.00

Does the way people learn technical craft skills fundamentally change with the
appearance of social inequality in small scale societies? Under the direction of
Dr. Colin Grier, Adam N. Rorabaugh of Washington State University will conduct
research using existing archaeological research collections, to examine sites
from the past 4,000 years in the Salish Sea (Northwestern Washington and
Southwestern British Columbia). Archaeologists studying the emergence of social
inequality and leadership have often examined prestige exchange items thought to
have been used or controlled by chiefs and elites such as exotic jade, dentalia
shells, volcanic glass, native coppers, and ground stone bowls. Taking a
different but complimentary approach, this research examines stone tools used
for every-day activities such as hunting and fishing to determine how their
manufacture changed after the emergence of large sedentary villages, systems of
resource ownership, and intensive storage economies on the Northwest Coast. The
central hypothesis is that certain tool technologies will become less variable
because the knowledge needed to produce them became more tightly controlled by
elites after the emergence of more structured systems of social inequality.

In a broader context, this project examines how knowledge is produced and
managed in small scale societies, and the ways in which control of knowledge
changes with increasing social inequality. The focus of this project on stone
tool technologies of the Northwest Coast will further understanding of how the
production and reproduction of technical craft training was restricted in these
societies. Learning how knowledge is produced and controlled is critical to
understanding how social inequality becomes entrenched in hereditary forms.

Although anthropologists have long studied the emergence of social inequality
and the control of resources, the impacts these fundamental societal
transformations have had for social learning, and how knowledge itself
represents a controlled resource, have been less systematically examined. Based
on oral traditions, many forms of knowledge in Northwest Coast societies are
controlled including songs, stories, and resource gathering locations.

If craft skills became a controlled resource, there should be increased
uniformity in the styles of stone tools as knowledge was more restricted to
elites through time. Restricted craft knowledge means fewer teachers, and with
fewer teachers there would be a smaller pool of potential styles. This shift
should be evident through time in the archaeological record. Stone tools can
provide strong evidence for how people learned in the past as they require a
high degree of skill and knowledge to produce. Both chipped stone and ground
stone tools will be examined in this project, as they each have unique
production constraints as well as functional applications, and therefore will
allow for the identification of variation caused by both the materials used in
their manufacture and the degree to which knowledge used in their production was
restricted.

Archaeological sites to be examined include shell middens and villages dating
from the past 4,000 years. The tool collections are housed at Simon Fraser
University, the University of British Columbia, Western Washington University,
the Burke Museum, and Royal British Columbia Museum. All chipped and ground
stone tools traditionally used as knives, arrows, spears, and harpoons within
the geographic scope of the study will be analyzed, focusing on the hafting
areas of these tools. Based on these criteria, a total of 70 sites will be
examined, with a sample size of 3,600 artifacts. The data generated through the
examination of these collections will be at a resolution higher than any
previous study, and so will provide a detailed view of social learning processes
over time and space in the Salish Sea.

Understanding the impact of social inequality on every day practices remains one
of anthropology's most important contributions. This study will makes a small
but concrete contribution to this larger question. More specifically, this
project provides an opportunity to explore the ways in which traditional
knowledge of stone tool production was held in small scale societies, and
contributes to a greater understanding of forms of transmission of traditional
knowledge and resource management practices. The key aim of this study,
reconstructing the learning processes of past stone tool traditions through
archaeological data, will highlight the connections between past and present
knowledge, and demonstrate the meaningful contributions archaeology can make
towards reconstructing how knowledge in indigenous communities was traditionally
produced, consumed, and conveyed down generations.