* 1308822
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* William Lennon, Lennon                  William        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds William Lennon of the University of California, San Diego to
conduct a research project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at
the University of Electro-Communications in Tokyo, Japan. The project title is
"Computational Modeling of the Cerebellum with Additional Biological Realism."
The host scientists are Professors Nobito Yamamoto and Tadashi Yamazaki.

While much is known about the anatomy and physiology of the cerebellum, the
function of this brain structure remains vague. Roughly speaking, the cerebellum
is responsible for ensuring the precise timing and coordination of movement, and
is hypothesized to have similar effects on cognition. Computational modeling of
the cerebellum has been underway for many decades and has aided researchers in
testing hypotheses about its function that would otherwise be impossible in a
laboratory setting. Recently, neuroscientists have realized the importance of a
particular cell type in the cerebellum, the molecular layer interneuron (MLI).
Historically, these cell types have received relatively little attention from
neuroscientists and as a result are poorly understood. This project investigates
the role of MLIs in a computational model of the cerebellum. In particular, this
project investigates the role of learning at synapses formed by MLIs and their
effect on learning and control of movement. A better understanding of brain
structures like the cerebellum will ultimately guide our understanding of
neurological disorders like schizophrenia and autism that are believed to affect
these structures. Additional insight into the function of the cerebellum may
also lead to novel algorithms in robotics and the control of prosthetic devices.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the PI plans to disseminate the results of
this study by publication in peer-reviewed journals, publication of the source
code in publicly available databases, and as course material for teaching future
students of computational neuroscience.