* 1308762
* CDI-Type II:  Computational Methods to Enable an Invertebrate Paleontology  Knowledgebase
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Xue-Wen Chen, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,092,818.00

The Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology, founded in 1948 by an international
consortium of paleontological societies, is considered to be the most
authoritative compilation of data on invertebrate fossils. It holds an almost
biblical significance and is to be found in every good library. The Treatise has
found applications in many areas, such as understanding evolution, studying
climate change, and finding fossil fuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
maximize the possible benefit from this landmark effort, there is a strong
desire in the paleontological community to make this vast repository of
paleontological data available in electronic form for current and future
scientists and laypeople. The object of the proposed research is to facilitate
knowledge discovery activities in invertebrate paleontology by providing
scientists with a general framework that takes advantage of the rich information
extracted from the Treatise. The first mission is to turn the Treatise data into
available knowledge. The second mission is to develop computational tools for
analyzing, modeling, and visualizing paleontological data in order to facilitate
knowledge discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledgebase we propose to
develop will play a central role in paleontological data management. It will
facilitate paleontologists to further explore unexploited areas and to raise and
answer research questions that are unsolvable under the current paradigm.
Furthermore, it will provide a paradigm shift from the book-based knowledge
system, which is perceived as supporting evidence of mainstream research and
provides little knowledge regarding the patterns and relationships that are
embedded within them, to a unified framework in which computational analysis and
modeling are integrated with knowledge to derive a new era of paleontological
research. Consequently, the knowledgebase will likely open transformational
opportunities in scientific discovery to help understand the complexity of
nature. Additionally, the website we will create will enable anyone to explore
the world of fossils on the world-wide web, and to link with the University of
Kansas Natural History Museum and their outreach programs for K-12 students and
the general public.