* 1308085
* Structure, Reactivity and Transport at Surfaces and Interfaces of Doped Ceria Electrolytes and Cermets: An In Situ Atomic Resolution Investigation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Peter Crozier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 527,626.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Developing efficient methods for generating
electricity is a critical goal as society moves towards sustainable energy.
Solid oxide fuel cells are a promising approach for efficiently converting the
energy stored in chemical fuels directly to electricity. These ceramic cells run
at high temperatures and can utilize a wide range of fuels such as natural gas,
biofuels and gasoline. This fuel flexibility is a significant advantage of solid
oxide fuel cells compared to other fuel cell technologies. Unfortunately, these
devices are expensive and do not show long term stability because of their high
operating temperatures. Many of these issues may be solved by developing new
materials that would allow reliable operation of the solid oxide fuel cell at
lower temperatures. Development of novel materials requires information on the
behavior of materials under the harsh conditions present in a fuel cell. This
project utilizes a powerful technique, electron microscopy which enables direct
observation of atomic level changes taking place in materials under conditions
similar to those present in a real fuel cell. This information provides a
fundamental understanding of how the structural re-arrangements result in
positive or negative materials functionalities. In turn, this information is
being used to help in the design of new materials for improved fuel cell
performance. Graduate, undergraduate and high school students are involved in
this research. These research activities help them to understand how materials
research can be employed to address important societal problems like the
development of sustainable energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: Ionic transport properties and chemical reactivity are key factors
impacting solid oxide fuel cell technologies. Cost and long-term stability
problems associated with high temperature operation are unresolved materials
design challenges. These issues have motivated the development of so-called
intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells which employ novel materials
that can deliver high ionic conductivity and catalytic activity at lower
temperatures (500 - 700 C). Doped cerias are nonstoichiometric rare earth oxides
which show high ionic conductivity and desirable catalytic properties making
them potential candidates for use in intermediate temperature applications.
However, there are important unresolved scientific questions related to
interactions across grain boundaries in electrolytes as well as ceramic-metal
and solid-gas interfaces in anodes. This project addresses these questions by
using in situ aberration corrected electron microscopy along with monochromated
electron energy-loss spectroscopy to develop a fundamental atomic level
understanding of these interfacial processes. The nanoscale structures and
chemistries affecting ionic conductivity and the reactivity in electrolytes and
anode cermets are being determined. A new experimental approach is being
developed to allow in situ atomic resolution observations of electroceramics
under electrochemical conditions. This research is potentially transformative
because it is providing new information on the dynamic processes relating
structure and chemistry with electrochemical and electroceramic functionalities.
This research project is training graduate and undergraduate students to learn
about and contribute to the developments in energy-related oxide materials.