* 1308110
* Collaborative Research:  Imaging and Modeling the Microstructure of Unsaturated Soils for Improved Prediction of Macroscale Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/31/2012,05/31/2013
* William Likos, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2013
* USD 30,595.00

&lt;br/&gt;Unsaturated soils play an essential role in a variety of natural
earth processes and engineered earthen systems. The pore water in an unsaturated
soil system forms a complex fabric consisting of saturated pockets of water
under negative pressure and a network of liquid bridges formed near the particle
contact points. Water influences bulk soil behavior by modifying intergranular
stress through negative pressure in the saturated pores, and by providing an
intergranular bonding force through the liquid bridges. The magnitude and
relevance of each mechanism, however, is highly dependent on the pore water
fabric, which is readily altered with changes in suction, saturation, wetting
direction, external stress, and global or localized deformation. It is evident
that changes to unsaturated soil microstructure under mechanical or hydraulic
loading will influence macroscopic soil behavior, but the difficulties
associated with its characterization have limited development of microstructure-
based frameworks for predicting macro soil response.&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project seeks to observe and quantify the multiphase fabric of
unsaturated soils by making use of recent advances in non-destructive imaging
techniques. Microfocus X-ray computed tomography will be integrated with a
series of special loading stages designed to image the microstructure of
unsaturated sand specimens under controlled suction and stress conditions and
over a wide range of saturation and strain. Images will be analyzed to
characterize salient features of the multiphase fabric, including 3D grain
orientation, particle contact normals, liquid bridge configurations, and the
distribution of liquid- and gas-saturated voids. Tensors describing these
features will be quantified and their evolution tracked as specimens are subject
to controlled changes in suction, wetting direction, compression, and shear.
Grain size, density, anisotropy, suction, confining stress, and strain rate will
be treated as experimental variables. Microstructural observations will be
integrated into a new constitutive framework for unsaturated soil behavior that
explicitly accounts for elements of the solid, liquid, and gas
fabric.&lt;br/&gt;The research will work to resolve the links between
unsaturated soil microstructure and macroscale response, and will implement them
through a new constitutive platform for predicting engineering behavior.
Observations of fabric evolution with hydraulic and mechanical loading will
provide direct evidence to address the bottleneck issues that currently limit
our predictive understanding of unsaturated soil behavior, including wetting-
drying hysteresis, coupling between suction, saturation and deformation, liquid
bridge rupture, dilation, and rate effects. Understanding multiphase
interactions in packed particles with wetting fluids is also critical to other
scientific fields that deal with physical phenomena such as filtration, drying,
pharmaceutical and ceramic agglomeration, and oil recovery. Teaching and
diversity will be enhanced through graduate and undergraduate student
involvement and educational module development, including activities targeted
specifically for women and minorities at the University of Missouri and
Washington State University. &lt;br/&gt;