* 1308598
* Thermodynamics of Metal-Protein Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Dean Wilcox, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2017
* USD 359,999.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Dean Wilcox from Dartmouth College to quantitatively
characterize the thermodynamics of metal ion binding to proteins. This research
will provide insight in a) the contributions of metal ions to the stability of
proteins, and b) the modulation by the proteins of the redox properties of bound
metal ions. Using primarily microcalorimetry methods and systematic
perturbations of the protein (site specific mutations) and of the metal (e.g.,
isostructural Zn2+, Co2+, Cd2+), the enthalpic and entropic components of the
metal binding will be quantified, as will be the metal and the protein
contributions to the stability of the metalloprotein. Additionally, the
contribution of solvation to metal-protein interactions will be evaluated by
determining solvent effects on the thermodynamics of metal binding to the
protein. In a novel application of these methods, the thermodynamics of metal
binding to a protein will be determined when the metal ions is in two oxidation
states, and the enthalpic and entropic components of the metal reduction
potential, which is modulated by the protein, will be
quantified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Essential trace metals are normally bound to
proteins in living organisms. The metals play crucial roles, including a
structural role, where the metal (often zinc) helps to stabilize the active form
of a protein, and a catalytic role in essential reaction, where the protein
tunes the chemical properties of a metal (such as copper). Both the
stabilization of a protein by a metal and the influence by a protein of the
properties of metal ion will be quantified with experimental methods and
analysis pioneered by Wilcox and his students. The proposed research will seek
insight in the prevalence, placement and importance of so-called structural
metals in proteins; this insight may guide the engineering of metal ions into
therapeutic proteins for enhanced stability. Conversely, the identification of
the features of a protein that influence the properties of a bound metal will
help us to understand how Nature controls and uses the unique reactions of
metals. Students working on this project gain extensive knowledge at the
interface between inorganic, physical and biochemistry and learn skills
important for careers in science and education.