* 1308839
* A bioanalytical platform for interrogating the systems biology of tRNA modifications: Application to defining translational control mechanisms in bacterial stress responses
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Peter Dedon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Peter Dedon from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology to characterize a newly discovered, translation-based mechanism of
bacterial stress response, in which stress causes reprogramming of dozens of
tRNA modifications that regulate the translation of codon-biased transcripts to
achieve selective expression of critical proteins. The studies will be initiated
by comprehensively characterizing modified ribonucleosides in tRNA in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) using a mass spectrometry-based platform developed
in these labs. Following exposure of PA to hydrogen peroxide, changes in the
spectrum of modified ribonucleosides will be quantified and modifications found
to increase significantly under stress will be localized within specific tRNA
molecules. Stress-altered wobble modifications will then be used to predict
anticodon-codon interactions involved in selective translation of specific mRNAs
for response and adaptation proteins, with proteomic validation of stress-
induced changes in protein levels. Finally, a transposon mutant library will be
used to define the biosynthetic pathways for stress-altered modifications by
screening tRNA modification spectral changes in PA mutants selected by homology
to other prokaryotes. The proposed studies will provide new insights into the
translational mechanisms governing bacterial responses to environmental
conditions, and the detailed molecular mechanisms that link translation to cell
phenotype.

The goal of these studies is to see if bacteria use a novel mechanism of cell
survival and adaptation recently discovered in yeast and human cells. Using
technology for quantifying the dozens of modified ribonucleotide building blocks
of transfer RNA (tRNA) - the molecules controlling protein synthesis in all
living organisms - it was discovered that stressed cells "reprogram" their tRNA
modifications in a way that leads to selective production of proteins that are
required to survive to the stress. The generality of this model will now be
tested in the bacterium, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, to begin to understand how
translational control mechanisms affect the ability of this important pathogenic
microbe to survive and adapt during infection. The methods developed here will
provide microbiologists with tools to systematically study RNA modifications in
any type of bacterium, in principle, with potential broad impact on the basic
science of cell and molecular biology. The studies will also provide students
and scientists with specialized training in analytical technology and in a new
fundamental mechanism of cell biology, while an outreach program will engage
high school biology students with hands-on activities in cell culture, RNA
isolation and mass spectrometry.