* 1308767
* Embedded and Immersed Surfaces in Three-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Jesse Johnson, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2017
* USD 194,386.00

The guiding question in three-dimensional topology is the classification problem
for three-dimensional manifolds - to construct a list in which every
homeomorphism type appears exactly once. The PI will both address this question
and explore applications of the resulting methods to the topology of large data
sets in three components: First, the PI will expand and refine techniques
developed recently by Minsky, Namazi, Souto and others to related hyperbolic
geometry to topology via Teichmuller theory. Second, the PI will generalize
these techniques to answer questions about finite covers of three-dimensional
manifolds suggested by the recent proof of the Virtual Haken Conjecture. Third,
the PI will explore applications of these topological techniques to data
analysis in order to develop and refine new algorithms that will be useful to
scientists in a broad range of fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 3-dimensional
manifold is a topological space that models the 3-dimensional universe in which
we live. Heegaard splittings are topological structures that allow one to see
such a space as a pair of simple pieces that have been combined in a possibly
complicated manner. While Heegaard splittings have been studied for over a
century, our knowledge of Heegaard splittings has only in the last two decades
matured to the point where they can be thoroughly understood. They are now an
integral part of understanding geometric structures on 3-manifolds and knots.
Moreover, recent developments have demonstrated that techniques (particularly
one called thin position) used in the abstract study of Heegaard splittings can
be adapted to work on certain problems in applied mathematics, particularly the
analysis of large data sets. The research funded by this grant will develop both
the abstract and the applied aspects of this field.