* 1308276
* Collaborative Research: Polysaccharide Derivatives for Enhanced Drug Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Kevin Edgar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 325,000.00

The Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research funds the
collaborative efforts of researchers at Purdue University and Virginia
Polytechnic Institute to develop purpose-designed polymeric crystallization
inhibitors to enhance drug solubility, and thereby enhancing the delivery of new
drugs with improved therapeutic activity. Oral drug therapy is a key aspect of
disease treatment, but many exciting new therapeutic agents fail because of poor
water solubility. Such drugs do not reach adequate solution concentrations to be
therapeutically effective. Using the amorphous form of the drug, which is a high
energy form, can lead to much higher solution concentrations and higher levels
of drug delivery to the body. The disadvantage of using amorphous formulations
is that they are inherently unstable, frequently crystallizing during
production, storage or delivery to the body, and thereby negating any solubility
advantage. Although crystallization can be delayed or prevented by incorporating
polymeric additives, the range of polymers with suitable properties is limited
and the properties of off-the-shelf polymers properties are not optimal. The
main aim of this project is to develop synthetic routes in producing novel
orally biocompatible polysaccharide amphiphiles designed to inhibit solid and
solution phase crystallization of drugs, and at the same time providing desired
drug release profiles. Furthermore, the specific structural features governing
drug-polymer intermolecular interaction and crystallization inhibition will be
elucidated. The technological impact of the project is in creating improved
delivery technologies for poorly water-soluble drugs, development of novel drug
delivery processes and improved disease treatments. Increasingly, drug
developers are interested in solubility enhancement strategies, and these
researchers could benefit greatly from the fundamental understanding created by
this research. Research findings will be integrated into teaching through
undergraduate research activities involving underrepresented minority students,
and development of new teaching materials based on this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing patients with new and effective drugs,
manufactured as tablets or capsules that can be taken orally, is a key aspect of
treating chronic and acute diseases. Unfortunately, many of the new drugs
currently being tested have poor solubility in water. The goal of this research
is to improve the solubility of new drugs by combining them with novel polymers
based on polysaccharides, which are natural, renewable, and abundant materials.
These polymers will be synthesized and tested for their ability to improve the
solubility and stability of drugs. By properly designing the polymer, it will
interact with the drug and the solubility of the drug will be improved because
the polymer will prevent it from crystallizing, and thus enhancing its
solubility. This research will create improved delivery technologies for poorly
water-soluble drugs, if the project is successful. Hence, this research could
broadly improve disease treatment, and contribute to success of the drug
development process. Research findings will be integrated into teaching through
undergraduate research activities, and development of new teaching materials
based on this project. Through summer undergraduate research programs at Purdue
University and Virginia Tech, students will be recruited and mentored in
research activities in the investigators' labs with the active participation of
graduate students and faculty members.