* 1308400
* A Comprehensive Framework for Fully Efficient Robust Estimation and Variable Selection, with Application to High-Dimensional and Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Howard Bondell, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2018
* USD 149,997.00

This research addresses robustness in both estimation and variable selection
within the context of today's complex data structures. The overarching theme of
the research is that carefully specified moment restrictions combined with
appropriate weighting of the data will lead to the ideal goals of full
efficiency in estimation and variable selection which remains stable in the
presence of atypical observations. The methodology is developed via generalized
empirical likelihood, which yields estimated weights for each observation. In
the process, this automatically downweights observations that may deviate from
the model, thus reducing their influence. Meanwhile, the estimators have no loss
of efficiency compared with the fully efficient model-based estimator if the
model were correctly specified, even in finite samples. Taking this point of
view allows a unified framework to the construction of robust and efficient
procedures that can be developed for a variety of models. The foundation of
efficiency and robustness allows variable selection to be built into the methods
to handle, not only the moderate, but also the high-dimensional setting. Due to
the performance of the baseline approach, the variable selection consistency
under contamination and misspecification can improve on existing selection
methods that rest on a starting point that may be already non-robust or less
than fully efficient.

Modern scientific data is characterized by a wealth of information. The data
explosion has arisen in diverse areas running the gamut from drug discovery to
the financial markets and even homeland security. While the massive influx of
data has led to breakthroughs in these fields, it brings many statistical issues
to the forefront. In particular, it can be an overwhelming task to determine the
relevant predictor variables that provide a suitable model. Meanwhile, with
today's complex data, this postulated model will surely be only a simplification
of reality. Thus it is inevitable that some of the data will deviate, perhaps
significantly, from the model, although it is still useful for the bulk of the
data and can provide meaningful insight. This research targets the essential
task of developing techniques to perform estimation and variable selection,
while also allowing for some of the data to deviate from the model without
greatly affecting the results. The methods developed from this research are
robust to outliers and model misspecification, while still maintaining
efficiency for both estimation and variable selection even in the presence of
this contamination. Thus it will be a key component to enable meaningful results
in the face of complex data.