* 1308052
* GOALI: Intelligent Networked Solar Panel Array Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2017
* cihan tepedelenlioglu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/2017
* USD 215,808.00

GOALI: Intelligent Networked Solar Panel Array Management This three year GOALI
proposal addresses several new signal processing, power, modeling, and control
methods for optimizing photovoltaic (PV) arrays and inverters through Smart
Monitoring Devices (SMD). The objectives for this GOALI project have been
designed jointly by our faculty and industry partners and include: a) studying
how the individual PV monitoring devices can improve solar panel array operation
and efficiency, b) examining communication and networking methodologies for data
flow through the system, and c) investigating optimization methodologies for the
overall improvement of PV array and inverter performance. Based on these
objectives our short term goals are: a) to develop intelligent, interactive PV
monitoring technologies, b) to develop switching strategies for PV modules, c)
to optimize PV array performance, d) to provide fault tolerant capabilities, e)
to establish communications and networking among SMDs, servers and inverters, f)
to provide anti-shading strategies and reduce mismatch, and g) to establish
these innovations along with a tech transfer and IP roadmap for the GOALI
project. The long term goal is to develop smart PV technologies that will help
define new standards and protocols for PV array communication and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Scientific problems that the
proposal addresses revolve around information extraction and processing from PV
arrays and inverter units that are intended for utility scale power production.
The PV data and information processing algorithms derived for these applications
will impact many areas in solar array power production and distribution. More
specifically they will result in designing and deploying effective and robust PV
arrays that operate in near optimum conditions and are robust to faults, noise
and weather changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed work will
advance the development of PV and inverter technologies. Our research will lead
to inexpensive, smart, and robust PV units for utility scale applications. As a
whole, our research will reduce the cost of energy by optimizing PV array and
inverter operation. In the proposal, we describe a process to create compelling
realizations of mobile iJDSP for dissemination and outreach of this PV
monitoring research.