* 1308695
* High-Resolution Morphological Control of Silicon Nanowires for Bottom-Up Photonics and Plasmonics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* James Cahoon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Technical Description: This project aims to develop a bottom-up method for high-
resolution control of silicon nanowire morphology. Semiconductor nanowires have
traditionally been limited to cylindrical, axially symmetric structures, yet
many new technological applications for nanowires could be enabled with a method
to break the axial symmetry and produce well-controlled shapes along the
nanowire axis. In pursuit of this goal, this research project investigates
fundamental aspects of in-situ chemical doping of silicon nanowires and doping-
dependent wet-chemical etching processes. The research is expected to yield
fundamental insights into the incorporation of dopants during both vapor-liquid-
solid and vapor-solid-solid nanowire growth processes. By systematically
exploring the dependence of wet-chemical etch rates on nanowire doping, this
project is also expected to enable the synthesis of nanowires in which the axial
morphology is modulated on length scales ranging from a few nanometers to
several micrometers. The optical absorption and scattering characteristics of
the morphologically-controlled nanowires are studied through a combination of
experiment and finite-element simulations to determine their potential
technological application in the areas of nanophotonics and
plasmonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Most well-developed
semiconductor technologies require the patterning of materials on a microscopic
scale. Semiconductor nanowires often lack the nanometer-scale patterning
capability, which is necessary for many applications. This project aims to
develop a simple chemical method to encode high-resolution patterns into
nanowires composed of silicon. The results from this project are expected to
substantially expand our fundamental understanding of nanowire growth processes.
The optical properties of the wires are studied to determine their potential
application for technologies that use light for information processing and
computing applications. This project is integrated into educational and outreach
activities involving middle-school through graduate-level students. Graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the research on a year-round basis are
trained in a cross-disciplinary environment that bridges concepts from
chemistry, engineering, physics, and materials science. Through a summer
outreach program, middle- and high-school students from traditionally
underrepresented groups experience hands-on research emphasizing original
concepts and discovery. The overall project is designed to foster collaboration
between students with a diverse range of backgrounds using concepts and
techniques derived from all areas of the physical sciences.