* 1308659
* Graphene on Nanoscale Gratings for Terahertz Light Emission
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Anna Swan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2017
* USD 480,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The goal of this project is to develop high-quality graphene
samples on nanoscale gratings for the generation of terahertz (THz) light based
on novel radiation mechanisms that so far have been the primary domain of high-
energy electron beams in vacuum-based systems. Specifically, the mechanisms
under study include a radically new cyclotron-like emission process, where
angular motion is obtained via geometrical constraints rather than through the
application of an external magnetic field, and the Smith-Purcell effect. The
project activities involve a combination of nanolithography for the fabrication
of highly sinusoidal nanoscale gratings, graphene synthesis via exfoliation and
high-vacuum chemical vapor deposition, graphene transfer, and sample
characterization via gated electrical studies, Raman spectroscopy, and THz-
radiation measurements. The distinctive properties of graphene (including its
linear energy dispersion, high electron velocity and mobility, and two-
dimensional nature) are uniquely suited to the radiation mechanisms under study.
At the same time, critical information about the underlying materials physics
can be unveiled through the demonstration and investigation of these
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Graphene is a two-
dimensional crystal consisting of a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a
honeycomb lattice. By virtue of several unique electronic, optical, and
mechanical properties, it represents a promising materials platform to enable
the continued evolution of electronic and photonic technologies towards ever
increasing performance, miniaturization, and functionalities, well beyond the
fundamental limits of traditional semiconductors. This project investigates the
use of these properties to develop a new paradigm for THz light emission in
compact solid-state systems. As a result, it may open the way for a new class of
THz devices (including THz lasers potentially capable of room-temperature
operation, unlike all existing semiconductor-based solutions), as needed for a
wide range of emerging applications in security screening, medical diagnostics,
and manufacturing quality control. &lt;br/&gt;In the course of these activities,
education is promoted through the training of students in several areas of
materials science and nanotechnology, with a strong emphasis on the involvement
of undergraduates and high-school interns in addition to Ph.D. candidates. A
related goal is the development of experimental modules based on the research
methods and outcomes, to enhance the laboratory component of an undergraduate
course on nanotechnology at Boston University (BU), and for demonstrations at
local high schools (including institutes with large minority populations) by
undergraduates engaged in BU Inspiration-Ambassadors program.