* 1308032
* SusChEM: Defect Mechanisms in Bismuth Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* David Cann, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Research on bismuth-containing perovskite
materials has grown steadily over the last decade due in part to energy
efficiency considerations and environmental standards such as the Reduction of
Hazardous Substances (RoHS) directive. These same regulations were the
motivation for the development of Pb-free solders that were broadly implemented
across the electronics industry. While interest in bismuth perovskites as a
potential materials replacement for Pb-based electronic materials has grown in
recent years, there have been few studies on the role of point defects (e.g.
cation and anion vacancies) in these materials. This project contributes to the
fundamental understanding of the role of defects in bismuth perovskites to help
guide the development of these sustainable materials for emerging applications.
This research is critical because point defects ultimately have a profound
influence on phenomena (such as piezoelectric fatigue, aging, reliability, and
high temperature resistivity). Fatigue behavior can be a limiting factor in high
performance microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices, such as ink jet
printers, accelerometers, and actuators. This work also impacts the development
of capacitor materials for high temperature and high electric field applications
because robust electrical properties are important for devices for down hole
drilling electronics for geothermal systems, high temperature SiC-based passive
components, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines synthesis, analysis and computational approaches to investigate
the dominant defect species and relevant defect equilibrium conditions for
bismuth-containing perovskites to help guide the development of these materials
for emerging applications. Point defects are prevalent in these systems given
that many Bi-based perovskites feature tetravalent Ti on the B-site which has
been shown to exhibit oxygen non-stoichiometry at high temperatures from a
reduction reaction. Furthermore, the common A-site cations of Bi3+, Na+ and K+
are all known to be volatile under the typical processing conditions of both
ceramics and thin films. This project involves three experimental tasks
including synthesis of ceramics with controlled cation and anion non-
stoichiometry, characterization techniques to identify the nature and
concentration of the defect species, and establishing the linkage between the
defect chemistry and the materials properties through measurements of the
dielectric and piezoelectric properties and electrical resistivity. Finally,
computational (first principles) efforts are integrated throughout this project
to complement and verify the experimental results and to help guide future
experiments. In addition to training and mentoring undergraduate and graduate
students in materials research, this project incorporates a high-impact K-12
outreach activity by hosting two high school students into the laboratory at OSU
each summer as part of the Summer Experience in Science and Engineering for
Youth (SESEY).