* 1308520
* Dispersion-engineered membrane reflectors for reconfigurable dual-directional emission membrane lasers on silicon
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Zhenqiang Ma, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 05/31/2018
* USD 368,837.00

Objective: This program is to investigate Fano resonance principles and
dispersion engineering approaches in photonic crystal cavities, for
reconfigurable dual-directional emission (vertical and in-plane) membrane
reflector VCSELs on Si. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research
will lead to the understanding of the fundamental Fano resonance physical
characteristics and applications towards novel nanophotonic light sources with
unique emission properties, as well as vertical-cavity edge-emitting lasers
(VCEELs). Taking advantage of the unique modal characteristics and dispersion
engineering capabilities in Fano resonance photonic crystal slabs, one of the
Fano resonance Si-based membrane reflectors will be modified and designed to
facilitate light coupling into in-plane waveguides, utilizing relatively large
field concentration inside the Si-MR region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The investigations of Fano resonance principles, coupled with various
photonic crystal cavity designs, can impact a wide range of active and passive
photonic device applications, such as lasers, detectors, modulators, couplers,
and beam routing structures, etc. The reconfigurable dual-directional emission
of ultra-compact lasers is highly desirable for a wide range of applications for
both vertically and in-plane integrated photonics, as well as laser beam-
steering and ranging systems. The success of the development of economical yet
reliable lasers on Si will permit monolithic integration of sensing,
spectroscopy, signal processing and computing all on a single chip. The
education plan focuses on a few major activities, including interdisciplinary
research and education, curriculum development on optoelectronics and green
photonics, efforts to recruit underrepresented students in this research, and
collaborations with national labs and industry.