* 1308669
* Foundations of the theory of J-holomorphic curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Dusa McDuff, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2017
* USD 250,458.00

This project seeks to rework some basic foundational constructions in symplectic
geometry. Symplectic invariants (usually counts of curves of various kinds) are
defined using solutions to perturbed systems of equations, and the issues
involved in finding coherent perturbations are not yet fully worked out. A main
part of this proposal is to continue McDuff?s project with Wehrheim that reworks
the traditional approach (via finite dimensional reduction) to this problem. So
far, they have resolved the main topological issues, but questions concerning
isotropy and how to deal with the lack of smoothness caused by gluing have yet
to be worked out in detail, even in the simplest case of closed curves. Once
this most basic problem has been dealt with, many important variants of the
construction also need reworking, for example what happens when there is a
circle symmetry. McDuff also proposes to study a variety of more geometric
questions. For example, how does the existence of a very non generic holomorphic
curve in a symplectic four manifold affect the other curves in the manifold? How
"bendable" are symplectic structures: is there a circle action with isolated
fixed pointswhose moment map defines a (singular) fibration over a
circle?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic geometry has grown into a very important
tool for understanding the structure of manifolds. These are spaces which, like
the space-time of physics, locally look like familiar Euclidean space but might
have global twisting. As in the recent solution to the Poincare conjecture
concerning three dimensional manifolds, it has turned out that instead of
looking at plain vanilla manifolds, one should give them extra structure: a
metric (which is a way of measuring distance) or perhaps a complex or symplectic
structure. The latter two involve making two-dimensional measurements
(symplectic structures measure area), and are related by a mysterious mirror
symmetry that was first suggested by physicists and recently given various
mathematical interpretations. In its eagerness to work with these exciting new
ideas from physics, the mathematical community has been using various
foundational tools without setting them up with sufficient rigor. This has
become a serious problem. Mathematics develops via intuition and imagination,
but, because results cannot be verified by experimentation, without careful and
valid proofs one is left with mere speculation. This project is largely
motivated by the desire to remedy this. It proposes a detailed reworking of
basic constructions (from topology and analysis) that allow one to count objects
in a consistent way. Once completed, symplectic geometers will be able to move
ahead with a sure way to test the correctness of their arguments.