* 1308299
* QGP Strong Coupling Mechanisms and Jet Modification Via Direct Photon-Jet Probes, RHIC-PHENIX vs. LHC-ATLAS
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Justin Frantz, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 359,493.00

The Quark Gluon Plasma discovered at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC)
and now also studied at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), has incredible
properties due to its strongly interacting nature. This award will fund studies
of these strong interactions using very high energy versions of X-rays called
direct photons, produced in the same collisions, that can penetrate the plasma
and can thus provide important information. These photons can be compared with
quarks produced at similar high energies but which should interact more
strongly, like the other quark constituents of the plasma. In the project this
will be done through studying correlations between photons and hadrons, which
are particles made of quarks. Measurements of these correlations will be
performed primarily using the PHENIX experiment at RHIC. The specific goal of
these analysis studies will be understanding the newly discovered enhancement of
a certain type of particle produced by the above mentioned quarks because of the
plasma, at both RHIC with PHENIX and also at the ATLAS experiment at the LHC.
For this reason our data analysis will include comparisons to, and some limited
research activities using, the ATLAS experiment as well. In addition to these
analysis projects, the investigator's group at Ohio University will support the
upgrade of computing, analysis, hardware of PHENIX through operation of the
PHENIX Sub-Detector called the Lead-Glass Calorimeter Detector as well as
through leadership of groups and projects of detector development and analysis.

The project results in a number of broad benefits to society beyond the
important goal of educating and training students. The PI maintains
organizations in the state of Ohio and beyond to exchange Heavy Ion knowledge.
International collaboration among nuclear physicists around the world is
strengthened. Furthermore, the project contributes to the development of future
computing in the nation. Finally the investigator contributes to the improvement
of physics teaching related to the above research at Ohio University and in the
Appalacian region by developing "Active Learning" classroom techniques.