* 1308170
* RUI: Energetics and Dynamics of an Electron-Transfer Protein from a Psychrophilic, Hydrocarbonoclastic Microorganism
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* John Magyar, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2016
* USD 185,510.00

This award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the NSF Chemistry
Division funds Dr. John Magyar from Barnard College to study the energetics and
dynamics of cytochrome c from the cold-loving (psychrophilic) microorganism
Colwellia psychrerythraea. The protein will be studied by a variety of
structural and spectroscopic methods, including UV-visible absorption,
fluorescence, circular dichroism, and NMR spectroscopies; X-ray crystallography;
and electrochemistry. In particular, roles of noncovalent interactions (e.g.,
hydrogen bonds and cation-pi interactions) and ligand substitution reactions in
psychrophilic protein folding will be investigated. This work will provide
insights into how cellular processes such as electron transfer and energy
storage occur with reasonable rates at decreased
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colwellia psychrerythraea, the organism whose
protein is investigated here, played a major role in natural hydrocarbon
degradation processes following the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill. Unlike most
previous oil spills, which primarily affect the ocean surface and the shoreline,
the 2010 Gulf of Mexico spill occurred in deep, cold water. In this unusual
environment, different microorganisms were involved in the natural cleanup. The
work funded by this award adds to the scientific understanding of how
microorganisms can live and thrive at low temperatures. These insights will lead
to greater understanding of protein dynamics and intramolecular interactions,
with relevance to bioremediation, solar energy utilization, and global
biogeochemical cycling. In addition, the project will provide research
experiences for undergraduate women at Barnard College and science outreach
efforts to elementary and secondary students in New York City.