* 1308879
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Molecular systematics, flower micro-morphology, &amp; floral fragrances in Mormolyca (Orchidaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Kenneth Cameron, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,509.00

Pollination by sexual deceit is well known in the orchid family. This unusual
system has been studied in detail for many temperate, terrestrial orchid
lineages, but rarely in the New World. In the Neotropical orchid genus
Mormolyca, sexual deception has evolved along with food reward and food
deception, thereby providing an opportunity to explore correlations between
flower morphology and scent. This research incorporates techniques from multiple
disciplines (molecular evolution, micro-morphology and chemical ecology) in an
attempt to gain a holistic picture of evolutionary processes underlying lineage
diversification of an orchid group with multiple pollination
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Given that the Neotropics harbor an impressive number of
orchid species, this integrated approach should be especially helpful in
understanding this biodiversity hotspot. The research is helping to train a
Ph.D. student in modern approaches to molecular systematics and chemical
ecology. It will allow him to continue serving as a mentor to undergraduate
students, and significantly enhance the impact his dissertation will have on the
discipline. Not only scientific papers, but also products for a broader audience
will be made available in orchid society publications and websites devoted to
orchid enthusiasts. Educational activities focused on orchid pollination also
will be developed based on the results for K?12 outreach events.