* 1308264
* Center for Theoretical Biological Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jose Onuchic, William Marsh Rice University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 4,119,366.00

This award provides a second five-year term of funding for the Center for
Theoretical Biological Physics (CTBP) located at the University of California,
San Diego (UCSD). This second period builds on the extensive research,
education, and outreach successes achieved during the initial five years to both
expand the reach and accelerate the rate of scientific progress on critical
issues in biological physics and extend the scope of training and outreach
activities. Crucially, it continues the strategy of both developing and using
concepts and techniques from physics and applied mathematics to tackle otherwise
intractable problems in the science of living matter and conversely to use
biological problems to motivate new concepts of broad applicability throughout
physics.

The research program includes three projects that utilize the depth and breadth
of the collective expertise of the center participants to target specific
biological areas for rapid advances. These are: Cellular Tectonics- the dynamic
mesoscale structure of the intracellular milieu; Computational Approaches to
Intracellular and Intercellular Communication - chemical-based reaction-
diffusion governed communication across complex spaces; and Gene Regulatory
Networks - genetic/signaling networks exhibit specificity and robustness in the
face of intrinsic stochasticity, and yet retain evolvability. Each of these
areas has reached the stage where approaches based on developing and using
fundamental physical principles can be effectively implemented. A separate part
of the research plan will be organized around smaller seed projects and around
junior investigators. This part will ensure flexibility in keeping abreast of
newly emerging directions and allow for re-orienting the principal projects as
needed. This overall strategy is enabled by the success the center has
demonstrated to date in creating an environment which fosters multi-investigator
collaborations, interdisciplinary thinking and a sense of excitement at the
possibility of helping build what is, in some ways, a new branch of physics.

A main challenge at the biological physics frontier has been the training of
physical scientists to become leaders in this inherently multi-disciplinary
subject. A significant number of students and postdocs trained in the center
have secured leading national and international positions in both physical and
biological sciences. This cadre of talented individuals is contributing to the
notion that deep physics-based conceptual approaches can now encompass living-
system complexity. Educational approaches that have proven successful, including
training workshops, a visiting scientist program, a biological physics
curriculum and the seminar/reading courses/journal club activities are being
continued. The process whereby students learn biological physics will be
formalized to a great extent by integrating the courses into a comprehensive
syllabus and by creating individualized plans for meeting biology background
shortfalls. New ideas for disseminating center practices to the broader
community are under development.

The outreach program focuses on bringing under-represented groups into the
research pipeline at the undergraduate level by working with partner
institutions in Southern California. An earlier effort with Cal State University
San Marcos is making progress, and this will be enhanced and expanded to other
institutions. The overall excitement engendered by research into living systems
will be exploited as a vehicle to interact with the K-12 educational sector.

This award is jointly funded by the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) and the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) as part of a
partnership to foster research and education at the mathematical and physical
sciences - life sciences interface. Funds are provided by the Physics Frontiers
Centers program and the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in MPS and
the Biomolecular Systems cluster in BIO.