* 1308363
* Protein Chaperone Nanoparticles - Abiotic Mimics of Heat Shock Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Kenneth Shea, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 06/30/2016
* USD 440,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research is
to develop novel, low cost, abiotic, thermally responsive polyacrylamide
hydrogel nanoparticles with chaperone-like activity to stabilize proteins at
elevated temperatures. The chaperone-like function arises from two 'engineered'
properties of the synthetic polymer nanoparticles: 1) an intrinsic antibody-like
protein affinity; and 2) a lower critical solution temperature (LCST), which can
be used to trap protein at elevated temperatures, preventing its aggregation and
denaturation, and release of the protein upon cooling below the LCST without the
need for additives and preserving the overall function of the protein in
solution. The concept of creating 'smart' synthetic polymer molecular
chaperones, where the antibody-like protein affinity of synthetic polymer
nanoparticles is utilized to stabilize a target protein by inhibiting
denaturation and/or protein-protein aggregation and the resulting loss of
activity. The second 'smart' function of the synthetic polymer nanoparticles
arises from its thermal response to temperature. The polymer is in a collapsed
state at a temperature above its lower critical solution temperature, where it
has protein binding affinity. These two unique polymer properties allow
engineering the protein binding affinity of the nanoparticle so that it is
switched on and off in response to temperature. One application would be a
nanoparticle that sequesters and stabilizes a target protein at elevated
temperatures, where the protein is vulnerable, but that has little or no
affinity for the protein at room temperature so as to not impede the proteins
function. A 'smart' material with this property would find applications by
protecting proteins from denaturation. It could also help reduce the cost of
protein therapeutics and diagnostics, which arise in part due to the retention
of efficacy of the drugs during transportation and storage. This proposal will
engage graduate students, undergraduates and high school students in an
interdisciplinary research program that spans polymer synthesis, materials
chemistry, biology and biotechnology. Additionally, the project will provide
students with an opportunity to work with industrial collaborators on practical
problems, which could have profound impact on the world-wide delivery of health
care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are large biopolymers produced by all
living systems. They play an essential role in all biological processes
including regulatory processes, the immune system, catalysis of all biochemical
reactions among other functions and properties. Despite their complexity,
advances in molecular biology and biotechnology have made proteins readily
available. These 'engineered' proteins are now produced and used on a large
scale for applications that go far beyond their intended biological functions.
These applications include therapeutics and diagnostics, and synthesis of value-
added chemicals. Proteins, however, have several limitations. They are not
stable when taken beyond physiological conditions of temperature and pH. In
particular, they are often unstable at conditions above room temperature, and
this temperature sensitivity can limit the use of proteins particularly where
refrigeration facilities are not easily available. Maintaining protein functions
depend on the availability of a network of cold storage facilities, which will
provide optimal cold temperatures during transport, storage, and handling.
Nature has evolved strategies to protect proteins from elevated temperatures. A
class of biomacromolecules collectively referred to as heat shock proteins,
'protect' vulnerable proteins against loss of function at elevated temperatures.
This proposed study is in developing simple, low cost synthetic polymers that
can mimic the behavior of heat shock proteins. These 'engineered' synthetic
polymer nanoparticles are being designed to 'protect' proteins from denaturation
at elevated temperature by sequestering them. This proposal will provide
educational and training opportunities to students from graduate to high school
levels in an interdisciplinary research program that spans many scientific
fields such as polymer synthesis, materials chemistry, biotechnology and
biology. In addition, this project will provide students with opportunity to
work with industrial collaborators and receive training not only in preparing
them as the future generation of scientists but also providing them with
opportunities to work in industry.