* 1308799
* SusChem: High-throughput Computational Discovery of New Nanoporous Materials for Energy Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Randall Snurr, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 272,886.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new nanoporous
materials is critical for many problems related to energy and sustainability.
New catalysts, new gas storage media, and new sorbents for separations are all
urgently sought. In the transportation sector, there is a significant effort by
the major automakers to develop hydrogen-powered fuel cells as a long-term
alternative to internal combustion engines, which burn fossil fuels. One of the
biggest hurdles for hydrogen-powered vehicles is the challenge of storing enough
hydrogen on the vehicle within the constraints of weight, volume, and safety.
The solution to this storage problem will require the development of new storage
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are
to&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop a high-throughput computational screening approach for
the development of nanoporous materials for various applications, using gas
storage as a particular example.&lt;br/&gt;2. Demonstrate how this computational
approach, when used in close interaction with experiment, can vastly accelerate
the discovery of new and useful materials.&lt;br/&gt;3. Discover new sorbents
that can store hydrogen for mobile applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). These nanoporous
materials are synthesized in a building-block approach from metal nodes and
organic linkers. The building-block approach to MOF synthesis opens up the
possibility to synthesize an almost unlimited number of materials. This clearly
creates exciting possibilities, but it also creates the following challenge: how
does one identify the most promising structures, among the millions of
possibilities, for a particular application? In this project, we will generate
millions of MOFs on the computer and test their properties for gas storage
applications. These computational methods can be extended in a straightforward
manner to other applications, and the materials discovered may find uses in a
variety of other applications, including catalysis and separation of gas
mixtures. A related problem is how to extract insight and understanding from the
resulting deluge of information. Powerful data mining strategies, developed in
other fields, will be harnessed and tested for this
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the long term, hydrogen produced from clean energy
sources such as wind or solar may play an important role as a green energy
carrier in a variety of scenarios. If hydrogen can be used for transportation,
it would lead to a reduction in U.S. petroleum imports and have a significant
impact on the economy, the environment, national energy security, and
sustainability. However, hydrogen storage is widely regarded as the most
difficult problem preventing the development of hydrogen-powered vehicles.
Beyond gas storage, the materials developed in this work - particularly those
with highly coordinatively unsaturated metal sites - may be valuable in
applications such as separations and catalysis. The computational methods can
also be applied to other problems. In addition, a searchable database of
millions of hypothetical MOFs discovered in this project will be made publicly
available, so that other researchers may search and analyze it to discover
materials for other problems. Graduate students, undergraduates, and high school
teachers will be educated in a highly interdisciplinary research environment.
Web-based education and outreach activities (developed with the high school
teachers) will reach a wider audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen-powered vehicles could be a significant
advance toward more sustainable transportation. Hydrogen produced by solar,
wind, or other green energy sources is an attractive fuel because its only by-
product when burned is water. There is a significant effort by the major
automakers to develop hydrogen-powered fuel cells as a long-term alternative to
internal combustion engines, which burn fossil fuels. Because hydrogen is a gas,
one of the biggest hurdles for hydrogen-powered vehicles is the challenge of
storing enough hydrogen on the vehicle within the constraints of weight, volume,
and safety. The solution to this storage problem will require the development of
new storage materials. The objectives of this project are to&lt;br/&gt;1.
Develop a high-throughput computational screening approach for the development
of nanoporous materials for various applications, using hydrogen storage as a
particular example.&lt;br/&gt;2. Demonstrate how this computational approach,
when used in close interaction with experiment, can vastly accelerate the
discovery of new and useful materials.&lt;br/&gt;3. Discover new porous
materials that can store hydrogen for mobile applications.&lt;br/&gt;The project
will focus on a new class of materials known as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs).
These materials have incredibly high internal surface area and are promising for
gas storage. The project will develop and use advanced computational methods to
discover new MOFs for hydrogen storage. The computational methods can also be
applied to other problems in the future. In addition, a searchable database of
millions of hypothetical MOFs discovered in this project will be made publicly
available, so that other researchers may search and analyze it to discover
materials for other problems. Graduate students, undergraduates, and high school
teachers will be educated in a highly interdisciplinary research environment.
Web-based education and outreach activities will reach a wider audience.