* 1308617
* SusChEM: Sustainable Epoxy Materials From Vegetable Oils and Terpenes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* James Crivello, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 605,832.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project will develop fundamental knowledge of physical properties for
sustainable epoxy materials from renewable resources. In particular, this
research is aimed at advancing the knowledge and understanding of how to control
the mechanical, viscoelastic and thermal properties of sustainable epoxy
materials derived from crosslinked epoxidized vegetable oils and terpenes using
onium salt photoinitiators. This research program is built on the premise that
epoxidized monomers from renewable resources can serve as sustainable
photocurable monomers that are designed to undergo facile and rapid crosslinking
via exothermic ring-opening cationic polymerization. Three classes of biosourced
substrates -- lipids, terpenes and natural rubbers -- are specifically selected
based on the criteria that they are abundantly available at reasonable prices
for the epoxidation and photocuring studies. The proposed projects represent a
new direction of sustainable epoxy material research to focus the research
efforts in tailoring their physical properties via the control of the
crosslinking densities and the inclusion of rubbery or glassy segments.
Specifically, the following research tasks will be conducted: (1) Mechanical and
thermal properties of crosslinked epoxidized vegetable oils (EVOs), (2) Blending
EVOs with epoxidized terpenes toward higher crosslink density, and (3) Blending
EVOs with partially epoxidized natural rubbers toward lower crosslink density.
This epoxy monomer blending and copolymerization strategy will produce new
sustainable thermosets with inclusion of rubbery or glassy domains by
manipulating the crosslinking and phase separation kinetics using EVOs with
terpene- and/or natural rubber-derived epoxidized monomers. It is envisioned
that this study will enhance the capability to tailor the physical properties of
sustainable epoxy materials that may end up being comparable to, or potentially
even better than, petroleum-derived epoxy materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymer materials research faces the challenge of relieving our dependence on
petroleum-derived monomers and polymers by developing sustainable plastic
materials from abundant and economical renewable resources. A spectrum of new
biorenewable epoxy monomers will be studied to relieve our dependence on
petroleum for use in coatings, adhesives, ink-jet printing and composites.
Because the proposed polymerization is inexpensive, rapid, solventless and can
be readily carried out under ambient conditions, this technology could easily be
transferred to large-scale industrial settings. Our education activities will
reach a broad and diverse range of students (K-12, undergraduate and graduate).
The graduate and undergraduate students supported by this grant will acquire
extensive knowledge of the design, synthesis, properties and application of
novel epoxy materials from renewable resources and gain multidisciplinary
training to promote academia-industry interactions. These students will also
actively participate in the broad dissemination of their knowledge through K-12
outreach activities including web-based programs on science and the environment,
open houses, and hands-on demos at local elementary schools and elsewhere. The
PIs and students will also participate in the Sustainability Studies Program at
Rensselaer.