* 1308009
* Statistical Inference Based on an Integrated Likelihood
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Thomas Severini, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 99,996.00

Integrated likelihood methods provide a promising approach to likelihood
inference in which any nuisance parameters in the model are eliminated by
averaging the likelihood with respect to a weight function for the nuisance
parameter.Such an integrated likelihood offers a number of advantages over other
approaches to likelihood inference: it is always available; it is based on
averaging rather than maximization, an approach that is often more reliable; it
has a certain type of finite-sample optimality; by appropriate selection of the
weight function it has many of the same properties of marginal and conditional
likelihood functions, when either of those is available. Integrated likelihood
methods combine ideas from both Bayesian and non-Bayesian inference and, hence,
provide a hybrid method with many of the benefits of both approaches. These
methods represent a new way of thinking about likelihood inference in models
with nuisance parameters in which the traditional approach of eliminating
nuisance parameters through maximization is replaced by averaging. The research
will focus on three broad areas: a study of the asymptotic properties of point
estimators and the associated standard errors of maximum integrated likelihood
estimators; the use of integrated likelihood methods for estimation in models
with an unknown function, and the application of integrated likelihood theory
and methodology to models with random effects. In each of the areas, models with
a high-dimensional nuisance parameter will be of particular interest. This work
will lead to better understanding of the properties of likelihood-based methods
of inference as well as the development of new statistical methodology based on
those results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a new approach to
statistical theory and methodology, based on the use of an integrated likelihood
function. These methods are used in the analysis of virtually all statistical
models and in all fields of application. In particular,
integrated&lt;br/&gt;likelihood methods are useful in complex statistical models
and these methods have been used successfully in applications ranging from the
reliability of computer software to the analysis of genetic data. In contrast to
some other recently-developed methods, which require considerable background in
advanced statistical theory, the integrated likelihood approach is computation-
based and relatively straightforward to understand and to implement. Thus, the
results of this proposed research are useful for researchers in a wide range of
fields. The results also further our understanding of the properties of
statistical models and, hence, play an important role in the education of
researchers in statistics and related fields.