* 1308151
* Collaborative Research:  Unveiling the Enigmatic Biosynthetic Machinery of the Azinomycins
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Coran Watanabe, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2017
* USD 308,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Dr. Coran
Watanabe from Texas A&amp;M University and Dr. Stephen Ealick of Cornell
University to collaboratively characterize enzymes of the azinomycin
biosynthetic pathway both functionally and structurally. Specifically, this
project is directed at the evaluation of thioesterase-domain interacting
partners and structural characterization of the iterative polyketide synthase
(PKS) AziB, as well as functional characterization of both AziA2, and the of
azabicycle biosynthetic enzymes. This project also aims at a structural
understanding of the bacterial Type I iterative polyketide synthase (PKS)
involved in the construction of the azinomycin naphthoate. While it was long
thought that all bacterial aromatic polyketides are derived from Type II PKSs,
it is now clear that this is not the case and the azinomycin PKS serves as a
specific example. The azinomycin PKS will thus serve as a model system for this
bacterial Type I iterative PKS class. Experiments will elucidate the key role of
an unusual non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) module of unprecedented
domain architecture (C-PCP-C). The azinomycins also contain an aziridine ring
system, the biosynthesis of which is poorly understood. These studies should
provide inroads into the route and mechanism of aziridine formation through the
functional characterization of four enzymes of this pathway.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural products or secondary metabolites are compounds
that are produced by a given organism but are not essential to the survival of
the host. Such compounds often possess potent bioactivities and serve as lead
compounds for the development of therapeutic agents. The biosynthesis of the
azinomycins is under investigation here. The azinomycins are a family of DNA
crosslinking agents with demonstrated anti-tumor activity. Understanding how
nature constructs these strained ring systems should shed light on a fundamental
mechanistic question in biosynthesis and also pave the way for the engineering
of the pathway genes for therapeutic purposes, in the longer term. This project
also includes an outreach component where both undergraduate and high school
students will be exposed to natural products research.