* 1308348
* Mass Spectrometry and Computational Studies of Deprotonated Substituted Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* David Dixon, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2017
* USD 441,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Carolyn Cassady and Professor David Dixon and their
groups will study the gas-phase reactive and dissociative chemistry of
deprotonated amino acids, their amides, and peptides by mass spectrometry and
computational techniques. The primary focus will be on acidic residues that
readily deprotonate, such as phosphorylated serine, tyrosine, and threonine, as
well as aspartic acid and glutamic acid. An overall goal is to increase the
knowledge of deprotonated peptide fragmentation mechanisms, ion structures, and
acid/base properties so that proteomics researchers seeking to sequence peptides
by negative ion mass spectrometry will have a strong foundation of fundamental
information upon which to base their work. This research will further the
development of new methods of analysis of peptides using negative ion mode
tandem mass spectrometry, with particular emphasis being placed on electron-
based dissociation techniques for sequencing acidic
peptides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project exposes a diverse group of both
graduate and undergraduate students to important interdisciplinary research
areas, providing them with tools that will prepare them to contribute to a wide
range of proteomic and chemical biology challenges. Both groups are also been
actively engaged in outreach activities, such as the University of Alabama
Computer Based Honors Program and the Alabama Advanced Instrumental Techniques
Colloquium, which expose large numbers of students to the powerful computational
and analytical tools utilized in their laboratories.