* 1308801
* Reaction networks in environmental systems: connecting reactive oxygen species generation and particle formation during the oxidation of ferrous iron
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* John Ferry, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2016
* USD 405,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professor John L. Ferry at
the University South Carolina at Columbia. There have been several important
works describing the oxidation of dilute (nanomolar) Fe(II) by oxygen and many
describing electron transfer from ferrous/ferric solids in anoxic solutions.
However, these have not been integrated into a predictive, Fe-based continuous
model for estimating ROS production. In the natural environment, Fe(III) can be
reduced to the Fe(II) state through photochemical processes, direct reaction
with reductants (e.g. sulfides) or via microbially mediated reduction. The net
cycling between the two oxidation states leads to the apparent catalytic
production of ROS (which include hydroperoxyl radical and its conjugate base
superoxide, hydroxyl radical and hydrogen peroxide) and provides kinetically and
energetically facile connections between the elemental Fe, O, C, S and N cycles.
The researchers have developed a high throughput, combinatorial approach to
explore the effect of solution variation on Fe(II) oxidation and ROS yield in
the presence of Fe(III). Work proposed will test the specific hypothesis that
ROS production is maximized when resulting Fe(III) is sequestered in phases that
can undergo atom transfer as well as electron transfer with reactants in the
solution phase. ROS will be measured in the aqueous phase through the addition
of a series of organic probes. The concentration of dissolved metals will be
determined by a combination of spectrophotometric and mass spectrometric
techniques. Solids will be characterized for 56Fe to 58Fe to O ratios using
electron backscatter and mass spectrometric techniques. The exchange of
isotopically labeled Fe(II) with particulate Fe will be determined using high
resolution mass spectrometric techniques. These observables will be correlated
to the conditional initiating matrix to develop response surfaces describing the
systemic ROS generation response to oxygen addition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of this study will result in a new understanding of how rapid
Fe(II)/Fe(III) cycling is affected by co-solutes and colloids. These outcomes
have significance to the general public in the context of carbon turnover driven
by the by-product ROS (and hence climate change) as well as public health
concerns. Results from this work will be incorporated into workshops designed to
educate students and faculty outside of the field. The workshops will be
developed in collaboration with the Hanse Institute for Advanced Study in
Delmenhorst; Germany, and extended to the South Carolina State Museum. The
proposed work will provide support for two graduate and two undergraduate
students. Professors John Ferry and Tim Shaw have a well-documented record of
mentoring underrepresented minorities and female students; 34 out of the 60
researchers in their laboratories have been female, and nine have been from
underrepresented groups.