* 1308737
* Integral Points, Rational Curves and Entire Curves on Projective Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Yuri Tschinkel, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 04/30/2014
* USD 35,000.00

The month-long conference, "Rational Points, Rational Curves, and Entire
Holomorphic Curves on Varieties", June 3-28, 2013, will be held at the Centre de
Recherches Mathematiques in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. The URL for the conference
website is as follows.&lt;br/&gt;http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2013/Integral13/ind
ex_e.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity is a summer school of 2-3
weeks comprised of a dozen mini-courses, followed by a week-long international
workshop. There have been recent advances in seemingly separate fields:
classification of complex projective varieties, existence and properties of
solutions of Diophantine equations, and analytic behavior of entire curves in
projective varieties. The moment is ripe for a summer school and workshop
bringing together experts to synthesize these results, and train junior
mathematicians in the new techniques. With the groundwork laid, we will
emphasize open problems that seem amenable to solution: the holomorphic Lang
conjecture about entire curves in general type varieties, potential density of
rational points and rational curves on Calabi-Yau varieties, and the
Grothendieck-Katz conjecture on algebraic solutions of differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems of polynomial equations arise in all
areas of mathematics, as well as areas of science and engineering as disparate
as genomics and robot design. The oldest, and still most important, problem in
this area is that of finding solutions to polynomial systems, particularly
solutions that are fractions of whole numbers. Although surprising, this problem
is closely connected to the related problem of interpolating any two given
solutions by a system of solutions that are the outputs of a fraction of
polynomials, or, more generally, an entire analytic function (the functions most
amenable to study via "power series expansion"). There have been recent
breakthroughs on both of these problems separately, as well as the interaction
between them. This conference will feature training courses for young
mathematicians, discussions with experts, and a public outreach lecture, as well
as a planned volume to disseminate this work to an even broader audience.