* 1308081
* Multifunctional methionine based materials for therapeutic use
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Timothy Deming, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2016
* USD 435,997.00

Technical: There is a need for polymeric drug carriers that can be prepared
using a versatile method that allows fine tuning of chemical composition and
structure, and use building blocks that are biocompatible and easily
functionalized. The goal of this project is to develop and study multifunctional
amphiphilic block copolypeptides containing modified poly(L-methionine)
segments, MMOD, that can be assembled into vehicles for intracellular drug
delivery. Recent synthetic advances in this lab now allow the development of
entirely new polypeptide amphiphiles utilizing MMOD domains that are designed so
that individual segments can play unprecedented multiple functional roles in the
resulting nanocarrier assemblies. This innovative approach provides a new method
for introducing functionality into polymeric nanocarriers and will develop and
test a new class of methionine based biomaterials. The incorporation of
methionine segments and their subsequent modification is a straightforward,
scalable process, and allows unprecedented control in the ability to add complex
functionality and biological activity to polypeptides. Some MMOD residues also
occur naturally in biological systems and these will be used strategically to
promote release of therapeutics, and may also provide other therapeutic
benefits. The MMOD segments will be utilized as new, functional hydrophilic
domains capable of providing multiple combinations of solubility,
biocompatibility, therapeutic binding, cell uptake, enzyme-response, pH
response, and chemoselective bioconjugation. Specifically, the project will
design, prepare, and characterize vesicle forming block copolypeptides
containing MMOD segments as carriers for therapeutics with low cytotoxicity and
capability for cell uptake, endosomal release and intracellular carrier
disruption. In addition, it will test the capabilities of these carriers using
in vitro cell culture and trafficking studies. The knowledge gained from these
studies will allow fine tuning of carrier properties for downstream specific
uses in encapsulation and delivery of drugs, and will lay groundwork for
development of a new class of functional biomaterials for medical applications.

Non-Technical: In this project, the PIs will continue their successful inclusion
of underrepresented groups, teaching and training of graduate and undergraduate
students, and dissemination of their research findings in publications and
presentations. Some examples of these efforts from the previous grant period
are: development and improvement of bioengineering courses incorporating
concepts from the project such as intracellular trafficking and bioconjugation
methods; recruitment of a Hispanic female student (Ph.D. granted in March 2013)
and an African American female student for this project (1st year); PI and
student presentations of research results at national and local meetings (ACS,
BMES, MRS, Society for Advancement of Hispanics, Chicanos, and Native Americans
in Science (SACNAS) national meeting); and presentations incorporating this
research by the PI to encourage students to pursue careers in science (2010 UCSB
Summer School on materials synthesis; 2011 NAE Grand Challenges Summit for
graduate students; 2012 International Young Scientist Symposium, Bordeaux,
France). Professor Kamei has also made annual visits to elementary and high
schools in East Los Angeles (one is 90% Hispanic) to inspire youth in this
system to become scientists and engineers. Ph.D. students trained under this
program are valuable in the industrial job force (both pharmaceutical and
materials science areas) since they will learn fundamentals of polymer synthesis
using catalysis and self-assembly, cell culture and drug trafficking, as well as
more applied areas of materials characterization and property evaluation. These
undergraduate students have also done well by being admitted into prestigious
Ph.D. (Washington, MIT, UCSB) and MD (Cornell, Texas A&M) programs, and
obtaining NSF graduate fellowships.