* 1308045
* Cognitive Prediction-Enabled Online Intelligent Fault Diagnosis and Prognosis for Wind Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Wei Qiao, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 359,852.00

The objective of this research is to study the use of cognitive prediction
paradigms for online fault diagnosis and prognosis to enable condition-based
smart maintenance for wind energy systems. The approach is to: (1) study the use
of time and frequency domain data mining methods to effectively extract the
features of faults in a wind turbine from the signals acquired from the wind
turbine condition monitoring system; and (2) study the use of artificial neural
networks and machine learning for intelligently diagnosing and prognosing
faults, predicting the lifetime, and quantitatively evaluating the physical
condition of the wind turbine using the extracted fault features.

Intellectual Merit: This project will create innovative cognitive prediction-
based models and computational algorithms to enhance condition awareness of
geographically distributed wind energy systems. The findings of this research
are highly transformable and will provide capabilities for enabling condition-
based intelligent maintenance for other energy conversion and engineered
systems.

Broader Impacts: The outcome of this project will further exploit the benefits
of wind power by successfully reducing cost and improving reliability of wind
energy systems and, therefore, will make wind energy a reliable, cost-
competitive source of clean electricity. The increasing use of wind power will
benefit various sectors of the nation's economy and contribute to sustainable
development of society. Multiple fields covered by this project are areas where
a talent shortage is projected in the United States, particularly in the
Midwest. The proposed activities will provide a unique learning platform for
young individuals to become skilled professionals.