* 1308777
* Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mohammad Ghomi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2017
* USD 176,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1308777, Principal Investigator: Mohammad Ghomi

The principal investigator proposes to continue his work on the theory of curves
and surfaces in Euclidean space, and more generally on Riemannian submanifolds
of low dimension or codimension. He specializes in applying contemporary methods
such as curvature flows and h-principle theory to solve classical problems which
often have simple intuitive statements, while their solutions may require
sophisticated techniques. The PI's research in this area spans a wide range of
topics including isometric embeddings, isoperimetric problems, geometric knot
theory, polyhedral approximations, and connections with real algebraic geometry.
Some recurring themes throughout these investigations are various notions of
convexity or optimization, and the interaction between geometric and topological
concepts, or local versus global properties of submanifolds. More specifically,
a typical problem is how restrictions on curvature, intrinsic metric, or various
boundary conditions, influence the global shape of a curve or a hypersurface, or
even allow an embedding of that object in a Euclidean space of low codimension.
A fundamental problem in this area is that of isometric rigidity of surfaces:
can one continuously deform a smooth closed surface in Euclidean space without
changing its intrinsic metric? We also consider a number of related problems
involving the self-linking number or vertices of closed curves, spherical images
of closed surfaces, and various deformations of submanifolds which preserve the
sign or magnitude of the curvature. Other projects include inequalities for mean
chord lengths of submanifolds, regularity of real algebraic hypersurfaces, and
unfoldings of convex polyhedra.

Curves and surfaces are to geometry what numbers are to algebra. They form the
basic ingredients of our visual perception and inspire the development of far
reaching mathematical tools. Yet despite centuries of pure study, and an
abundance of potential applications, there are still many fundamental open
problems in this area which are strikingly intuitive and elementary to state.
Studying these problems may stimulate useful developments in pure mathematics,
or lead to wider applications in science and technology. For instance, the PI's
work on rigidity problem for surfaces may have applications for stability of
complicated domes in modern architecture, or various physical frameworks. The
polyhedral approximation techniques which the PI is proposing could be useful in
computer aided design, and the emerging field of discrete differential geometry.
The related studies of the Gauss maps of surfaces could be useful in computer
vision and optics, while studying isoperimetric problems has been a significant
source of enrichment in calculus of variations and mathematical physics.
Further, folding-unfolding problems have numerous applications ranging from
deployment of satellite dishes in space to implantation of stents in human
arteries. Another impact of the proposed activity would be development of
connections between various fields, as in the PI's work on tangent cones, which
combines concepts from geometric measure theory, algebraic geometry, and convex
analysis. Finally, these problems are ideal for introducing the general public
to the exciting world of modern day mathematics, and arousing the interest of
beginning students in Geometry.