* 1308159
* CRCNS: Collaborative Research: The role of inhibition and correlated dynamics in cortical visual processing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Ralf Wessel, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2017
* USD 363,388.00

The cerebral cortex is comprised of two competing types of brain cells:
inhibitory neurons tend to suppress brain activity while excitatory neurons do
the opposite. This project will illuminate principles governing the balance of
inhibition versus excitation. Focusing on the role of inhibition, the project
will test the hypothesis that a particular intermediate level of inhibition is
optimal for sensory information processing, because it places the cortex network
in a special operating regime called criticality.

When inhibition is too high, cortical neurons are suppressed and act largely
independently. When inhibition is too low neurons are hyperactive and act
largely in unison. Neither extreme is conducive to effective information
processing. However, gradually decreasing inhibition from a high level can
result in an abrupt onset of correlated, intense activity among the neurons. The
tipping point of this onset is called criticality. Importantly, computer models
and cortex slice investigations predict that at criticality certain types of
information processing are optimized. However, the potentially pivotal role of
criticality in processing real sensory input in an intact sensory system remains
untested. Such tests will be undertaken here in an in vitro whole-brain
preparation that allows the researchers to precisely manipulate levels of global
inhibition, record cortical activity with microelectrode arrays for many hours,
and stimulate the retina with naturalistic images. Employing novel,
statistically rigorous, multifaceted, quantitative tests of criticality, the
proposed research will determine the roles of inhibition and criticality in
intact cortex during visual processing. Specifically, the experiments are
designed to determine whether information transfer from visual stimulus to
cortical response is maximized at an intermediate level of inhibition which
manifests as criticality.

This project represents the first experimental test of the hypothesized
functional benefits of criticality in real sensory processing. It builds on a
strong conceptual foundation combining statistical physics and computational
neuroscience, and may open a new paradigm for investigating cortical visual
processing in large neural networks. This new paradigm is particularly relevant
in light of emerging new technologies that enable the recording of activity from
thousands of neurons. From the medical perspective this contribution is
significant because it is expected to illuminate the etiology of numerous brain
disorders with abnormal inhibition. Finally, the project brings the excitement
of research into Missouri and Arkansas high schools with teacher training and
classroom presentations. Newly fostered interest in STEM research will be
assessed by longitudinal measures.