* 1308501
* Periodic orbits of Hamiltonian systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Viktor Ginzburg, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2017
* USD 166,962.00

The proposal focuses on the existence problem for periodic orbits of Hamiltonian
systems and several other questions closely related to the PI's previous work.
The first group of problems considered in the proposal concerns generalizations
of the Conley conjecture. This conjecture asserts the existence of infinitely
many periodic points of a Hamiltonian diffeomorphism of a symplectically
aspherical, closed manifold. The Conley conjecture has been established by
Hingston (for tori) and the PI, and eventually generalized to all closed
symplectic manifolds with zero Chern class and to negative monotone symplectic
manifolds. The PI proposes a variety of further generalizations of these results
as well as a program to investigate the cases where the conjecture is known not
to hold. In particular, the PI will study the existence of infinitely many
periodic orbits for Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms with a hyperbolic fixed point,
higher dimensional generalizations of Franks? theorem, and the Conley conjecture
for manifolds with large minimal Chern number. The second part of the proposal
concerns a similar circle of questions for periodic orbits of Reeb flows.
Finally, the main subject of the last part of the proposal is a study of
Hamiltonian systems with finitely many periodic orbits and certain homological
resonance relations on the actions and indices of the orbits. The ultimate goal
of these projects is to better understand the underlying reasons for the
abundance of periodic orbits of Hamiltonian systems. The methods to be utilized
by the PI are essentially Floer-theoretic in nature. An essential new ingredient
comes from the PI?s recent work, joint with Gurel, on periodic orbits of
Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms with a hyperbolic fixed point.

Hamiltonian dynamical systems describe many classes of physical processes in
which dissipative forces can be neglected. For example, planetary motion in
celestial mechanics and some electro- or magneto-dynamical processes can be, and
usually are, treated as Hamiltonian dynamical systems. One of the classical
subjects lying at the very core of modern theory of Hamiltonian dynamical
systems and symplectic geometry is the study of periodic orbits (i.e., cyclic
motions). Periodic orbits are ubiquitous: a vast majority of Hamiltonian systems
have periodic orbits and the number of distinct periodic orbits is infinite for
a broad class of systems. The analysis of this phenomenon is among the main
objectives of the proposed research. One novel ingredient of the proposed
research is a new form of interaction between local and global features of
Hamiltonian systems. For instance, the PI proposes to show that Hamiltonian
systems with a certain type of local behavior must necessarily have infinitely
many periodic orbits. The proposed research has potential applications to
physics and mathematical aspects of mechanics.