* 1308176
* VOSS: Research on the Process of Virtual Research Environment
* CSE,OAC
* 09/27/2012,08/31/2017
* Iftekhar Ahmed, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 248,551.00

Increasingly, science is conducted by large teams of researchers scattered
across widely dispersed locations and accessing scientific tools, data, and each
other via the internet. Scientific communities develop with a wide variety of
talents and skills, harnessing the resources of multiple institutions, and
tackling larger, more multifaceted problems. The virtual research environment (a
key type of cyberinfrastructure combining technologies for conducting research,
analyzing data, coordinating projects, and enabling collaboration) has been
shown to make significant contributions to the success of distributed science.
However, there are few systematic studies of the process by which these
environments develop both through intentional design decisions negotiated among
a diverse and changing set of stakeholders over an extended period of time and
through unplanned events and contingencies.

This project will advance and refine a theoretical framework for understanding
the processes by which virtual research environments are developed and how these
processes contribute to their effectiveness. The framework proposes that virtual
research environments are constructed through interactions among five critical
activity tracks, specifically: (a) technological design and implementation, (b)
scientific work, (c) the community of virtual research environment users,
developers, funders and other stakeholders, (d) managerial and organizational
system, and (e) critical events. The project will conduct in-depth longitudinal
analyses of the sequences of events involved in the development of virtual
research environments along the five tracks and trace inter-track influences. It
will assess the fit of various developmental models to identify factors that
account for the development of the virtual research environments and the co-
evolution of the tracks. Finally, it will relate various features of the
developmental process to effectiveness of virtual research environments in terms
of productivity, collaboration, community development, and successful
implementation and use of virtual research environment features.

Results of this research will yield insights into how virtual research
environments develop and change over time. The multidimensional model can be
used to understand the conclusions drawn by previous case studies and to enable
a more sophisticated analysis of cyberinfrastructure evolution that can identify
key drivers and effectiveness. The results also promise insights into other
kinds of virtual organizations with multiple, complex sets of stakeholders. The
project will advance process theory and research by providing a more complete
specification of the types of relationships among process tracks and
articulation of developmental models based on these relationships.

Virtual research environments have great potential to advance scientific
inquiry. Understanding how they develop and how their effectiveness is related
to their development over time would enable designers to improve the development
process. Knowledge of the various processes that promote or derail design,
implementation, and use would increase the effectiveness of developers and
managers of virtual research environments, and assure the best returns for
public and private investments.