* 1308168
* Collaborative Research: Optimized Harvesting of Hydrokinetic Power by Ocean Current Turbine Farms Using Integrated Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Lothar Birk, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2017
* USD 121,731.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The modern world needs a diverse energy portfolio and during
the past decade, significant investments have been committed to harnessing
marine renewable energy sources which have a theoretical potential to far exceed
the world's present power generation needs. Of these untapped resources, open
ocean currents, or predominantly unidirectional large scale circulations located
near eastern coastlines of most continents, are located in deeper ocean areas
(&gt;250m), but flow near the sea surface. Various commercial interests now
propose to install turbines to convert these vast kinetic energy reserves into
usable electrical power, but thus far no large-scale commercial production
prototypes have been constructed or tested in relevant environments. Perceiving
the value these resources and to nurture their commercial development, the U.S.
Department of Energy has designated three national centers to investigate
solutions that help accelerate the pace at which marine renewables deliver base-
load power to the grid and to provide testing capacities for evolving
technologies. One such center, the Southeast National Renewable Energy Center
(SNMREC) at Florida Atlantic University (FAU), is specifically tasked with
enabling commercialization of open ocean current
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A partnership between the SNMREC, the School
of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering at the University of New Orleans
(UNO) and the Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and&lt;br/&gt;Systems
(CEHMS) at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VT) has been
organized to leverage the strengths of each institution to achieve the goal of
helping the emerging ocean current energy industry overcome specific technical
hurdles to promote and enable eventual commercialization. Future farms of ocean
current turbines (OCTs) will be strategically located in the most energy dense
portions of ocean current flows (near the surface, but anchored in deep ocean
areas) to maximize power generation. To achieve positioning stability and to
maximize generated power, OCTs are expected to efficiently avoid the wakes of
nearby turbines and destructive environmental forces, but seek high energy
density and consistent flow. Thus, these turbines must achieve autonomous and
integrated electromechanical and position control. Unfortunately, because early
commercial turbine design efforts are still focused on energy conversion
demonstrations, small-scale validation, and hardware suitability for the
operational environment, no significant effort has yet been applied to develop
joint motion control for farms of OCTs, especially when coupled with power
generation considerations. This effort therefore proposes to develop autonomous
electromechanical and flight control systems to maximize the generated
electricity by a single OCT unit, and then test effectiveness with a physics-
based numerical simulation.&lt;br/&gt;Control optimization will involve active
OCT rotor blade pitch angle control by leveraging helicopter flight control and
modern multivariable constrained control techniques. The solutions will then be
extrapolated to a farm of OCTs, which will require novel advanced collaborative
control methodologies and will be validated with physics-based numerical
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: For OCT concepts to become
commercially viable, motion control and power generation optimization systems
are needed. This project will achieve this requirement, will advance turbine
modeling science, and will advance modern control design. This effort will
directly enable the commercialization of ocean current energy conversion and
will bring focus upon a new control and optimization application which will
inspire significant innovation beyond this work. Major findings from this
project will be directly integrated with the SNMREC, UNO and VT active outreach
and education development programs which regularly share research outcomes with
the public through presentations, workshops, the web, and conferences. A K-12
STEM enhancement curriculum and trained teachers in culturally diverse school
districts will further benefit from this work. The university partners have also
developed cooperative laboratory tools planned for direct incorporation into
undergraduate curriculum. UNO, VT and FAU promote dissemination of applicable
research data, helping prepare a future professional workforce toward a robust
marine renewable energy sector.