* 1308325
* Studies of Particle Production, Vacuum Polarization, and the Validity of the Semiclassical Approximation in Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Paul Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2015
* USD 41,275.00

This award supports research that addresses issues relating to quantum effects
in both cosmological and black hole spacetimes. These are questions related to
the validity of the semi-classical approximation when it is used to describe the
effects of quantized fields on a classical background field and to determine
whether observable effects related to the existence of a horizon, in this case a
sonic horizon, can be found in certain Bose-Einstein condensates, which can
serve as black hole analogues. One project involves determining whether quantum
fluctuations in the density and pressure of matter and radiation will be large
during a period of inflation when the universe is expanding exponentially. If
so, then the semi-classical approximation to gravity breaks down and a different
method will be needed to describe what happens. A second project investigates
the validity of the semiclassical approximation when the universe contracts for
one important model in which the contraction is to a minimal size and is
followed by an expansion. Evidence suggesting a quantum instability in this
model could indicate that quantum fluctuations become large during the
contraction phase. A third project investigates whether quantum effects that
could be observed in laboratory studies and which are related to the existence
of a horizon exist for a model in which a Bose-Einstein condensate serves as an
analog for a black hole. Specifically the density density correlation function
is computed in order to determine whether undulations are predicted to occur and
whether other new observable effects that require the existence of a horizon can
be found.

Completion of these projects will elucidate phenomena ranging from the expansion
of the universe to potentially observable effects in black hole analogues. If
quantum fluctuations prove to be large in important situations, then predictions
made using the semi-classical approximation will be suspect, and a different
method must be found to treat the effects of the quantized fields. The work on
the validity of the semiclassical approximation could have implications for and
be extended to other situations in which this approximation has been used such
as the production of particles in the presence of a strong electric field and
the modeling of heavy ion collisions in nuclear physics. The work on Bose-
Einstein condensates which serve as analog black holes may predict specific
effects that experimental condensed matter physicists can attempt to observe in
laboratory experiments. If observed, these effects would provide significant
evidence that predictions of quantum effects relating to black holes, such as
black hole evaporation, are correct. It is expected that at least three
undergraduate students and at least one graduate student will participate in
many aspects of the research, continuing a long history of the training of
students in numerical and analytical research techniques and co-authorship on
publications. Results will be disseminated to the research community through
publications and presentations at national and international meetings.