* 1308644
* Quantitative Measurement of Surface Plasmon-Enhanced Electromagnetic Fields on Single Plasmonic Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Wei Wei, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2017
* USD 410,000.00

Prof. Wei David Wei at the University of Florida is being supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry in developing methods and strategies for a direct and quantitative
evaluation of the magnitude of surface plasmon resonance (SPR)-enhanced
electromagnetic (EM) fields at the single-nanoparticle level. These methods are
to allow the mapping of the lateral spatial distribution of "hot spots" on the
surfaces of anisotropic nanostructures and, furthermore, to permit a thorough
investigation into the local extinction profiles, polarization dependences, and
ultra-fast excited state dynamics of individual hot spots at the nanometer
scale. A detailed analysis of the precise correlation between local
nanostructure geometry and the attributes of the resulting localized SPR is
being made in order to significantly advance the understanding of the nature and
origin of nano-localized hot spots. The long-range objective is to greatly
facilitate the development of new classes of plasmonic nanomaterials with
properties optimized for applications in the biomedical and solar energy fields,
including single-molecule sensing and solar photocatalysis.

Discoveries from the proposed project are targeted at the development of new
plasmonic nanomaterials and technologies that promote public health and clean
energy, both vital to the nation's future. The broader educational impact of
this program is to be the instruction and inspiration of the next generation of
scientists in biomedical sensing and solar energy production. Prof. Wei and his
group are specifically focusing on broadening the participation of groups
underrepresented in the sciences. In conjunction with student mentorship and
curriculum development, Prof. Wei is active in ongoing outreach activities to
educate high school students, teachers, and the general public on plasmonic
nanomaterials.