* 1308587
* Magnetically Actuated Active Tuning of Plasmonic Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Yadong Yin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Yadong Yin of the University of
California, Riverside, and his students incorporate magnetic actuation into
noble metal nanostructures to achieve active tuning of plasmonic properties. A
long-term goal of this research is the development of novel hybrid optical
nanostructures with many technological applications in data storage, photonic
devices, and chemical and biomedical sensors. The team studies two types of
magnetic responsive plasmonic nanostructures: one involves magnetically induced
assembly and disassembly of plasmonic nanoparticles and the other utilizes
magnetic alignment of anisotropic noble metal nanostructures to achieve active
tuning of the plasmonic properties. To enable reversible tuning of the plasmonic
property, the surfaces of these metal nanoparticles are engineered to produce
sufficiently repulsive interactions that can balance the magnetically induced
attractive force and prevent permanent aggregation. New synthetic methods are
developed to create many complex hybrid materials that are integrated with both
magnetic and plasmonic properties, providing very useful tools for studying and
controlling the plasmonic properties through the movement, rotation, and
assembly of the metal nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting hybrid
materials find great use in practical applications that may have very positive
impacts on our society, including novel visual displays, optical sensors,
anticounterfeiting devices, therapeutic agents for tumors, targeted drug
delivery, and many enhanced sensing and imaging devices. The project also
targets expanding research-based learning at UCR and in the wider community by
engaging high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in research.
Undergraduate students are attracted to the research program through regular
academic and summer internship programs, student clubs and organizations, and
collaborative programs with local small liberal arts colleges. Undergraduate and
graduate students are provided with opportunities to present their discoveries
in national meetings and other public settings. Students are also encouraged to
report their research activities and findings in the form of video presentations
that can be shared with their classmates, friends, family members, and others on
their social networks, thus disseminating research outcomes from the laboratory
to the general public. Prof. Yin is also deeply involved in science fair
competition in order to promote high school students' interests in science and
engineering.