* 1308941
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The genetic basis of endoreduplication and fitness compensation in plants
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Ken Paige, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 20,618.00

DNA replication is a process that occurs in all cells of all organisms to create
new cells with the same DNA composition. DNA re-replication, however, creates
numerous copies of the DNA within single cells instead of creating numerous new
cells. This process occurs in many types of organisms but there is little
knowledge of the potential ecological or evolutionary benefits of re-replicating
DNA for the organism. This project will provide a whole-genome perspective of
the effects of DNA re-replication on gene regulation and will relate those
expression differences to plants under the stress of herbivory, ultimately
determining if DNA re-replication provides beneficial gene regulatory effects to
aid the plants? regrowth, survival, and enhanced seed production following
damage.

The genetic effects of DNA re-replication may be important for organisms in
combating a wide range of environmental stresses, and this study will provide
the genetic underpinning of the adaptive potential of DNA re-replication
generally. Investigating under-researched mechanisms influencing plant regrowth
following damage is particularly important with the increased production of
repeatedly-harvested biofuel and resprouting crops. This project will provide
opportunities for undergraduates to gain experience in cutting-edge gene
expression techniques and serve as material for discussion in K-12 classrooms
via Skype and online web forums.