* 1308142
* Gate-Modulated Charge Density-Dependent Physics of Low-Dimensional Inorganic Semiconductors in Organic Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Norman Armitage, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2017
* USD 506,320.00

Technical Description: Topological insulators, such as bismuth selenides and
bismuth tellurides, are materials with inherent conductive states near their
surfaces. This research project utilizes multifunctional organic layers to
control the surface chemical potentials and bonding interactions in these
materials, introducing sufficient charge density to reveal atomic and structural
features that determine the surface conductive states. The layered structures
are used to encapsulate thin films of topological insulators to reach a high
charge density at low applied voltages, maximize dielectric strength, and tune
local band energies. Local electric fields are designed to be as large as those
in ionic liquids presently employed, but in a much better defined geometry.
Terahertz magneto-optical polarimetry will provide a powerful probe to determine
scattering rates, charge densities, and band masses for several parallel
transport channels simultaneously. The research offers opportunities to observe
physical phenomena such as correlated electron transport, spin polarized
conduction in topological insulators, and unconventional superconductivity and
charge-density waves. It can lead to new ways of controlling chalcogenide-
organic interfaces in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description:
There is a great interest in materials that can manipulate electrical and
magnetic signals with high energy efficiency, and that can store and process
information more and more rapidly. This research project concerns the study of a
new class of mineral-like materials that have a special ability to conduct
electricity very effectively at certain locations. A new way to package and
switch these materials using plastic-like media is developed. This method is
expected to avoid some of the complications of previous methods and allow better
understanding of the factors that control the electrical and magnetic behavior
of the materials. The result of this work will help to create new possibilities
for designing future computers and data management systems. Graduate and
undergraduate students in this project synthesize materials and perform
characterizations of materials and devices, acquiring a broad technical basis
for diversified science and technology employment. These activities also form
the basis of fabrication and characterization modules in undergraduate materials
science and materials physics laboratory courses. Students from Western High
School, a public, largely minority and low-income girl's school in Baltimore
City, also participate in the research as part of an after-school program, and
ultimately serve as ambassadors to feeder middle schools as well.