* 1308972
* Strong Correlations in Chiral Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Dmitrii Maslov, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2016
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports combined theoretical
research, education, and outreach to pursue the consequences of spin-orbit
coupling in various materials through a chiral Fermi liquid theory. The research
part of the proposal will explore possibilities of new phases of electronic
matter in two-dimensional electron systems with strong spin-orbit coupling,
focusing on electron and hole gases in gallium-aluminum-arsenide
heterostructures, surface states of oxides, states at oxide interfaces, and
three-dimensional topological insulators. The main thrusts of the project
include&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+ developing the general theory of chiral Fermi
liquids;&lt;br/&gt;+ applying this theory to three main archetypes of chiral
Fermi liquids: systems with linear and cubic spin-orbit couplings, and Dirac
fermions on the surface of topological insulators;&lt;br/&gt;+ identifying and
classifying possible novel phases resulting from the interplay between the
electron-electron and spin-orbit interactions in these systems;&lt;br/&gt;+
analyzing ferromagnetic order of nuclear spins coupled by an indirect
interaction via heavy holes in p-gallium arsenide quantum wells; &lt;br/&gt;+
developing a theory of novel collective modes in chiral Fermi liquids and
proposing experiments for detecting these modes;&lt;br/&gt;+ understanding the
interplay between superconductivity and spin-orbit coupling in a 2D
superconductor at lanthanum aluminate/strontium titanate
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational and
outreach activities that will address diverse audiences of graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of Florida, as well as a broader
community of STEM teachers via the FloridaTeach program. Using the already
existing framework of the advanced multi-faculty course at the UF Department of
Physics, the PI will develop month-long courses of lectures on the topics
relevant to this project for graduate students. Educational materials for these
lectures will be available for a broader audience of graduate students and
researchers via the UF Physics website. At the undergraduate level, the PI will
involve participants of the existing REU program in some of the research
projects related to this proposal. Finally, the PI will deliver popular lectures
on advances in nanoscience to Florida STEM teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research that crosscuts two very active research
areas in materials research. The first one is the field of strongly correlated
electron systems and quantum phase transitions in itinerant electron systems.
The main goal of this field is to understand the mechanisms by which the
electrons in a many-electron system choose to organize themselves into an
ordered state, such as magnetism over a liquid-like state. The second one is the
field of semiconductor spintronics and quantum computation with spin qubits. The
main physical ingredient of this field is correlated dynamics of just a few or
many electrons along with their spins. There are interesting "overlap regions"
between these two areas, and the PI aims to investigate them. The results will
help to improve our understanding of fundamental physics in both areas, and thus
will be of interest to a broader community. The universal language of symmetry-
based phenomenology employed by the theory of Fermi liquids should be equally
familiar to large communities of researchers working in strongly correlated
electron systems and in spintronics/quantum computation. Training of graduate
students will prepare them not only to life in academia but would also give them
useful problem-solving skills that can be used outside of academia. The PI's
group has a strong record for placement of PhD students some of whom made
successful academic careers and some chose equally successful careers in
industry.