* 1308919
* Iterated filtering:  New theory, algorithms and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Yves Atchade, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2017
* USD 99,994.00

Partially observed Markov process models provide a general framework for
formulating and answering questions about dynamic systems. Evaluation of the
likelihood for these models can be formulated as a filtering problem. Iterated
filtering algorithms carry out repeated sequential Monte Carlo filtering
operations to maximize the likelihood. Current theory for iterated filtering
justifies the parameter update at each iteration via a stochastic approximation
to the first derivative of the log likelihood. Our new approach to iterated
filtering theory and methodology draws on similarities with data cloning (i.e.,
methods where Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms are applied to multiple copies
of the data to provide likelihood-based inference). The relationship with
iterated filtering is that each filtering iteration is analogous to creating a
new clone of the data. This new theoretical perspective leads to novel novel
algorithms. In the context of the previous stochastic approximation theory of
iterated filtering, the new algorithms behave as though the intractable second
derivative of the likelihood were known. Indeed, the proposed algorithm
generates an estimate of the Fisher information as a bi-product. Preliminary
results, on a simple ecological model and on a challenging inference problem
arising from fitting a malaria transmission model to time series data, show that
a new iterated filtering algorithm out-performs previous methods. As well as
advancing methodological capabilities for time series analysis via mechanistic
models, the investigators will develop applications to two other related classes
of statistical problems: longitudinal data analysis via mechanistic models, and
inference for complex dynamic data structures. As concrete examples, the
investigators will study the use of iterated filtering techniques for (i)
relating pathogen genetic sequence data to HIV transmission models; (ii) using
longitudinal data to inform stochastic dynamic models of sexual behaviors
related to HIV transmission; (iii) inference via summary statistics and pseudo
likelihood criteria, with an application to partially observed dynamic network
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many scientific challenges involve the study of
nonlinear stochastic dynamic systems about which only noisy or incomplete
measurements are available. Except when the system is small, state-of-the-art
statistical methods are required to make efficient use of available data and to
provide modeling flexibility that promotes model criticism. The novel iterated
filtering algorithms developed by the investigators will be used to study
disease transmission systems with the goal of informing policy for the
detection, control and potential eradication of infectious diseases. The PI is
already engaged in the interface between statistical methodology development,
epidemiology and public policy. The proposed research will directly benefit
understanding of malaria and HIV transmission, but will also provide
methodological tools and case studies relevant to other disease systems. More
broadly, the methodology developed will be applicable to inference problems for
dynamic systems arising throughout the biological, physical, social, health and
engineering sciences. Open source software for all the methodology developed
will be included in the R package {pomp}
(http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/pomp) for which the PI is a co-
developer. Advances in iterated filtering methodology will be disseminated as
part of the PIs ongoing agenda to spread the use of formal statistic methods for
partially observed dynamic systems.