* 1308236
* Quantum Critical Phenomena and Non Fermi Liquid Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2014,04/30/2017
* Andrew Millis, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 04/30/2017
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
to advance understanding of strongly interacting electrons in equilibrium and in
situations far from the steady state of equilibrium. Superconductivity,
magnetism, conversion of light into electrical energy: the astonishing variety
of behavior found in `electrically active' materials arise from the combination
of quantum mechanics and the electrical repulsion between electrons.
Understanding this behavior is one of the grand challenges of modern science.
Controlling it would create new technologies that can improve all of our lives.
However this `many electron' problem is one of the classic hard problems of
theoretical science. The research supported by this award builds on exciting
recent developments in computers, algorithms and physics concepts, some of them
invented by the PI, that are transforming the capability to solve these
problems. The PI will further develop, implement and use these new ideas and new
computational methods to understand, design, optimize and exploit materials with
new kinds of important electronic properties. A central focus of this research
is to use the new methods to understand what happens when an electrically active
material is challenged by an applied current, electrical impulse, or light wave,
because how a material responds to such a challenged determines its
technological utility.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational studies of
the physics of strongly interacting electrons in both equilibrium and
nonequilibrium situations. A key aspect of the proposed research is the further
development and wider application of new classes of computational methods that
the PI and other groups have recently introduced. New methods are needed because
the combination of quantum mechanical entanglement and electron-electron
interactions makes the many-electron problem formally unsolvable for large
systems. The difficulties are compounded in the nonequilibrium situation, which
is relevant to devices and to new classes of pump-probe experiments, where even
the basic theoretical concepts are unclear. The PI will build on discoveries
made by many NSF-supported researchers over the years, relating to the use of
stochastic methods, such as Monte Carlo, to estimate the value of a Feynman
diagram series. These methods have opened up wide classes of previously
intractable problems to quantitative investigation. The PI will use them to gain
new insights into the superconducting properties of novel materials by
constructing and studying in detail the superconducting and pseudogap states of
the two dimensional Hubbard model and relating these to the magnetic properties
which can now be calculated using the vertex correction methodology developed in
the previous funding period. The PI will also explore new applications of the
stochastic exploration of diagram series approach to the nonequilibrium case.
The straightforward extensions the PI pioneered in previous funding periods do
not permit access to physics on long-time scales, but new work based on
expansions around analytically determined partial resummations seems to allow
access to the long-time limit. The PI will use these methods to develop solvers
for the equations of nonequilibrium dynamical mean field theory. In a third
research thrust the PI will use analytical methods to examine the interplay of
superconducting, antiferromagnetic and `nematic' phases and fluctuations in the
iron-pnictide superconductors.