* 1308885
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Jamie Oaks, Oaks                    Jamie          R
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2016
* USD 207,000.00

Developing novel methods for testing models of shared evolutionary history

Understanding the processes that generate biodiversity is a fundamental goal of
biology. To achieve this goal, it will be critical to account for mechanisms
that influence the evolution of entire communities of co-occurring species, such
as changes to the environment. The advancement of next-generation sequencing
(NGS) technology provides opportunities to examine evolutionary history in
unprecedented detail using genome-wide data from multiple species. However,
there are currently no methods for analyzing NGS data in a comparative framework
to test hypotheses about shared evolutionary history. The goal of this project
is to develop Bayesian statistical models that can utilize NGS data for
estimating the temporal pattern of speciation events across co-distributed taxa.
These novel methods will be applied to NGS data from species across West-Central
Africa to infer the effect of past aridifi cation cycles on the diversifi cation
of Afro-tropical rainforest fauna.

Broader impacts include the development of novel computational tools made freely
available as open-source software. These tools will be of general interest
across multiple disciplines, including biodiversity science and evolutionary
medicine, by providing statistical approaches to estimate models of co-diversifi
cation across landscapes and co-evolutionary dynamics between host taxa and
their associated microbiomes. The former is critical for understanding global
biodiversity, and the latter is important for understanding the evolutionary
history and assembly of host-associated microbiota, including pathogens.
Training objectives include mastering the mathematical, computational, and
bioinformatic skills necessary for advancing research at the nexus of
mathematics, statistics, and biology. This project will also use an evidence-
based approach to develop classroom strategies for improving undergraduate
education in the foundational concepts of evolution and the scienti fic method.
This project will follow the principles of Open Notebook Science; all progress
will be recorded in real time via version-control software and made publicly
available on the Internet.