* 1308093
* Expanding the Scope of a Chemical Modification and Mass Spectrometry-Based Method For Protein-Ligand Binding Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Michael Fitzgerald, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2016
* USD 407,000.00

With support form the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Fitzgerald and his research group at
Duke University will develop and apply new quantitative mass spectrometry-based
proteomics methods for the large-scale thermodynamic analysis of protein-ligand
binding interactions. The specific protocols under development utilize the
Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) technique in combination
with a stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) approach
to compare the equilibrium unfolding/folding properties of proteins and protein
ligand-complexes in real biological mixtures (e.g., cell lysates). The new
protocols, which are designed to significantly expand the number of proteins
assayed in proteome-wide SPROX experiments, will be benchmarked in several
proof-of-principle experiments in which the endogenous proteins in a yeast cell
lysate are analyzed for binding to ATP (a ubiquitous enzyme cofactor), to
geldanamycin (an Hsp90 inhibitor), and to cyclosporine A (an immunosuppressive
agent that directly binds cyclophilin A and indirectly interacts with
calcineurin. The new protocols will also be used in a real drug mode-of-action
studies involving manassantin A, which is a natural product with demonstrated
anti-cancer activity in cell-based assays but an as yet unknown mode-of-
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategies and protocols to be created will be
readily transferable to almost any protein-ligand system or biological mixture
regardless of the ligand (i.e. small molecule, DNA, peptide, or other proteins)
or binding affinity. The research provides interdisciplinary research
experiences for both graduate and undergraduate students, and as well as high
school students from the North Carolina Project SEED program, which is an on-
going science enrichment program designed to steer disadvantaged,
underrepresented minority students from North Carolina high schools into
chemistry and chemistry-related careers.