* 1308089
* Navigating Frustration
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Sethna, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on frustrated systems. The PI aims to understand how to handle spins S
= 1 and S = 3/2, and how to find emergent local degrees of freedom due to
disorder. The research has 4 thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1 Methods - The
methods of quasi-degenerate density matrix and/or Renyi entropy will be applied
to characterize emergent local degrees of freedom. Locally-dependent variational
wavefunctions will be developed to model the ground states of quantum systems
lacking translational invariance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Highly frustrated
antiferromagnets - The spin-1 antiferromagnet on kagome and pyrochlore lattices
will be studied, using variational Monte Carlo, also by DMRG using the loop-free
cactus lattice as an ersatz. The effective Hamiltonian approach will be applied
to situations with random fluxes, both to find the phase diagram of spins
coupled to electrons on the kagome lattice, and also to find the correct ground
state for spin-1/2 pyrochlore antiferromagnet in the large-N Schwinger boson
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Disorder and frustration - The PI aims to
resolve the three major mysteries about the spin-1/2 antiferromagnet at
percolation on the Bethe lattice: (1) Why do the emergent spin degrees of
freedom decouple? (2) Is the long-range order propagated purely by them? (3) How
does the smallest gap scale with system size?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4.
Interacting fermions - Exact diagonalization and analytic methods will be used
to decode the intriguing regularities of the 'coincident amplitude'
wavefunctions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods the PI will develop will likely
be useful for any material with disorder. The PI is completing a graduate text
on solid state physics after the introductory texts, but without field theory, a
pedagogical middle ground which hopefully will be congenial to experimentalists
working on quantum materials. The PI will involve undergraduate students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education on frustrated materials.
"Frustration" is the technical term for what happens when either electrons which
may hop between atoms in a solid, or "spins," which are abstractions of the
intrinsic magnetism of electrons, when the electrons don't hop, give conflicting
signals to each other. A hallmark of a frustrated system is: rather than having
a single collective state which is obviously favored by the interactions, there
are numerous collective states which are equally good by technical measures. As
a result, small interactions that are usually ignored might tip the balance and
favor a particular one of these states. Or, when quantum mechanics is important,
a quantum superposition of these states may result, and in some cases such a
collective state has exotic properties, such as emergent "particles" having
fractional charge. The PI aims to find ways to "navigate" through these
states.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In many real materials the regular lattice
defining the rules for a frustrated model is "diluted" i.e. missing an
occasional site. This may have dramatic effects in the case of a frustrated
system. The PI will complete an ongoing study that does not include frustration,
but combines quantum mechanics with dilution to the percolation threshold, where
the network of interacting spins is on the verge of becoming disconnected due to
the removed sites. The PI will adapt a computational method study possible non-
uniform states in systems where the rules of the game are uniform, but
frustrated. Several projects which address dilution will be
pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to adapt a variety of numerical
methods. For example, the quantity called "entanglement" which is a measure of
how much quantum information a systems has. This can be a powerful way to
identify the kind of emergent state the system is in. The PI will evaluate the
entanglement of a small region relative the environment that surrounds it and
evaluate whether this can be used to identify which kind of emergent local
degree of freedom is appearing in that region because of
dilution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods the PI will develop will likely be
useful for any material with disorder. The PI is completing a graduate text on
solid state physics after the introductory texts, but without field theory, a
pedagogical middle ground which hopefully will be congenial to experimentalists
working on quantum materials. The PI will involve undergraduate students in the
research.