* 1308958
* Polymer Crystallization at Curved Liquid/Liquid Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 498,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Curved space is incommensurate with typical ordered structures with three-
dimensional (3D) translational symmetry. However, upon assembly, soft matter,
including colloids, amphiphiles, and block copolymers (BCPs), often forms
structures depicting curved surface/interface. Examples include liposomes,
colloidosomes, spherical micelles, worm-like micelles, and vesicles (also known
as polymersomes). For crystalline BCPs, crystallization oftentimes overwrites
curved geometries since the latter is incommensurate with crystalline order. On
the other hand, twisted and curved crystals are often observed in crystalline
polymers. Various mechanisms have been proposed for these non-flat crystalline
morphologies. One intriguing question would be: how do curved space and
crystalline order co-exist in polymeric systems? In this work, the PI proposes
to systematically investigate polymer solution crystallization at curved L/L
interface using an emulsion-solution crystallization method. The objectives of
the project are: 1) understanding the polymer single crystal growth mechanism at
curved L/L interface; 2) understanding structure and mechanical properties of
curved polymer single crystals; and 3) fabricating multicomponent shell
ensembles using polymer single crystals. From a scientific standpoint, packing
crystalline chains in a curved incommensurate space is an intriguing question to
study. From a technological standpoint, if successful, the well-controlled
single- or multiple-component ensembles will not only shed light on using
polymeric capsules for drug delivery and gene therapeutics, they can also be
extremely useful for applications such as catalysis, surface enhanced Raman
spectroscopy, and artificial nanomotors.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Twisted and curved crystals are often observed in crystalline large molecules
such as polymers. This is intriguing because by definition, crystals should lead
to flat instead of curved surfaces. In this work, the PI proposes to investigate
polymer crystallization at curved space and more importantly, to guide polymers
to form tiny crystal shells whose radii are about one thousandth the diameter of
a human hair! The tiny shells can be used as capsules to deliver drugs to
specific locations needed to cure diseases. From a technological standpoint, the
proposed research, if successful, will pave the way to improving the performance
of polymeric capsules for drug delivery because these capsules are more stable
than many other systems that are currently used. The educational component of
the proposal includes: 1) addressing the need for the education of modern
developments in polymer nanoscience and nanotechnology by developing two class
modules which will be used in the Nanostructured Polymeric Materials course. 2)
Involving graduate, undergraduate, high school students and teachers,
particularly under-represented populations, in the proposed research activities.