* 1308200
* AGEP-T: Collaborative Research: Advacing Interdisciplinary STEM Graduate Education in Energy and Sustainability Disciplines
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Rajab Challoo, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 279,000.00

The Texas A&amp;M University System (TAMU) Alliance for Graduate Education and
the Professoriate was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 12-554) for the
AGEP-Transformation (AGEP-T) track. The AGEP-T track targets strategic alliances
of institutions and organizations to develop, implement, and study innovative
evidence-based models and standards for STEM graduate education, postdoctoral
training, and academic STEM career preparation that eliminate or mitigate
negative factors and promote positive practices for
URMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TAMU Alliance is a collaboration between five
doctoral degree granting institutions who are members of the Texas A&amp;M
University System, to advance URMs around the unifying theme of Energy and
Sustainability. The collaborating institutions include: Texas A&amp;M University
Main Campus (TAMUMC), Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville (TAMU-K), Prairie View
A&amp;M University (PVAMU), West Texas A&amp;M University (WTAMU), and Texas
A&amp;M University Corpus Christi (TAMUCC). These institutions are engaging the
following non-doctoral degree institutions who are also members of the Texas
A&amp;M University System: Texas A&amp;M International University (TAMUI), Texas
A&amp;M-San Antonio (TAMUSA), Texas A&amp;M-Texarkana (TAMUT), Tarleton State
University (TSU), and Texas A&amp;M-Commerce (TAMUC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
vision of the collaboration is to develop an AGEP Alliance that opens multiple
paths to the doctorate and professoriate for underrepresented minority (URM)
populations by successfully developing and sustaining large-scale, distributed,
yet interconnected STEM communities among the diverse Alliance institutions that
increase participation, reduce barriers, and promote success of URM doctoral
students preparing for careers in the professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term goal of the TAMU AGEP Alliance is to increase the number of successful
URM STEM faculty by measurably increasing the number of STEM doctoral degrees
awarded to URM students each year and increasing the number of underrepresented
minorities (URMs) transitioning to STEM faculty positions (or to competitive
postdocs that lead to faculty positions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The short-term
operational goal of the TAMU AGEP Alliance is to develop, implement and assess a
set of transportable strategies to ultimately increase the number of successful
URM STEM faculty by increasing the number of URMs who enter participating
doctoral programs, the percentage of URMs completing STEM doctoral degrees, and
the number who transition to faculty positions (or to competitive postdoctoral
positions), and by reducing their time to doctoral
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four defined objectives for the TAMU AGEP
Alliance participants, who are all U.S. citizens, who are URMs in STEM. The
Alliance defines a student participant as an URM U.S. citizen, with a
demonstrated interest in energy and sustainability, who is classified as a
doctoral or master degree student. Objectives follow:&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1.
Increase the number of URMs entering STEM doctoral degree programs at the five
collaborating TAMU AGEP institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2. Reduce the average
time to degree for the TAMU AGEP Alliance URM STEM doctoral students, and
increase the percentage of students across the Alliance completing their
doctoral degree in five years.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3. Provide the TAMU AGEP
Alliance students with the preparation necessary to compete for faculty
positions and increase the number of URMs transitioning from STEM Ph.D. programs
to faculty or competitive postdoctoral positions.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 4. Foster
TAMU research collaborations to support Alliance-wide collaboration with
undergraduate, master's and PhD student researchers that will result in an
increase in the number of URM STEM doctoral research dissertations co-advised by
faculty from at least 2 partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interventions that form the model for the TAMU AGEP Alliance include: joint
institutional recruitment of URM doctoral STEM students; participation of
institutions and prospective students in an annual alliance conference; use of
regional travel, a virtual social network, and webinars to provide community
building and joint mentoring opportunities for AGEP doctoral students; student
retention stipends based on level of project participation and timely progress
toward degree; student participation in research and professional development
training conferences, a mini-grant competition for research seed funding, a
learning community, and transitioning activities for post-doctoral fellowship
placement and/or faculty positions; and engage faculty in cross-institutional
collaborations and partnerships with the NSF-funded Research Coordination
Network (RCN-SEES): Climate, Energy, Environment and Engagement in Semiarid
Regions (CE3SAR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TAMU AGEP Alliance social science
research study focuses on two questions related to feelings of inclusion of URM
STEM graduate students at each of the Alliance institutions in both experimental
and applied settings: &lt;br/&gt;1) What effect does experiencing isolation or
ostracism have on the productivity and progress of URM STEM graduate students
and their intentions to continue to the professoriate? &lt;br/&gt;2) What
factors (e.g., institutional, interpersonal, individual) promote or mediate
against URM STEM students' experiencing feelings of isolation or ostracism?