* 1308485
* Poly(alpha-hydroxy acids) via Ring-Opening Polymerization of O-Carboxyanhydrides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Jianjun Cheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation, Jianjun
Cheng at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign aims to develop methods
for facile preparation of poly(alpha-hydroxy acids) bearing pendant
functionalities. The project will first focus on the design and synthesis of
various O-carboxyanhydride monomers containing natural or unnatural amino acid
side chains. These monomers will then be used in the development of organo- and
metal-catalyzed, living ring-opening polymerization of O-carboxyanhydrides to
yield well-defined poly(alpha-hydroxy acids) with functionalized side chains.
Finally, some applications of poly(alpha-hydroxy acids), such as their uses in
encapsulation, conjugation and membrane penetration, will be explored. The
broader impacts and proposed education and outreach activities include mentoring
academically underperforming undergraduate students and leading summer education
and outreach programs designed for stimulating interest of high school and
college students in science and engineering.

Polyesters are useful materials encountered in many aspects of everyday life:
clothing fiber, plastic bottles, plastic shopping bags, etc. One drawback of
many commercial polyesters is that they are not easily modified to form new
materials with new properties. In this research project, new classes of
polyesters that incorporate different types of chemical groups are developed.
Such materials could impact a range of technologies in which plastics are used,
such as new technologies for recycling of polyester plastics, the generation of
renewable plastics and new functional materials for biomedical applications.