* 1309589
* Surface/interface order in liquids with electrostatic correlations: X-ray scattering studies
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Pulak Dutta, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Water, and aqueous solutions containing
dissolved ions, are ubiquitous in nature, and electrostatic interactions between
aqueous solutions and surfaces drive numerous crucial phenomena in biology,
chemistry, geology and environmental science, food technology, etc. Dissolved
ions are thought to behave in a number of remarkable ways near interfaces. For
example, it is predicted that a charged surface in contact with a solution may
attract so many dissolved multivalent ions that they will pack into a ordered
interfacial layer, thus not just neutralizing the surface charge but adding an
excess of the opposite charge ("charge inversion"). Again, hydrophobic surfaces
are counterintuitively predicted to attract dissolved negative ions when in
contact with ionic solutions. These and other novel phenomena will be studied
using synchrotron X-ray scattering to see directly how the ions are arranged and
under what conditions. The knowledge gained from the proposed studies will
ultimately help design systems with specific surface/interface behaviors for
practical applications. This project will train graduate students in an
interdisciplinary environment and give them experience in the use of synchrotron
facilities. Liquids-related topics will be incorporated into undergraduate and
graduate courses and web-disseminated teaching
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Water
often contains dissolved ions, and the interaction of ionic solutions with other
materials is responsible for many crucial phenomena in biology, chemistry,
geology and environmental science, food technology, etc. Dissolved ions are
thought to behave in remarkable and unexpected ways near solid surfaces. For
example, it is predicted that when a charged solid surface becomes wet, the
dissolved ions it attracts may form an ordered layer somewhat like a crystal,
thus packing in so many ions that the interface actually ends up with a net
opposite charge. Again, surfaces that repel water are theoretically predicted to
attract negative ions when they touch ionic solutions, which is completely
counterintuitive. These and other novel phenomena will be studied by using
synchrotron X-rays to look directly at how dissolved ions are arranged and under
what conditions. What is learned from the proposed studies may ultimately help
design systems with specific properties for practical applications. This project
will train graduate students in an interdisciplinary environment and give them
experience in the use of synchrotron facilities. Liquids-related topics will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses and web-disseminated
teaching materials.