* 1309667
* Field Theoretical Methods in Strongly Interacting, Topological, and Disordered Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Andreas Ludwig, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education to
develop advanced theoretical tools to tackle problems in areas that include
quantum entanglement, topological insulators, the plateau transition in the
integer quantum Hall effect, and quantum critical phenomena. Many of the most
interesting, or newly emerging phenomena in condensed matter physics cannot be
understood in terms of existing paradigms and techniques, and the development of
new methods or approaches for their description is often needed. Materials of
particular interest include those where electronic behavior is dominated by
strong interactions and strong disorder, and those exhibiting topological
features. The understanding of such systems is often very challenging due to the
limited number of theoretical tools available for their investigation. The focus
of the work supported under this award is the development and the application of
novel methods and techniques in condensed matter theory, a process that also
benefits from recent advances in the mathematical sciences. The PI aims to
develop theoretical tools in the context of the study of quantum entanglement
and quantum information, topological states of matter and topological
insulators, and localization transitions in disordered electronic systems. The
methods planned to be employed range from topology, to conformal field theory,
the Schramm-Loewner Evolution and the functional renormalization group.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education
aimed at the discovery and study of novel phases of matter. The latter often
exhibit completely new phenomena and may possess highly unusual properties that
can hold promise to form the basis of future technologies. One recent example is
the discovery of topological insulators, which are insulators in the bulk but
conductors at the surface. Another example is a notion called non-Abelian
statistics, a possible quantum property of electronic materials which has been
proposed to form the physical underpinnings of what is known as a fault-tolerant
quantum computer whose realization would mark the dawn of an entirely new era of
computation. As new phenomena appear in condensed matter physics, the
development of novel methods or approaches for their description is often called
for. This typically occurs in electronic systems dominated by strong
interactions, or by the presence of strong disorder arising from omnipresent
sample impurities. The focus of this project is the development and the
application of new theoretical tools in condensed matter theory, some of which
benefit from recent advances in the mathematical sciences. Today's newly
developed methods will belong to the standard repertoire of tools available to
the next generation of researchers. This research activity aims to advance
fundamental science at the frontiers of condensed matter theory, with the
potential to contribute to the development of future technologies. It will also
contribute to the training and mentoring of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers interacting with the PI on this project. This activity will thus
contribute to the education of the next generation of condensed matter
theorists.