* 1309053
* Designing the Electronic Properties of PbSe Nanowires for Optoelectronic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Cherie Kagan, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 07/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

Technical Description: Semiconductor nanowires allow the interrogation of unique
materials physics that arises in one-dimensional materials and the exploitation
of their properties for a wide range of applications. PbSe is a unique materials
system to probe in one-dimension: it has large electron, hole, and exciton Bohr
radii, giving rise to strong quantum confinement in small-diameter nanowires,
and it has a large dielectric constant compared to host matrices, leading to
strong dielectric confinement. Confinement effects in nanowires dramatically
alter their electronic structure as well as carrier statistics, dynamics, and
transport. The goal of this project is to understand the influences of strong
quantum and dielectric confinement on the electronic properties of PbSe
nanowires and their importance in designing nanowire p-n junctions in particular
for mid-infrared photodetectors and for photovoltaics. Colloidal PbSe nanowires,
tunable from 4 to 20 nm in diameter, are synthesized and integrated as single
nanowires and nanowire arrays in devices embedded in different dielectric
environments. After nanowire integration, routes to substitutionally and
remotely dope nanowires are applied to understand doping and its efficiency in
these one-dimensional, strongly quantum and dielectrically confined
semiconductors and to controllably define p-n junctions within high-mobility
nanowires. Electrical and optoelectronic measurements are used to probe doping
efficiency and charge injection and transport in n- and p-doped PbSe building
blocks and the electrostatics, carrier diffusion, and performance of p-n
junctions to design high-efficiency optoelectronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Semiconductor devices
are constructed by defining junctions between n- and p-type doped regions, to
introduce excess electrons and holes, respectively. In one-dimensional
materials, the p-n junctions are affected by their small diameter as well as by
contrast between the dielectric constant of the nanowires and their surrounding
materials. This project explores the impact of one dimension in a semiconductor
material where the effects of small size and dielectric contrast are high. These
nanowires are promising for high-efficiency mid-infrared photodetectors and for
photovoltaics. This project provides an interdisciplinary research experience
for undergraduate and graduate students. The PI and students are sharing the
science of one-dimensional, nanoscale materials and their technologies through
student coursework and outreach activities to engage K-12 students, teachers,
and the general public.