* 1309590
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Dawn Ruth, Ruth                    Dawn           C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Dawn Catherine Sweeney Ruth of the University at Buffalo to
conduct a research project in Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at Nanyang
Technological University in Singapore. The project title is "Relating Rock
Chemistry and Earthquake Data to Improve Volcano Monitoring Efforts." The host
scientist(s) is Dr. Fidel Costa Rodriguez.

This project assesses if the timing of magma movement is related to the timing
of earthquakes and ground deformation that occur prior to an eruption, with the
ultimate goal of improving volcano monitoring efforts. The migration of magmas
from depth is understood as a key eruption-triggering process. Determining the
timing of earthquakes and ground deformation is straightforward as the
instruments used record a time stamp at the onset of movement. Olivine crystals
collected from the products of an eruption are being used to estimate the timing
of actual magma movement. When crystals form, the distribution of elements is
set. However, this distribution can be affected by subjecting the crystals to
new environmental conditions, such as changing the temperature through magma
movement. Since changes in elemental distribution in olivine crystals is well
understood, comparison of the observed elemental distributions with computer
models can be used to estimate the time elapsed since magma movement. Moreover,
if the eruption date is known, the approach provides an estimate of when magma
movement occurred. If magma movement can be definitively dated and linked to
specific seismic signals, then a more process-based approach to volcanic
monitoring will likely improve interpretation of geophysical signals at
volcanoes.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Successful completion of the project will expand the
Fellow's analytical geochemistry toolkit which will provide the basis for a
short course in analytical geochemistry techniques to be given at the Fellow's
home institution. Furthermore, the findings of this project will be presented at
an international conference and the Fellow will submit the detailed findings to
a peer-reviewed journal.