* 1309989
* Semiconductor Carrier Dynamics in Metal-Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Gregory Salamo, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2016
* USD 329,947.00

Technical Description: This project is designed to utilize unique materials
growth techniques to investigate the optical properties and the underlying
science of metal-semiconductor hybrid nanostructures. Photoluminescence
spectroscopy and photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy of quantum dots and
quantum wells are used to probe the nature of the interaction between surface
plasmon polaritons and excitons. The principal investigator and students use
these optical techniques to observe and control the coherent transfer of energy
across the interface between metal and semiconductor materials, as a function of
growth parameters. In addition, frequency-resolved optical gating spectroscopy
combined with spectral interferometry yield a sensitive method for temporal
characterization. The material systems being studied are silver, gallium,
aluminum, and indium metal nanoparticles and indium arsenide and indium gallium
arsenide quantum wells and dots. The research project designs, fabricates,
characterizes and investigates the origin of the linear and non-linear optical
behavior of hybrid metal-semiconductor nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: In its simplest form, a surface plasmon polariton is an
electromagnetic wave that is guided and confined along a metal-dielectric
interface much in the same way that light can be guided by an optical fiber.
This confinement leads to an intense electromagnetic field at the interface,
resulting in an extraordinary enhancement of materials properties. This is
particularly true when the separation between metal and dielectric materials is
at the nanoscale. In this project, using novel materials fabrication techniques,
the functionality of metal-semiconductor hybrid nanostructures is increased to
demonstrate control of light waves on a nanometer length scale and ultra-short
optical switching times. As a result, the confined nature of propagating surface
plasmon polariton waves enables all-optical integrated circuits. One can imagine
tiny active photonic elements based on nonlinear surface plasmon polariton
optics that allows propagation and switching of nanoscale light beams confined
by the metal-semiconductor interface. In addition to the potential for
technology impact, the project gives students the skills to design and fabricate
nanostructures, characterize their morphology and utilize their data to question
and advance the understanding of the exciton-surface plasmon polariton coupling.
In this way, students uncover novel and useful optical behavior while learning
exciting techniques in both continuous wave and ultra-fast optical spectroscopy.