* 1309724
* Collaborative Research: Exotic Block Copolymer Nanoparticles through Hierarchical Solution Construction
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Karen Wooley, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2017
* USD 277,517.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project is a collaboration between the University of Delaware and Texas A&M
which aims to establish new experimental paradigms for the construction of
novel, exotic nanoparticles. Protocols will be developed that direct block
copolymer solution behavior through fine-tuning stagewise iterations of kinetic
vs. thermodynamic control and the application of chemical modifications at
desired stages. In addition, a new toolbox of block copolymer functionality will
be formulated for solution construction of nanoparticles. New block copolymer
chemistries will allow a) shell crosslinking, b) core crosslinking, c) shell
degradation, d) core degradation, e) display of ligand functionality from shell
of polymer nanoparticle, f) extension to polybases as hydrophilic blocks for
complexation with multiacid molecules during kinetically controlled assembly,
and g) new hydrophobic blocks for phase separation once trapped within internal
domains of the nanoparticles due to kinetically controlled hierarchical
assembly. New solvent mixing pathways will be used to develop kinetically-
controlled assembly processes for trapping two or more different block
copolymers into the same nanoparticle for local phase separation and
multicompartment particle construction. Resultant multicompartment particles can
then undergo additional assembly and/or synthetic steps in a hierarchical
construction process towards arbitrary, asymmetric structure and future
function.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This research will develop the ability of scientists to
create particles on the nanoscale with unprecedented complexity in structure and
function. Nature contains plenty of examples of complex nanostructures that
display ornate shape and function, both beneficial (e.g. microtubules within
cells, cell membranes) and deleterious (e.g. viruses). New methods of
synthesizing large polymer molecules, combined with new methods for forcing
these molecules together to produce nanostructures, will be sought and combined
to make extraordinary synthetic nanostructures. With effort, the construction
method to make these nanomaterials will be as routine as lithography is in
making microprocessors and memories for modern electronics. Ideally, the final
nanostructures will be as arbitrary in structure and useful as lithographically
produced devices in the future. The students who perform this interdisciplinary
research will gain a broad and deep knowledge of nanomaterials science and
polymer chemistry. All students involved will spread this knowledge to pre-
college students through K-12 activities that use the research to develop fun,
interesting topics to promote their interest in science and technology.