* 1309525
* Responsive Drug-Polymer Conjugate
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Jianjun Cheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 06/30/2018
* USD 390,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Illinois is to develop a new generation of polymer-drug conjugates
that afford precise control over polymer-drug compositions, structure, drug
loading and release. Conventional polymer-drug conjugates share the common
feature such as a pre-synthesized water-soluble polymer with drug molecules
being covalently conjugated to the pendant, conjugation-amenable groups via
cleavage linkers. One key drawback of this design of polymer-drug conjugate is
the lack of control of the chemical structure and composition, especially the
control over pendant groups used for drug conjugation. The resulting material is
essentially a mixture of numerous structure- and composition-distinct polymer-
drug conjugates that each has its own therapeutic profile, clearance rate,
distribution property, tissue penetration efficiency, etc. The proposed new
generation of polymer-drug conjugates (chain-shattering polymeric therapeutic)
would result in precise control over polymer-drug compositions, structure, drug
loading and release. This system is basically an "AB" type of block copolymer,
and the resulting nanoparticles are designed to be stable in aqueous solution
because of the urethane and carbonate backbone structure. However, once a
specific trigger is applied and the protecting groups of trigger-responsive
domain "A" are removed, the backbone structure of chain-shattering polymeric
therapeutic system becomes instantly unstable and quickly shatters to monomeric
fragments resulting in drug release. The technological broader impact of the
proposed system could be the development of well controlled drug-delivery
materials that allow trigger-responsive and precise control over drug release
both in vitro and in vivo. This system also would have the property similar as
drug encapsulated systems that drug in its original form can be instantly
released and exhibit therapeutic effects. Students working on this project would
be trained in multidisciplinary areas such as organic synthesis, carry out
controlled polymerization, preparation of polymer-drug conjugates and cell
culture. The materials research will be widely disseminated with different
outreach activities at the campus.

Widely used present polymer based drug delivery systems share common features
such as pre-synthesized water-soluble polymer with drug molecules being attached
to pendant and conjugation-amenable groups via cleavage linkers. With this
current system, it is difficult to overcome the drug being prematurely released
from delivery systems prior to reaching their targets. To overcome some of these
drawbacks, this research project will focus the development of drug conjugated
systems (polymeric pro-drugs) with ease of handling and processability with no
premature drug release. This system called chain-shattering polymeric
therapeutics, in addition, would have the property similar to drug encapsulated
systems with the drug in its original form that can be instantly be released for
instant therapeutic effects. When the trigger is applied after the drug delivery
materials arrive at the target or diseased tissue, the time, site and amount of
drug released can be precisely controlled, which makes it possible to develop a
personalized nanomedicine protocol. Students working on this research will be
trained in the different aspects of materials research with respect to polymer
based drug delivery system. The proposed research will be incorporated into
outreach activities focusing underrepresented students at different levels from
undergraduate to K-12. Other proposed outreach activities at University of
Illinois include Discover Engineering Summer Camp programs and Engineering Open-
House Program.