* 1309905
* Highly Integrated Resonant Switched Capacitor Converters for Sub-Module Photovoltaic Power Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Jason Stauth, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 403,731.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore the use of
highly-integrated power electronics to improve the energy production of
photovoltaic (PV) systems. We will develop a process for 3-D integration of
power magnetics, power conversion circuitry, and a range of moderate to high
density capacitor technologies using commercially available CMOS technologies
and custom back-end processing. A second focus will be on efficient, high power-
density circuit designs that can exploit the maximum capabilities of integrated
passive and active devices. In particular, we will explore the use of resonant
switched-capacitor (ReSC) converters, used in partial power processing
architectures that can be integrated with groups of PV cells at the sub-module
level to efficiently and cost effectively mitigate power that is lost due to
mismatch at the cell, module, and system level. Targets include achieving
effective conversion efficiencies over 99% for a range of operating scenarios,
insertion loss below 0.1%, and a roadmap for cost of module-integrated
electronics below 5 Â¢/Wp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently, variations among PV cells and differences
in how much insolation they receive greatly limit the practical energy
extraction that is possible and impose undesired constraints on the system
configuration and grid interface electronics. The proposed research aims to
eliminate these obstacles, resulting in PV systems of much greater robustness,
flexibility and energy extraction capability, while maintaining low cost of the
conversion electronics. Developing power electronics solutions and components
that can be fully integrated in silicon integrated circuits (ICs) can support
the path to grid-parity for PV systems, but can also impact other areas of acute
need such as LED lighting, and power delivery for a range of consumer and
industrial electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the tools and
techniques developed in this project will be used extensively for teaching and
dissemination of scientific knowledge to the next generation of engineers,
scientists and educators. The research will augment the educational experience
at Dartmouth in specific courses and the broader curriculum. The program will
also be used to enhance our community outreach efforts. Dartmouth K-12 outreach,
including regular classroom visits by the principal investigators and
involvement in summer engineering workshops for high-school students will
motivate new activities that leverage students' interest in solar energy to
drive engagement with technical concepts, helping to make these concepts
accessible and meaningful.