* 1309027
* Organization of charged molecules in heterogeneous media
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Monica Olvera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
numerical research on the coupling of elasticity and electrostatics of gels.
Electrostatics plays a critical role in the development of modern materials
including membranes for water filtration, functionalized nanoparticles for
diagnostics, polyelectrolyte complexes for gene therapy, nanogels for drug
delivery, lithium-ion batteries and novel devices. These systems often require
the support of a heterogeneous elastic medium where the information can be
transferred such as a bicontinuous membrane or a gel. Many of the functions of
these materials, as well as of biological gels, result from charge and
composition heterogeneities. There are great challenges in both, solving
electrostatics and elasticity problems in heterogeneous media of arbitrary
shapes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to develop ways to determine the
properties of heterogeneous gels including effects neglected in classical mean
field models such as the hard core of the ions, the dielectric mismatch and the
elastic energy. More specifically, the PI will: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) study
the effect of hard-core interactions in dense ionic gels via a non-linear
density-functional theory that accounts properly for long- and short-range
interactions and will test the results via computer
simulations;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) analyze the effect of local dielectric
heterogeneities in the presence of divalent ions or absorbing molecules via an
energy variational principle that enables one to update charges and the medium's
response in the same simulation time step; and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) develop
a formulation of elasticity effects in gels coupled to local heterogeneities
using a continuum elasticity model to describe the gel-shape changes induced by
local heterogeneities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of techniques will be used
in the research including a density-functional approach, coarse-grained
molecular-dynamics simulation, and finite-elements methods. The understanding of
electrostatics will inform research on self-assembly of gels and the design of
synthetic materials. The PI collaborates with experts in complex electrolytes in
Mexico. The combined efforts of the PI and her Mexican collaborators will aid
the design of smart gels for cleaning water, which is an important societal
problem in both Mexico and the US. Moreover, the PI is committed to continue
increasing diversity in science by supervising students and postdocs from
underrepresented ethnic groups. She is also committed to educate the public and
engage middle and high school students in scientific research by participating
in outreach programs at Northwestern
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and numerical
research on the coupling of elasticity and electrostatics of gels. A gel is a
network of dilutely cross-linked polymer molecules suspended in liquid but
exhibiting some of the mechanical properties of a solid. Parts of the molecules
generally carry electric charges, and the interactions of the charges govern
both the assembly of the molecules into a gel and the gel's properties. This
award funds research on how to properly describe electrostatic interactions in
gels and their interplay with the elastic properties of the material.
&lt;br/&gt;Gels are used in a wide variety of applications. This research will
also be applicable to other soft materials and systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
proper theoretical description of electrostatic interactions combined with
elastic effects in heterogeneous soft materials will be important for the design
of new materials, such as membranes for filtering water to make it safe for
drinking. The research will be carried out in collaboration with experts in
Mexico. The PI is involved in outreach efforts at her university and is
committed to broadening representation from underrepresented groups.