* 1309961
* Instrument Development:  a High Density Source of Cold, Slow Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Igor Lyuksyutov, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurements and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Profs. Dudley Herschbach and Igor Lyuksyutov of Texas A&M
University seek to develop an instrument capable of delivering beams of cold
molecules with densities up to 1012 cm-3 at speeds as low as 5 m/s (the
benchmark). The instrument is a pulsed, counter-rotating supersonic source
(PCRS), with which any molecule available as a gas can be slowed (or speeded).
Such densities at speeds so low are about four orders of magnitude larger than
currently available by other means. Very slow beams of ~ 5 m/s are essential for
many experiments that require trapping molecules. Anticipated beam densities,
typically >1010 cm-3, are essemtial to enable the trapped molecules to be
subsequently cooled down to the ultracold realm. Used in a different mode, for
study of collisions, very low relative kinetic energies can be attained by
pairing the PCRS with a codirectional stationary source and closely matching the
beam velocities by adjusting the rotor speed. This merged-beam capability is
widely applicable. It will open up the "matterwave" or "hyperquantum" realm of
chemical reaction dynamics, where collisional deBroglie wavelengths much exceed
the size of reactant molecules. The project also includes the development of an
auxiliary instrument, applicable to molecules with magnetic moments. It is a
single-stage magnetic decelerator (SSMD), designed to operate in combination
with the PCRS. Computer simulations for a preliminary version of the SSMD
demonstrate that a pulsed field only 7 cm long, with parabolic profile and
strength 5 Tesla, can decelerate O2 from 50 m/s to 2 or 3 m/s. The combined PCRS
+ SSMD instrument will be compact, robust, simple to construct and operate.

This project will provide tools that will significantly advance experimental
research exploring and eventually using the novel properties of very slow
molecules. Futuristic applications from information processing (quantum
computers) to gravity detectors have been predicted to emerge from slow molecule
technology. The adventurous character of the research fosters interest both
among students and the wider public. Undergraduate students (supported either by
REU funding or by TAMU) as well as graduate students will contribute
significantly. The work involves design studies for apparatus, including many
table-top components, and experimental protocols, thereby providing experience
in computer simulations and other practical arts. Both PIs are evangelical about
teaching and mentoring students and have undertaken efforts to improve K-12
science education and public understanding of science. Directly linked to this
project are plans for a "Coolest Place in Texas" summer program for high school
students and a pair of lecture series "The Ultracold World" and "Wizards of the
NanoWorld" for the general public, including high school and middle school
students.