* 1309856
* Extreme Value Theory and Fixed-Domain Asymptotics of Multivariate Random Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Yimin Xiao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 100,000.00

The aim of this project is to develop systematic approach to establish novel
results and open new research directions on extreme value theory and fixed-
domain asymptotics of multivariate random fields. Special emphasis is placed on
characterizing cross-dependence structures of Gaussian or non-Gaussian, non-
stationary and/or anisotropic multivariate random fields and on studying their
effects on extreme value theory and fixed-domain asymptotics. In particular, the
Investigator plans to combine his investigation of fractal and differential
geometries of multivariate random fields with precise estimation of the
excursion probabilities, parameter estimation, prediction and fixed-domain
asymptotics of multivariate spatial and spatio-temporal processes. Multivariate
random field models are in increasing demand in statistics, geophysics,
environment sciences and other scientific areas, where many problems involve
data sets with multivariate measurements obtained at spatial locations. Common
problems in applications of random field models including parameter estimation,
prediction and the determination of threshold level on the random field. It is a
major challenge to accurately determine the threshold level when the
observations in the random field are correlated in space and time. The
Investigator believes that the proposed research project will ultimately yield
novel insights into the understanding of multivariate spatial and spatio-
temporal models, multivariate extreme value theory, and further promote their
applicability in other scientific areas. The proposed activities will also help
to identify young talent, to train graduate students and to develop their
careers in the mathematical and statistical sciences.