* 1309806
* Instrumentation Development: Label-free and rapid 3D-nanostructure ultrathin-layer birefringence imaging chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Hage, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 402,483.00

With support from the Division of Chemistry - Chemical Measurement and Imaging
Program, David Hage from the Department of Chemistry and Tino Hofmann from the
Department of Electrical Engineering and their students at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln will develop instrumentation for label-free and rapid detection
in ultrathin-layer imaging chromatography by using highly-oriented 3D
nanostructure ultrathin-layer supports in combination with transmission
birefringence imaging detection schemes. This approach, which is based on
ellipsometric measurements, will use the detection of spatial and time-resolved
microscopic images of linear birefringence variations in nanoengineered supports
upon the interactions of these supports with analytes.

Chromatography methods analyze mixtures by separating them into their
components. Ultrathin-layer liquid chromatography (UTLC) methods separate
components using their interactions with very thin, specially engineered
(nanostructured) films. Often these methods require that the mixture components
be labeled or tagged so that they can be detected. This work is expected to
reduce the limit of detection of UTLC by two orders of magnitude when compared
to current state-of-the-art label-free UTLC systems; this will be a
groundbreaking advancement in this technology. The application of this
separation and imaging system, which will have essentially universal
applicability to small chemical targets, will benefit chemical analysis in many
fields, including biochemical, environmental, and pharmaceutical testing. In
addition to the significant advantages of the new measurement scheme compared to
current UTLC systems, the increased sensitivity to minute amounts of chemicals
that are adsorbed to nanostructured surfaces will also provide crucial
information about the separation and flow-based properties of the nanostructured
surfaces. This project provides a unique opportunity for students to participate
in the development of new instrumentation and interdisciplinary research.