* 1309209
* Attosecond-resolution quantum interferometry - quantum measurement for telecommunication and science
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Alexander Sergienko, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2017
* USD 289,133.00

The objective of this research program is to develop a practical quantum
measurement technology - attosecond-resolution quantum interferometry. The need
for the highest possible resolution in optical interferometric measurements is
increasing with modern trends in fiber sensing, optical device characterization,
optical identification of folded-unfolded and engaged protein markers,
biological imaging of tissue and brain, and in hundreds of other science and
technology applications. The approach is based on the utilization of
polarization- and frequency-entangled states of light accompanied by the non-
classical effect of dispersion cancellation. This use of several mutually
entangled variables (hyper-entanglement) will boost the resolution of numerous
sensing applications. The goal is the development of quantum interferometry for
group velocity delay evaluation that has two orders of magnitude better
resolution than the best classical optical apparatus could achieve. Intellectual
merit. The availability of quantum interferometry with attosecond resolution
will be capable of revolutionizing optical measurement and sensing in multiple
areas from telecommunication to biology. The project must go significantly
beyond the current state-of-the-art, and will rely on an interdisciplinary
approach at the intersection of quantum optics, material science, and optical
measurement. Broader impacts. Novel scientific devices as well as environmental
and biophotonics sensors always strive for greater resolution in order to reveal
effects that are currently hidden from modern optical sensors. Quantum optics
and quantum measurement are highly potent modern research fields, and the
current project holds promise for attracting talented undergraduate and high-
school students who are eager to join the development of future technological
breakthroughs.