* 1309466
* Defect Engineered Graphene Gate in a Subthreshold SiC MESFET for Emissions Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Goutam Koley, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 05/31/2017
* USD 368,000.00

The objective of this program is to develop a compact, practical, novel
3-terminal approach to sensing and distinguishing emissions gases using
graphene's intrinsic single molecule sensitivity. This is to be accomplished
using a subthreshold Silicon Carbide Metal Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor
with an active epitaxially grown graphene gate as the active transducer to
provide performance advantages not possible with SiC and graphene alone.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in applying subthrehsold
design principles to SiC devices, as well as to gas sensors, neither of which
has been done to date. Furthermore, the modes of distinguishing between gases
using a compact solid-state device will be investigated, a potentially
transformative concept in the realm of gas sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this include applications in harsh-environment sensing,
emissions monitoring and low-cost gas-monitoring for homes. If successful, this
will provide transformational low-cost solutions to these monitoring problems,
some of which are currently un-enforceable. Finally, this effort will fund 3
professional 10-minute videos (by Co-PI &amp; Emmy-nominated documentary maker
L. Kissel) documenting the scientific process in this project for the layman,
and to develop materials for recruitment of students into Science and
Technology, Engineering and Math fields. This project will continue University
of South Carolina's commitment to expanding diversity, by seeking to match the
University demographic makeup with that of the surrounding counties, through
recruitment of minority students. This project will involve at least 1 African-
American PhD student.