* 1309753
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: RNA-Seq analysis of nascent RNA to provide insights into the mechanisms behind genomic loss of introns.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Katrien Devos, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2015
* USD 18,070.00

Genes provide the genetic code for proteins which are the building blocks of
cells and organisms. Most eukaryotic genes contain one or more non-coding
regions, called introns. Introns are typically removed (spliced out) during the
cellular processes that decode genes to build proteins. Some intron positions in
genes have been retained in species as diverse as plants and animals, possibly
because they are functionally important. Other introns have been lost from genes
independently in different evolutionary lineages, and it may be that the intron
loss provided some selective advantage to the organism. It is important to
understand the mechanisms that lead to intron loss in plants. The proposed
research aims to investigate whether introns that are spliced out more
efficiently during cellular processes have a higher chance of ultimately being
lost from the genome. Large-scale sequencing of RNA, which essentially provides
a blue print of all genes that are expressed, during different stages of
cellular processing, will yield information for each gene on the relative rate
with which the introns are spliced out. Statistical analyses will be carried out
to determine whether splicing rates are correlated with patterns of genomic
intron loss.

Some introns, either by their content, their size or their location can regulate
gene expression and hence are functionally important. Genomic loss of introns
may lead to altered expression, which may provide the plasticity needed for
species to adapt to new environments. Knowledge of the mechanisms that lead to
intron loss will help to understand species evolution.