* 1309461
* Quantum Monte Carlo Simulations of Quantum Criticality and Topological Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Nandini Trivedi, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 288,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research,
and education to advance understanding of quantum materials pertaining to
quantum criticality in fermionic systems, the origin of incoherence across
quantum phase transitions, and emergent topological phases in the presence of
spin-orbit coupling and strong correlations. The PI's general approach is to
develop models that contain the essence of the phenomena mentioned above, and to
investigate them by a variety of methods, including quantum Monte Carlo
simulations. This research also has impact on the field of ultracold atomic
gases that have emerged as excellent laboratories for gaining insights into
quantum materials. Major breakthroughs that the PI hopes to make in the course
of this project are:

(i) a quantitative understanding of how a Fermi surface and associated
quasiparticle excitations are destroyed near a quantum critical point; (ii) an
understanding of the origin of dissipation and emergence of novel conducting but
incoherent metallic phases near a quantum phase transition; (iii) emergence of a
superfluid with non-trivial spatial, spin and topological ordering in a system
with spin-orbit coupling and strong correlations; (iv) a library of fully
developed state-of-the-art QMC codes, including (a) worm algorithm and maximum
entropy methods for large-scale boson simulations providing information about
dynamical susceptibilities; (b) wavefunction based variational Monte Carlo
methods with optimization of large numbers of parameters; and (c) reputation QMC
methods that minimize the dependence on the wavefunction.

This project also supports training students in the setting of a diverse
research group working to advance understanding of quantum matter and materials.
The PI plans to organize a Festival of Physics at the Columbus Science Museum on
the theme of random numbers "Raisins to Pi." The PI is spearheading the
Scientific Thinkers program Meet a Scientist, Be a Scientist, and Learn about
other Scientists at the Innis Elementary School in the Columbus City School
district. The PI will launch a website for undergraduate-level education with
short 10 minute lecture-nuggets that are searchable and coordinate her efforts
with other options for distance learning.

Non-Technical abstract: This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education on novel emergent states of matter and on quantum phase
transitions between them. Materials are made up of many electrons and ions and
the interactions among them lead to new states of matter, such as
superconductors and magnets, which arise from the self-organization of the
electrons, their motion, and their intrinsic magnetic orientation known as spin.
The PI will investigate the possibility that novel phases could emerge when the
spin of the electron is locked to its motion. When interactions between the
particles are strong enough to dominate over the energy due to their motion,
their kinetic energy, textured magnetic phases with hedgehog, vortex and spiral
structures may result. Electrons moving in the background of magnetic textures
lead to unusual properties of materials related to the transport of electrons.

The PI will also explore quantum phase transitions. These are phase
transformations that take place at the absolute zero of temperature. It is
believed that these transitions may have consequences that may reach up to a
significant fraction of room temperature. Unlike the familiar phase
transformation from water to steam which is driven by thermal fluctuations,
quantum phase transitions are driven by quantum fluctuations which arise from
Heisenberg's famous uncertainty principle. Quantum phase transitions may lead to
dramatic changes such as the restructuring of one quantum state to a completely
different one upon changing the interactions between particles, or the
application of a magnetic field, or pressure. These questions of fundamental
importance will be explored in the context of physical models that have direct
relevance to oxide materials containing transition metal as well as ultracold
atoms in trapped in lattices of light.

This project also supports training students in the setting of a diverse
research group working to advance understanding of quantum matter and materials.
The PI plans to organize a Festival of Physics at the Columbus Science Museum on
the theme of random numbers "Raisins to Pi." The PI is spearheading the
Scientific Thinkers program Meet a Scientist, Be a Scientist, and Learn about
other Scientists at the Innis Elementary School in the Columbus City School
district. The PI will launch a website for undergraduate-level education with
short 10 minute lecture-nuggets that are searchable and coordinate her efforts
with other options for distance learning.