* 1309495
* Disseration Research:  The Mechanisms and Consequences of Herbivore-induced Volatile Emissions for Neighboring Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Andre Kessler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,121.00

Herbivory is a major factor shaping the diversity and abundance of plant
communities. Because plants are sessile, the proximity and identity of their
neighbors influence their apparency to herbivores and affects competitive
interactions. Thus, competition and herbivore resistance are interacting factors
in the co-evolutionary arms race between herbivores and plants. Moreover, by
perceiving chemical signals from damaged neighbors, plants can induce resistance
without actually receiving damage, emphasizing that plant-herbivore interactions
are played out on a scale much larger than the individual plant. Understanding
the mechanisms of and constraints on this so-called ?plant-to-plant signaling?
will help predict how the genotypic diversity of a plant?s neighborhood
influences the availability and reliability of information from its neighbors,
and how plant-to-plant signaling influences plant-herbivore coevolution. The
proposed research will test for genetic variation in and specificity of plant-
to-plant signaling, investigate the degree of within- and between-clone
signaling, and assess the potential for natural selection on traits associated
with the emission and perception of signals from neighboring plants. From an
ecological perspective, these experiments will inform how the genetic diversity
of a plant?s neighborhood may affect the availability of information within the
plant population. From an evolutionary perspective, they will reveal the
potential for signal emission and perception to evolve by natural selection.

The project?s broader impacts involve the professional development of one
graduate and two undergraduate students, numerous public outreach events geared
towards encouraging appreciation of plant and insect ecology in K-12 students,
and the peer-reviewed publication of results.