* 1309640
* GOALI: Research and development of chip-integrated, magnetic-resonance-based platforms for chemical sensing of trace systems and nuclear polarization of fluids
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Prabhu Arumugam, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 09/30/2017
* USD 425,440.00

With this GOALI (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry) award
from the Chemical Measurements and Imaging program in the Chemistry Division and
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematics and Physical
Sciences Directorate, Professors Carlos Meriles at the City College of New York
(CCNY) and Orlando Auciello of the University of Texas at Dallas and their
students will partner with investigators at Advanced Diamond Technologies, Inc.
(ADT), Romeoville, IL to perform basic and applied research and development of
novel technologies that exploit the properties of near-surface paramagnetic
defects in diamond. The project will combine crystal growth techniques, spin
control schemes, and microfluidics and molecular labeling technology to develop
chip-integrated structures where a target analyte is brought in contact with
paramagnetic centers -- specifically nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers and
substitutional nitrogen -- generated near the surface of ultra-pure diamond. The
central goal is to use the paramagnetic centers as sensitive probes tailored to
detect the presence of pre-defined trace materials in solution. The research
plan includes a range of proof-of-principle experiments explicitly conceived to
facilitate the transfer of these sensing technologies to the market. The basic
and applied science to be performed and the systems that will ensue are likely
to find broad use ranging from chemical analysis and medical diagnostics, to
bio-defense, environmental monitoring, and food safety.

Magnetic resonance (MR) measurements are well known for the usefulness in
medical imaging, but a close variant of these measurements are widely used in
chemical analysis because they provide a wealth of information about sample
composition and molecular structure. However, the detection limits of MR
measurements are typically too high for use in trace analyses, such as
environmental monitoring and medical diagnostics. This project will seek to
lower the detection limits of MR measurements by coupling the target molecule to
tags that produce very strong MR signals as they interact with deliberately
induced defects in diamond films. Besides the technological and scientific
advantages, this project will enrich the education of PhD students and postdocs
through training in entrepreneurship and new venture creation. To meet this
goal, the investigators plan various activities that build on the close ties to
their industrial collaborator ADT, a company presently commercializing a new
generation of industrial and biodevices based on exclusive thin-film diamond
technology. The proposed R&D program includes internships for students and
postdocs under the combined supervision of an academic mentor and an industry
partner, student-oriented seminars by lead industrial scientists, and regular
cyber-enabled interactions designed to facilitate the transfer of research
results to industry. These plans gain special meaning at CCNY and UTD, two
institutions with a large population of minority students. Capitalizing on the
various recruitment channels at hand, the teaching, mentoring and career
counseling components of this project will truly broaden participation, while
encouraging groups underrepresented in the sciences to pursue scientific careers
both in academia and industry.