* 1309879
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Andres Osorio, Osorio                  Andres         F
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Andres Felipe Osorio of University of California, Berkeley to
conduct a research project in ENG during the summer of 2013 at Hokkaido
University in Sapporo, Japan. The project title is "Material Flammability in
Microgravity Environments." The host scientist is Professor Osamu Fujita.

Fires in spacecrafts are dangerous scenarios given the confined space and the
risk for astronauts onboard. Understanding the effect of microgravity in fires
is an important step towards developing a better knowledge of fire prevention
and mitigation in space. This project develops a better understanding of how
microgravity conditions affect the flammability of materials when compared to
normal gravity.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this project will help developing content in
the form of pictures, videos, presentations, etc. that can be used to showcase
that space-funded research is not only relevant to space agencies but something
the general public can relate to.