* 1309569
* Aggregation of Hybrid Dynamical Systems for Demand Response Modeling and Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Wei Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 292,845.00

The objective of this research is to establish theoretical foundations for
aggregated load modeling under various demand response strategies. A hybrid
system model with general nonlinear subsystem dynamics will be developed to
characterize individual load dynamics. The main research thrust is to obtain a
unified abstraction for different types of responsive loads under a variety of
demand response scenarios. In addition, the project will also develop a general
modeling framework to capture the aggregated dynamics of a large population of
heterogeneous hybrid systems. Intellectual Merit: This project is among the
first that tries to develop a holistic aggregated modeling framework that can
deal with various responsive loads and demand response strategies. It can
address many important realistic challenges in a unified manner. Such a
framework is the key to identify and address fundamental research challenges in
aggregated load modeling, and will enable formal analysis and design of demand
response strategies. Broader Impacts: Demand response is a key technology to
enable high penetration of renewable generations of the future power grid. This
project will yield fundamental tools for reliable large-scale deployment of
demand response programs. In addition, the project will also impact a number of
education and outreach activities such as participation of undergraduate and
under-represented students in research, inclusion of research results into
courses, involvement of high school students. Close partnership with the Metro
Early College High School at Columbus, OH will also be established during this
project.