* 1309858
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research: The Integration of Data-Mining with Multiscale Engineering Computations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Ronald Coifman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 09/30/2016
* USD 475,000.00

This collaborative research project aims at developing mathematical methods for
the analysis/mining of large scale, high dimensional data that arise in
engineering/physicochemical computations, and, more importantly, in exploiting
these methods and algorithms to accelerate the computations themselves. This
type of synergy between data mining and scientific computation has the potential
to significantly enhance the way we extract knowledge from large scale modeling
and simulation. The focus of the approach is the discovery a small number of
key, intrinsic features of simulations characterized by very large numbers of
degrees of freedom - and the exploitation of these key features to
systematically design subsequent simulations. Another important feature of the
work is the development of algorithms that "translate" between fine scale,
detailed, and coarse scale, compact descriptions of the data, as well as
algorithms for the fast incorporation of new data/information in previous
computational frameworks. Deliverables of the effort will be the algorithms
themselves, as well as documented illustrative examples of their application to
large scale molecular and agent-based simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will create, document and make available a
computational protocol for enhancing large scale scientific computations in the
modeling of complex dynamical systems. Example applications include nanoscale
self-assembly, such as micelle formation in materials computations,
macromolecular foldling, large scale agent-based models of collective motion in
ecology and cellular biology, as well as large scale, Partial Differential
Equation simulations of engineering problems, like combustion. The results will
be disseminated to allow their use by other researchers. The research will form
the basis of cross-disciplinary education of graduate students in engineering
and in mathematics, and of undergraduate research projects in these disciplines.
It will also underpin the development of course materials in large scale data
processing.