* 1309708
* Collaborative Research: High Performance Cellular Simultaneous Recurrent Network based Pattern Recognition
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Tarek Taha, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 146,630.00

This is a collaborative proposal between a neural network researcher, addressing
the issues of face recognition and image recognition in general, and a
researcher on a new class of electronic chip based on memristors.&lt;br/&gt; In
recent years, new world records have been set in image recognition by
convolutional neural networks, funded &lt;br/&gt;at other universities through
the EFRI/COPN topic at NSF. At times, those systems have outperformed humans in
those tasks. On the neural network side, this team plans to use a more general
class of neural networks, the Cellular Simultaneous Neural Network (CSRN), to
address benchmark challenges in face recognition where computers have yet to
outperform humans. The CSRN may be viewed as&lt;br/&gt;a generalization of the
convolutional network to add a kind of real-time recurrence or feedback, a kind
of recurrence which is known to be crucial to the powers of biological
brains.&lt;br/&gt; On the electronic hardware side, this proposal addresses a
crucial challenge in continuing Moore's Law. The speed of computing chips is not
expected to grow as fast as it did in the past, but thanks to breakthroughs in
lithography and the recent work in memristors, we can still expect progress
towards thousand or even millions of active processors on a chip. In order to
make full use of this emerging new capability, new efforts are needed to
integrate device work and systems level work together, in developing new
architectures of real practical use. If successful, this project could be an
important step forward in that effort. Memristors for use in memory are already
being well-funded by industry, but the extension to active processing and
learning is more of a high risk&lt;br/&gt;breakthrough activity.&lt;br/&gt; This
project also includes a substantial component of education and outreach,
including development of systems to stimulate K-8 children.