* 1309510
* Molecular Programming: Bottom-Up Fabrication of Multi-Element Compounds with Precisely-Defined Structure and Composition
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Javier Vela, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2016
* USD 365,650.00

With the support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program of the
Division of Materials Research, Prof. Javier Vela and his group at Iowa State
University investigate new "bottom-up" chemical reactivity approaches to control
the composition, microstructure and properties of multi-element solid-state
compounds. The specific aims of this project are to tune the reactivity of
cationic molecular precursors for precise incorporation of transition metal
dopants into Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) and to tune the reactivity of phosphide molecular
precursors for controlling the composition and degree of phase segregation in
metal phosphosulfides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By enabling the fabrication of
complex functional materials, this project has potential broad impacts on other
research areas such as renewable energy generation, conversion and storage,
magnetic data storage, and catalysis. The educational portion of this project
builds on a successful collaboration with Prof. Hua-Jun Fan and his students at
Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU), a Historically Black University, and
seeks to broaden participation by recruiting and training a diverse scientific
workforce. Prof. Fan, a computational chemist, uses computations to guide the
development of molecular precursors. The Vela group hosts one PVAMU
undergraduate student for eight-to-ten weeks each summer for the three-year
duration of the project. Through this project, PVAMU students learn about the
synthesis and characterization of solid-state materials.