* 1309843
* Influence of Electric Field and Stress on Diffusional Sliding at Hetero-Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Indranath Dutta, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 06/30/2018
* USD 396,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: In most micro/nano-engineered systems, multiple materials are
in intimate contact with each other while being subjected to extreme thermal,
mechanical and electrical loads. This results in unique scale-sensitive near-
interface phenomena, such as diffusional transport along interfaces, driven by a
combination of stress, thermal and electric fields. In solid materials, this
causes interfacial sliding, which may cause migration of features embedded
within a device, causing interfacial strain incompatibilities and potential
failure. At liquid-solid interfaces, the application of an electric field can
result in movement of the liquid relative to the solid via liquid
electromigration (L-EM), which has potential applications in micro-fluidics,
conformal coating of circuitry in micro-systems, and tip-based nano-lithography.
This proposal has four objectives: (1) obtain mechanistic insight and develop a
constitutive model for sliding at solid hetero-interfaces under a combination of
stress, electric field and thermal gradient; (2) understand and model
diffusional liquid transport at liquid-solid interfaces under a combination of
electric field and thermal gradient; (3) correlate the kinetics of diffusion
along solid-solid and liquid-solid interfaces to interfacial and near-interface
structure and chemistry; and (4) utilize the models and insights generated to
simulate the combined impact of shear stress, electromigration and
thermomigration on interfacial sliding in solid-solid and liquid-solid systems
of practical importance. As such, the insights obtained will be valuable for
reliability of micro/nano-electronic devices, as well as for novel applications
involving micro/nano-scale liquid-motion, such as tip-based nanolithography and
micro-fluidics.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Micro and nano-scale devices such as those used in
electronics have numerous boundaries between disparate materials that are packed
very closely together. The materials within these devices are subjected to
mechanical, electrical and thermal loads, causing transport of material to occur
along the internal boundaries. This can cause severe reliability problems in
electronics. Occasionally, when one of the materials undergoes melting due to
excessive heating, the same phenomenon also causes flow of the liquid relative
to the solid. This presents opportunities to exploit this phenomenon in new
technologies like advanced lithography and microfluidics. In the proposed work,
mechanistic insight and models for transport along both solid-solid and solid-
liquid boundaries will be developed. If successful, the work will have direct
impact on the reliability of next-generation electronics, as well as on the
development of new manufacturing technologies such as tip-based nanolithography,
thus influencing US competitiveness. The project will involve a graduate student
and a postdoctoral associate in research and education, undergraduate students
through Research Experience for Undergraduates, and outreach to high-school
students through a science competition summer program. It will also involve
international collaboration with India and collaborative activities with a
national laboratory and industry. Results of the project will be broadly
disseminated through faculty and student participation at meetings of learned
societies.