* 1309556
* Responsive Vesicles from Recombinant Oleosin
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Daniel Hammer, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 06/30/2016
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Pennsylvania is for the development of vesicles endowed with
specific motifs to bind with cell receptors, the development of vesicles that
disassemble at specific pH's, and for the incorporation of protease cleavable
domains to allow programmable release. Vesicles, spherical compartments of
aqueous solution surrounded by a bilayer membrane, can be used for drug
delivery, imaging, and biocatalysis. With this project, vesicles will be
prepared from amphiphilic protein based oleosin using the tools of recombinant
biotechnology. Synthesis by recombinant methods would produce monomolecular
materials with designer functionality through the incorporation of precise amino
acid sequences. Oleosin, and numerous mutants resulting from either truncation
or substitution of amino acids, can be expressed in E. coli with high yields.
Several variants make vesicles, depending on the precise architecture of the
molecules and solvent conditions. With this award, the investigator will prepare
responsive vesicles by further alterations of oleosin. Students doing research
in this project will be trained in multidisciplinary areas. This work will be
conducted by graduate students and by high school students in a unique outreach
program designed to encourage both underrepresented groups and students from
high achieving schools to experience laboratory research.

There is an increasing need to make biocompatible materials that can carry
bioactive agents. A vesicle, a bag of aqueous solution surrounded by a membrane,
is a particularly useful material which can be loaded with drugs and imaging
agents. Although vesicles are often made from lipids, research is ongoing to
expand the palette of materials that can make vesicles with designer
functionality. This project is to prepare biocompatible vesicles from a
naturally occurring plant protein, oleosin, which the investigator has
demonstrated using the biotechnology methods. With this approach, every molecule
would be identical, and embedding specific functionality could be straight
forward through simply changing the gene. With this project, variants of oleosin
and construct vesicles will be prepared that will fall apart in response to
changes in pH, which are useful for drug delivery inside of a cell, or in
response to proteases, to make tumors-specific drug delivery vehicles. This work
will be conducted by graduate students and by high school students, in an
outreach program designed to both encourage underrepresented groups to
participate in science and to get high achieving students more interested in
careers in science and technology.