* 1309066
* Conductive Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 08/31/2016
* USD 523,432.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: With the support of the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, new synthetic strategies will be
developed in pursuit of metal-organic frameworks that exhibit facile ionic
and/or electronic charge mobility. The synthetic tunability of metal-organic
frameworks is expected to stimulate inquiry into new physical phenomena such as
nanometer scale pore confinement effects and framework-centered charge
distribution on ion mobility as well as, electron correlation in one-dimensional
materials, and the electronic and magnetic properties of low dimensional
systems. Such investigations are of immediate interest for their potential
battery applications as electrode or solid electrolyte component materials,
electrocatalysis, thermoelectric devices and ultra-capacitors. Porous materials
with high ion mobility can be prepared by engendering frameworks with
delocalized or otherwise inaccessible charges in order to yield uncoordinated
and pore-confined single-ion conductors. This will include the preparation of
materials containing ionic metal clusters, ionic organic linkers, inclusion of
bulky counterions, and characterizing ion mobility trends with respect to ion
identity, pore dimensions, pore topography, framework topology, and crystallite
morphology. Leveraging the modular nature of metal-organic frameworks in order
to include reversible redox couples in both the inorganic and organic components
of the material will target new electronically conductive frameworks. Other
synthetic strategies not yet developed in this class of materials will also be
explored. This will include optimization of electron correlation along one-
dimensional chains of metal centers, the inclusion of stable organic radical,
and tuning the band structure via ligand functionalization and inclusion of
adventitious guest species. Doing so will allow investigation of charge mobility
in porous structures from the perspective of fundamental coordination chemistry,
a technique commonly reserved only for molecular species.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Metal-organic frameworks are a new class of solid
materials with porous network structures the surfaces of which can be chemically
modified to suit a wide range of potential applications, notably gas storage,
chemical separations, and catalysis. By adapting these materials to be
electrically conductive through the movement of ions and electrons, new
phenomena will be explored that are of fundamental interest in chemistry, energy
storage, and condensed matter physics. This work will expand the understanding
of how to control the formation of new materials and manipulate the electronic
and ionic charge transport properties therein. With the support of the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, new
porous materials will be created of potential interest as component materials in
advanced batteries, electrocatalysis, thermoelectric devices, and ultra-
capacitors. In doing so, this work will broadly impact these key technologies,
resulting in a legacy of new synthetic techniques and a fundamental
understanding of conductive materials, while additionally contributing to the
education and training of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students in
the synthesis and characterization of new materials. As a related endeavor, the
principle investigator will continue to lead an effort in the Department of
Chemistry at UC Berkeley to found a materials chemistry major.