* 1309592
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Abby Schadock-Hewitt, Schadock-Hewitt         Abby
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Abby Schadock-Hewitt of Clemson University to conduct a
research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the University of
Canterbury in Christchurch, New Zealand. The project title is "Modeling of a
Unique Shaped-Fiber Stationary Phase for the Large-Scale Purification of
Antibodies." The host scientists are Dr. Simone Dimartino and Dr. Conan Fee.

The proposed project involves characterization and modeling of a novel
recombinant protein A- modified affinity chromatography stationary phase for the
capture and recovery of immunoglobulin G (IgG). IgG is necessary for antibody-
based therapeutics, a rapidly growing field that requires high quantities of
highly pure antibody to be separated from complex fermentation broths in an
efficient, fast, cost effective way. This work focuses on capillary-channeled
polymer (C-CP) fibers modified with protein A (the affinity capture ligand for
IgG), which show excellent potential, at the analytical scale, in overcoming the
drawbacks of costly commercially available resins. Modeling of protein
A-modified C-CP fibers is essential to determine if their advantageous
properties hold at a preparative, industry suitable, scale. Broader impacts of
an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand research
experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science policy, and
scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an orientation to the
society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF goal to educate for
international collaborations early in the career of its scientists, engineers,
and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific workforce.
Furthermore, this project encourages incorporation of engineering ideas and
perspectives toward the analytical scale implementation of C-CP fiber columns.
The Fellow will be able to bring this engineering perspective to other chemist
colleagues by giving a presentation of the knowledge gained. Successful
completion of the proposed work will open up many opportunities for future
modification and modeling studies; taking the discovery steps into the practical
realm. This will promote development of other novel C-CP fiber modifications and
allow for the continued collaboration with the host researchers, possibly
opening up new collaborations, and resulting in conference presentations and
peer-reviewed publications. The fibers current educational applications applied
at Clemson will grow from the information gained, allowing for added
applications.