* 1309712
* Evolution of magnetoelasticity from a single-atom bridge to bulk
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Harsh Chopra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 320,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This project will experimentally map the evolution of
magneto-elasticity in ferromagnets from a single-atom to bulk. This will be
accomplished by using a custom built probe that is capable of making stable
atomic-sized samples as small as a single-atom bridge, an atomic chain or atomic
clusters, and measure their interatomic forces and distortions with pico-level
resolution under applied field, mechanical perturbations, and as a function of
temperature. The project will focus on iron, cobalt, nickel, terbium and
gadolinium, which are key components of all magnetic actuator materials. By
pinpointing the length scales where enhanced magnetoelasticity occur will lead
to new strategies for "materials by design" and development of new alloys with
enhanced actuation. The project will support education of two graduate students.
Training of graduate students in thin films and vacuum technology, nano-science
and nanofabrication is of direct relevance to wealth generating high-tech
companies and opens vast opportunities for students upon graduation. The project
will also host 1-2 high school or undergraduate students through university's
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minorities Program. The project will also offer
outreach to a startup company that seeks to commercialize the probe used to
conduct experiments in this project.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** The ability of magnetic materials to precisely
expand or contract in a magnetic field makes them highly useful as sensors and
actuators in industries ranging from automobile, aerospace, data storage, to
satellites and telecommunication systems. There is urgent need to create new
magnetic alloys that can exhibit larger displacements or exert higher forces in
a magnetic field. This project will experimentally map the evolution of this
actuation ability in magnets, starting with samples as small as a single atom
bridge or an atomic chain, to bulk. This will be accomplished by using a custom
built probe capable of making atomic sized samples and measure forces and
displacements with sub-nanometer accuracy. The project will focus on iron,
cobalt, nickel, terbium and gadolinium, which are key components of all magnetic
actuators and sensors. Pinpointing the optimum size for highest actuation will
lead to new strategies for "materials by design" and development of advanced
alloys. The project will support education of two graduate students and 1-2
undergraduate students whose training in thin films and vacuum technology, nano-
science and microfabrication is highly sought after by wealth generating high
tech companies. The project will also offer help to a startup company that is
commercializing the probe used for experiments in this project.