* 1309416
* Collaborative Research: Spin Torque Oscillators Based on Electric and Thermal Spin Currents in Self Assembled Ferromagnetic Nanowire Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Ilya Krivorotov, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual merit of the proposed activity: &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
study spin transfer torques driven by electric and thermal spin currents by
utilizing ordered arrays of self-assembled ferromagnetic nanowires, and to
investigate the nonlinear magnetization dynamics in these closely packed spin
torque oscillator arrays. The objectives of this collaborative research are:
(i)to study electric and thermal spin torques generated by a ferromagnetic
nanowire in response to electric potential and temperature gradients; (ii) to
study nonlinear collective magnetization dynamics in the hexagonally packed two
dimensional arrays of strongly coupled spin transfer torque oscillators;
and(iii)to develop a high-power microwave voltage controlled oscillator based on
an array of phase locked spin torque oscillators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed array of spin torque oscillators consist of hexagonally ordered cobalt
nanowires electrodeposited in anodized alumina template. These nanowires will
serve as spin current injectors into a thin ferromagnetic film common to all
injectors. Spin currents will be generated by either voltages or thermal
gradients applied across the nanowires. Coupling among the individual spin
torque oscillators will be facilitated by spin waves propagating in the common
ferromagnetic layer. Ultrafast electrical detection of magneto-dynamics,
broadband ferromagnetic resonance and magnetic force microscopy will be used to
characterize the nonlinear magnetization dynamics in the array of spin torque
oscillators. The proposed research will advance the understanding of the large-
amplitude magnetization dynamics driven by electric and spin currents, which is
important for the development of the next generation ultrafast and non-volatile
magneto-electronic devices such as hard drive read heads and wireless
communication systems. This research program will also benchmark the relative
strength of thermally driven spin currents against the more common spin-
polarized electric currents in the same system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact of the proposed activity: &lt;br/&gt;The microwave voltage controlled
oscillator developed in this research will have a significant technological
impact on information storage and telecommunication industries. PhD students, as
well as undergraduates and high school students will take part in this program
under the guidance of the investigators. The practical training in
nanofabrication and unique measurement techniques offered by this program will
prepare specialists for the USA magneto-electronics industry that are currently
undergoing a rapid transition from micro- to nano-scale. The PIs will continue
to attract underrepresented students from minority-serving institutions, such as
California State Universities, as well as local K-12 students to participate in
the research projects. In the education curriculum, all investigators have
developed courses on nanoscience and nanotechnology with a series of
demonstrations for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) and by the Electronic and
Photonic Materials Program (EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR).