* 1309090
* SusChEM:  Molecular Routes to New Classes of Polar and Non-Polar Alloy Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2017
* USD 788,057.00

Technical Description: The project investigates the fabrication and properties
of (III-V)-IV alloys based on the recent discovery of a synthesis approach that
eliminates phase segregation effects in these alloys. The essential idea is to
build the alloy crystal from pre-formed molecular units containing three group-
IV atoms and a single III-V pair in tetrahedral geometry. Growth is done using
chemical vapor deposition on readily available silicon or germanium substrates.
The research includes determination of the atomic level structure of the alloys,
systematic study of their optical properties, investigation of compositional and
doping control for potential semiconductor applications, and generalization of
the approach to include most group III, IV, and V materials. An additional goal
is to develop other classes of materials based on the concept of molecular
building blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Modern research
in materials science is strongly focused on the design and synthesis of
materials not available in nature. The molecular approach to crystal growth
exemplified by this project represents a new tool for this quest that may lead
to materials with unique properties. In particular, some of the materials to be
studied, including alloys of Al, P, N, and Si, are expected to have lattice
dimensions similar to a silicon crystal and could form the basis for Si-based
tandem solar cells. Single-layer silicon solar cells dominate the current
photovoltaics market but their efficiency is limited to about 25%. The cell
efficiency could exceed 30% in tandem structures, with large societal impact.
The uniqueness of the molecules-to-solids approach also creates opportunities
for multidisciplinary education. The project includes the development of new
courses that allow students to become familiar with the chemistry and physics
concepts needed to pursue materials research. Provisions are also being made to
create a database of chemical precursors, to be made available to the community
at large, which insures that other researchers have access to the synthetic
innovations developed under this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded jointly by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and Solid State
and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) Programs in the Division of Materials Research.