* 1309228
* Methods of deRham Topology Applied to Nonlinear Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Dennis Sullivan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2017
* USD 176,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1309228, Principal Investigator: Dennis
Sullivan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One knows the algebra of differential forms up to
an equivalence relation from algebraic topology contains much more information
than the usual cohomology. Define the deRham coHomotopy to be the cohomology of
the linearized deRham complex defined as follows: first construct a resolution
of the deRham algebra (A,d). This is a differential algebra map of a free
differential graded commutative algebra (T,d) to the deRham algebra (A,d)
inducing a bijection on cohomology.The linearized complex is that induced on the
generators [or indecomposables] of T by its differential. This deRham Cohomotopy
can be related to ordinary homotopy for simply connected spaces and to algebraic
K theory of associative algebras using spaces with contractible universal
covers. The concrete proof that this recipe is meaningful is the key non-trivial
point of deRham Topology and to the applications of this proposal. It is based
on developing explicitly the nonlinear notion of homotopy between maps of
differential algebras. One obtains an illuminated picture of algebraic
structures and maps between them that closely resembles that of maps between
cell complexes and fibrations in usual topology. Thus one may analyze the theory
of algebraic objects defined by any number of multilinear operations with j
inputs and k outputs for j and k positive.In one envisaged set of applications
mathematical models in geometry and analysis that involve infinitely many
degrees of freedom and nonlinear structures, finite dimensional approximating
models are constructed with coherent mappings between the different levels of
approximations. The Hodge star operator [which associates to a linear subspace
its orthogonal complement] is not immediately amenable to this method. Thus the
proposal also focuses on several algebraic structures like string theories and
geometric structures like singularities in open and closed strings particular to
manifolds in order to finesse the Hodge Star
difficulty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some questions are linear problems. The
quantitative answer depends linearly on the data of the problem. There are good
techniques for these problems. Nonlinear problems like the mathematical models
of ocean currents, flows of oil in a reservoir and the weather are much more
difficult to get a grip on mathematically and computationally. The proposal
claims that a technique of nonlinear topology holds some promise to give a new
technique for treating quite general nonlinear mathematical models of physical
processes. The technique will be easy to apply by offering finite models
approximating nonlinear problems. The likelihood these models will fit with
reality and have predictive value is enhanced because their derivation is based
on the underlying mathematical structure of the nonlinearities.