* 1309118
* Geometric Aspects of Quantum Field Theory and Topological String
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Si Li, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2016
* USD 164,742.00

Under this award, the principal investigator will continue his research on the
quantum geometry of complex varieties. Further, in collaboration with the co-PI,
the investigator will undertake a study of certain algebraic structures arising
from quantum field theory and topological strings. The research contains two
major perspectives. The first aim is to develop the mathematical foundations of
the quantum geometry of the B-twisted topological string on a Calabi-Yau
geometry; a complete description will include open-closed string field theory
and the Landau-Ginzburg B-model. Secondly, the PI and co-PI will analyze the
perturbative quantization of two dimensional sigma models and develop various
algebraic index theories for higher differential operators via a rigorous
observable theory. The blossoming of quantum field theory and string theory has
provided a great driving force in the creation of new areas in mathematics. The
proposed project explores examples arising from quantum field theory relevant to
geometry and topology in a mathematically rigorous setting. The aim is to
develop new mathematical tools and reveal the geometry of quantum phenomenon by
anchoring physical intuition and arguments in the harbor of mathematics. The
implications of the proposed projects live both in an array of mathematical
fields (differential geometry, algebraic geometry, topology) and theoretical
physics.