* 1309751
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:   Hybrid Objects and Intercultural Assemblages in Colonial Louisiana
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Lauren Zych, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2015
* USD 22,012.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Shannon Lee Dawdy, Ms. Lauren Zych will analyze
handmade ceramics collected from colonial sites in Alabama, Mississippi, and
Louisiana. During the eighteenth century these sites were part of the Louisiana
colony, which encompassed the Mississippi river and its tributaries from Canada
south to the Gulf of Mexico. Claimed for the French crown in 1682, the colony
was eventually divided between England and Spain, and subsequently acquired by
the United States in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803. The ceramics under
investigation are important because, unlike the majority of ceramics from
colonial sites, they are coarse and handmade rather than mass-produced. They are
also associated with two groups of people - Native Americans and enslaved
Africans - whose experiences and perspectives are severely underrepresented, if
not completely absent, from historic accounts of the colonial era. Because these
ceramics were recovered from colonial contexts, rather than Indian villages or
slave cabins, they reveal complex and multi-faceted relationships between Native
Americans, Africans, and European colonists that deserve further investigation.
Ms. Zych's research will combine archaeological evidence with data from historic
and ethnohistoric records in order to explore the nature and extent of
intercultural relations during the colonial period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
European colonization of the Americas had dramatic, and often unforeseen,
consequences for indigenous tribes, as well as for thousands of African people
forcibly enslaved and transported across the Atlantic. The broad strokes of
their stories may be familiar - physical and cultural dislocation, enslavement,
extreme poverty, starvation, and death - but scholars agree that this singular
vision, glosses over considerable variation in the African and Indian experience
of colonization. This project will use material culture, primarily in the form
of handmade ceramics, to shed new light on group interaction in colonial
Louisiana during the eighteenth century. &lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of
traditional and experimental archaeological techniques, this project will
analyze the production, consumption, meaning and use of handmade ceramics in
colonial contexts. Descriptive, typological, and comparative analysis will
reveal the social, material and political contexts most often associated with
handmade ceramics. Advanced forms of chemical analysis, including neutron
activation analysis (NAA) and laser ablated-inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), will be used to identify the geographic origins of
non-local vessels. Combined with insights gleaned from critical use of historic
documents, these analyses will reveal the complex nature of the relations
between colonists, Native Americans, and African people in a century
characterized by radical transformations in both lifeways and political regimes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is broadly conceived and designed to hold
significance for multiple audiences. It will highlight the social, cultural and
historical contributions of peoples whose role in the formation of America is
poorly understood and frequently undervalued. To insure that this research makes
an impact outside the discipline, the results will be presented to both academic
and general audiences through a combination of public lectures, professional
presentations, and peer-reviewed publications. The completed dissertation will
be available through a subscription-based database, while raw data generated
through this research will be available online in an open forum expressly
designed for data-sharing.