* 1309264
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: AGEP-T: PROMISE AGEP Maryland Transformation
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Charles Caramello, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2019
* USD 733,066.00

The University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) is the lead institution for
PROMISE AGEP, a university system-wide effort for the state of Maryland to
facilitate underrepresented STEM graduate student and postdoctoral professional
development and pathways to careers. UMBC leads the alliance that consists of
all 14 colleges, universities, and regional education centers in the University
System of Maryland, four community colleges, and a former NSF Model Institution
of Excellence Hispanic Serving Institution in Puerto Rico. PROMISE has been a
critical catalyst for increasing enrollment, retention, and graduation rates of
underrepresented minorities. The program also will contribute to the higher
education literature on retention and professional development for graduate
students and postdocs. The Rotating Postdoctoral Fellowship and the Professors-
in-Training program for Maryland's institutions (including Master's serving
institutions, HBCUs, community colleges, and an HSI) are among the innovations
that respond to AGEP?s call to support the national goal of increasing the
number of underrepresented minorities who will enter academic STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROMISE AGEP: Maryland Transformation will focus on four
sets of alliance activities: &lt;br/&gt;1) Graduate student recruitment,
retention, and success; to cultivate new students by creating a pipeline
(pathway) for students to be prepared for and admitted to graduate school,
participate in workshops that promote retention, and develop community to
facilitate persistence; &lt;br/&gt;2) Ph.D. completion and career preparation;
to develop activities that will focus on both degree completion and transition
to careers; &lt;br/&gt;3) Programs for postdoctoral scholars; to facilitate
coordinated policies and programs for mentoring underrepresented minority
postdocs across the university system; and &lt;br/&gt;4) Programs to enhance
faculty understanding of diversity issues in graduate and postdoctoral
education; to open dialog among the faculty to develop promising practices for
underrepresented minority recruitment, retention, mentoring, and transitions to
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new project will engage the University System
of Maryland in a system-wide focus on diversity in STEM graduate education, and
will share resources and facilities to provide professional development for
participants that might otherwise be limited or non-existent at some of the
institutions without the alliance. This state-wide alliance eliminates the
"silo-effect" or independent STEM diversity efforts, and it promotes as a core
mission the collaboration to expand and connect a community of scholars through
the state. The state-wide alliance allows the institutions to provide pipelines
and pathways between institutions for doctoral study, postdoctoral placements,
and faculty appointments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes a research
component to explore three research questions: Does experience of micro-
affirmations/micro-aggressions, a sense of belonging, professional networks, and
mentoring experiences influence graduate student outcomes such as time to
degree, persistence, job placement, and a sense of agency in career advancement?
How do these outcomes and experiences differ by student demographics,
discipline, or institutional type? What role does participation in the PROMISE
AGEP play in these experiences and outcomes? The goals of the proposed research
are first to determine whether students in the second group are more likely to
experience a sense of agency in career advancement, persist in their degree
programs and STEM, have shorter time to degree, and find academic appointments
post-graduation. Second, the research will explore how the PROMISE program
facilitates access to these experiences, promoting educational outcomes for
underrepresented minority students in STEM.