* 1309832
* Collaborative Research: Wide-Field L-band Focal Plane Array Beamformer for Pulsar, Diffuse Hydrogen, and Fast Transient Surveys on the GBT
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Karl Warnick, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 586,110.00

The power of a radio telescope, like the power of an optical telescope, is
directly related to the region of sky that it can efficiently survey in a single
"image". At optical wavelengths the advent of multi-pixel detectors has
revolutionized astronomical science. Radio telescopes have lagged behind in this
pixel-count, for technical reasons, but now dedicated efforts are underway to
close some of this ground. This program aims to continue the development of a
closely analogous technical advance for radio wavelengths, which will permit
close-packed arrays of radio-wavelength detectors in the telescope focal plane,
and thus well-sampled pictures of astrophysical targets in the
sky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach used here is to design and construct a
high-performance phased array feed (PAF). The project aims to develop, then
field and utilize a working system on the Green Bank Telescope (GBT), although
the technology is of interest at a very wide range of telescopes. The
performance of the finished system is anticipated to be the highest in the
world, and this will potentially also be a world-leading effort in terms of the
timing with which the system could be fielded. A successful system would triple
the L-band mapping speed of the GBT. Associated issues, such as interference
mitigation and signal processing, will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will help to maintain US leadership in an emerging and important area of
radio technology, particularly in signal processing and algorithm development,
and thus maintain competitiveness within the phased array community. This effort
will include substantial training for the next generation of engineers through
involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in mentored research. Student
research assistants will spend several weeks or months at NRAO facilities to
become familiar with astronomical instrumentation in a "hands-on" fashion,
learning skills critical to the US scientific
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being provided
by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.