* 1309999
* Role of Selected Major and Minor Alloy Alloying Elements in Copper Alloys on Copper Ion Release and Oxide Formation for Anti-Microbial Functionality
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* John Scully, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Methicillin-resistant Straphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is
antibiotic-resistant and spread by hand-to-surface contact with metal surfaces,
often leading to hospital patient infection. Copper (Cu) and silver (Ag) possess
anti-microbial capability due to the release of either oxidized Cu or Ag ions
via electrochemical processes in response to complex surface environments formed
during deliquescence of perspiration salt deposits in humid air. Cu surfaces are
not presently favored in hospitals due to rapid tarnishing caused by hand
perspiration. A Cu alloy that has antimicrobial capability and color stability
is highly desirable for high touch surfaces where stainless steel is now used
but has no antimicrobial capabilities. The ideal alloy surface releases Cu ions
at rates mediated via alloying. However, there is a gap in scientific
understanding of electrochemical Cu oxidation, passivity and release from copper
alloys. Few past studies focus on the role of major and minor alloying elements
on Cu release from alloys. Prior research on commercial alloys confirms the
complex effects of alloying elements; alloying elements may either suppress or
enhance release of Cu ions by mechanisms which are presently unknown. The
objective is to elucidate the Cu release characteristics and mechanisms in
selected Cu alloys as mediated by systematic variation of alloying elements. The
effects of alloying on copper release, passivity and color stability will be
investigated using binary and ternary Cu alloys synthesized with systematic
additions of selected alloying elements. Corrosion/release behavior will be
connected with atomic scale measurements of the fate of alloying elements during
oxidation. Both global and high resolution surface and atomic scale experimental
studies using a variety of techniques will track the fate of Cu in the metal,
the oxide as well as the flux released. Intellectual merits include new
solid/liquid interfacial understandings of the role of major and minor alloying
elements on these processes. A foundation for functional alloy design that
improves trial and error approaches will emerge.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project concerns developing the materials science
which enables better design of copper and silver based alloys that have anti-
microbial functionality as a way to ultimately control hospital acquired
infections. For instance, Methicillin-resistant Straphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is
antibiotic-resistant and spread by hand-to-surface contact, often leading to
infection. Copper (Cu) and silver (Ag) metallic alloys possess anti-microbial
function due to the release of metal ions in response to complex chemical
environments such as human sweat. Cu is not favored in hospitals due to rapid
tarnishing caused by hand perspiration. Stainless steels resist tarnishing but
do not possess any antimicrobial capability. This project seeks to identify and
understand factors controlling alloy properties that enable both antimicrobial
function and color stability. These properties are highly desirable for high
touch surfaces. This project will conduct research to define the Cu release
characteristics and mechanisms in selected Cu alloys as mediated by selected
alloying elements. Intellectual merits include new understandings of the role of
alloying elements on copper alloy oxidation/ion release in human perspiration.
This will enable intelligent design of alloy compositions for ideal anti-
microbial function and minimal tarnishing. Broader implications include
development of the insight necessary to enable use of multi-functional copper
alloys in anti-microbial applications to reduce the spread of disease-causing
bacteria. This can positively affect world health, and also contribute to
understanding of metal release in other applications. Significant human resource
development will occur in the fields of materials science and engineering as
well as corrosion science - crucial gaps in STEM training and a national need
identified by the US National Academy. Graduate students in the materials
science area will be educated and fully integrated with all research tasks.
Undergraduate as well as high school students will also participate.
Collaboration is underway with the Copper Development Association of America and
various copper alloy producers.