* 1309996
* Quantum Optics with Superconducting Circuits
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Robert Schoelkopf, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

Intellectual merit: This award is for a program on fundamental experiments in
quantum optics using superconducting integrated circuits. Based on the paradigm
of "circuit QED" developed by the PI's group, in which superconducting qubits
are combined with microwave resonant cavities to realize the physics of the
Jaynes-Cummings model with ultra-strong coupling, we are pursuing the
generation, manipulation, and measurement of non-classical states of the
electromagnetic field. Using the tools developed for quantum information
processing with superconducting devices, we have realized a new 3D version of a
"two-cavity" circuit architecture with significantly extended coherence times
during the current funding period. Here a single qubit, which provides
nonlinearity, is combined with two microwave cavities, allowing new
possibilities for nonlinear optics at the single quantum level. We have been
able to use these devices to observe new quantum phenomena, such as the single-
photon Kerr regime, and to manipulate states of microwave fields in new ways. We
have the ability to create interesting non-classical states, including the
largest "Schrodinger cat states" (superpositions of Glauber coherent states)
ever produced, and measure them with full Wigner state tomography. This opens
new possibilities for employing cavities and the physics of continuous variables
in quantum information processing. Our main goal with this architecture is to
develop real-time quantum non-demolition measurements capable of detecting
single quantum jumps, and utilize this to actively stabilize states and perform
quantum error correction. The physics and capabilities developed here can have
significant impact on the prospects for scalable quantum information processing
with solid-state devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This work opens
a new area for fundamental studies of the quantum measurement of the
electromagnetic field, as well as to develop new technology for integrated
circuits which operate at the single quantum level. The experiments employ the
novel features of the circuit QED system to observe and study phenomena which
are mostly inaccessible with traditional AMO systems in quantum optics. The
techniques and capabilities for single photon generation and detection could
have major impact on the prospects for scalable quantum computation and
communication in these superconducting circuits and also atomic/condensed matter
hybrid systems such as ion and molecule chips. This project also continues the
trend established by earlier work to forge new connections between atomic and
condensed matter physics communities. The project supports graduate student
research. Results will be disseminated via publications and presentations at
conferences in the areas of AMO physics, quantum information, and condensed
matter physics, as well as in tutorials and introductory lectures at summer
schools and conferences. This research will take advantage of the infrastructure
and technical knowledge for fabrication and measurement of superconducting
devices developed as part of the large, applied effort for development of
quantum computing at Yale, but allows new and distinct directions of fundamental
physical interest.