* 1309459
* Theoretical and Experimental Design of Multifunctional Plasmonic Electrodes for Polymer-Based Optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Deirdre O'Carroll, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2017
* USD 335,926.00

Technical Description: Plasmonic near-fields can be used to increase exciton
generation or emission rate in organic conjugated polymer semiconductor
materials. However, to incorporate plasmonic effects in conjugated polymer-based
optoelectronic devices, it is important to control and stabilize the surface
electronic properties of the plasmonic structure. The goal of this project is to
develop design principles for multifunctional plasmonic electrodes that are: (1)
optically active; (2) efficient at charge carrier collection/injection; (3)
stable under ambient conditions; and (4) compatible with scalable
nanofabrication routes for organic polymer optoelectronic applications. The
plasmonic electrodes consist of vertically-oriented metal nanorod arrays that
support surface plasmons and that are either uncoated or have an ultra-thin
(native) metal oxide coating to tune the surface work function, eliminate the
need for additional hole transport/electron blocking layers, mitigate exciton
quenching, and improve performance lifetime in ambient
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The electrodes
developed in this project, that provide light management capabilities and that
exhibit stable, controllable surface electronic properties, are expected to
enable both more efficient and more durable organic polymer-based optoelectronic
devices, making them more viable for energy efficiency and generation
applications. The project activities also combine interdisciplinary research in
materials science and engineering, and chemistry with education by enabling
undergraduate students from local and state programs (such as Rutgers Research
in Science and Engineering program, Rutgers' Green Energy Technology REU program
and the New Jersey Governor's School of Engineering and Technology) to work
alongside graduate researchers on the goals of the project. Additional project
activities continue to support, encourage and maintain diversity in the research
team and in the broader scientific community; and incorporate participation in
high-school enrichment as part of Rutgers' outreach programs.