* 1309148
* Mechanistic Studies of New C-S Bond Formation Chemistries
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Pinghua Liu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2018
* USD 380,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Pinghua Liu from Boston University to study the
mechanism of the oxidative C-S bond formations in ergothioneine and ovothiol
biosyntheses. Thiol-containing molecules play many important roles in biological
systems. The oxidative C-S bond formations in ergothioneine and ovothiol
biosyntheses (EgtB-catalysis and OvoA catalysis) were first reported in late
2010 and early 2011 by Seebeck and co-workers. In preliminary studies on OvoA-
catalysis, the Liu Group discovered three more new chemistries of these enzymes.
With support from this award, they will carry out detailed mechanistic studies
by integrating tools from various disciplines, including organic synthesis,
molecular biology, bioinformatics, and enzymology. The goals are to
differentiate among selected oxidative C-S bond formation mechanistic options.
Then, through a combination of synthetic chemistry, pre-steady state kinetics,
and spectroscopy techniques, they will trap and characterize some of the
proposed intermediates. Information from this study will provide insights into
the mechanism of the reactions of this new type of C-S bond formation.

Representing about 1% of cell dry weight, sulfur adds considerable functionality
to a wide variety of biomolecules. The thiol-imidazole functionality in
ergothioneine and ovothiol makes them unique relative to other naturally
occurring thiols. As a result, ergothioneine is proposed to play many beneficial
roles in cellular functions. Information gained in this study will not only
provide mechanistic insights on C-S bond formation chemistries (one of the
frontiers in enzymology), but also help studies in related areas (e.g.,
investigating the physiological roles of these important metabolites). The
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed work (organic synthesis, molecular
biology, bioinformatics and enzymology) will provide an ideal opportunity to
train high school students, undergraduates, and graduate students for research
at the interface of Chemistry and Biology.