* 1309366
* Thin Layer Sonoelectrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Johna Leddy, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2017
* USD 399,998.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Johna Leddy at University of Iowa and her group will
explore improved catalysis at electrodes irradiated with ultrasound.
Classically, rates of chemical reactions increase with temperature and pressure.
On irradiation of solutions with ultrasound, large localized excursions of
temperature and pressure can be achieved. In a thin layer electrochemical cell,
these energetic excursions are captured at electrode surfaces and dramatically
increase rates of otherwise slow electrochemical events. That thin layer
sonoelectrochemistry is effective is demonstrated with preliminary data for
several reactions of fundamental and technological importance. Because the
energetic tax to drive ultrasonic transducers is low, sonication in a thin
solvent layer may provide a general means to increase surface reaction
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global objectives of this project are to
identify the fundamental mechanisms by which thin layer sonoelectrochemistry
increases interfacial rates; to map dependencies on acoustic frequency and
intensity; to optimize system design for maximum capture of acoustic energy; and
to explore mechanisms and materials where thin layer sonoelectrochemistry most
effectively accelerates electrocatalysis. Thin layer sonoelectrocatalysis is a
potentially transformative concept in the fundamentals of heterogeneous
catalysis and in electrochemical energy technologies such as batteries and fuel
cells. The intellectual merits of the proposal include a new and potentially
transformative means to facilitate heterogeneous reactions that include
electrocatalysis and a research approach that couples experiments and models to
identify the fundamental processes that drive enhanced interfacial rates
ultrasonically. The broader impacts include improved electrochemical energy
technologies, tools to make measurements, and well trained STEM researchers.