* 1309795
* An authentic theory of protein domains
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* George Rose, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 257,124.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Molecular Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences support Dr.
George Rose from Johns Hopkins University to enumerate a complete set of protein
domains from chemical principles. The identification of protein domains dates
back at least four decades, and dozens of structure-based domain definitions
have been proposed. Perhaps the most enduring definition, potentially
independent, stable folding units, conveys the fundamental concept
qualitatively. Yet, whether or not a protein substructure folds independently
cannot be ascertained from its structure, and stability depends on folding
conditions such as temperature, pressure, and solvent quality. Recently the Rose
group introduced a novel thermodynamic framework to assess domains. This
approach transforms decades of fuzzy structural domain definitions into a
thermodynamically rigorous definition. With this transformation in place, the
set of possible domains can now be generated based on the chemical principles
that govern accessible conformations of polypeptide chains in aqueous solvent.
This set can then be classified and compiled into a reference library. To test
the library for accuracy and completeness, protein structures in the protein
data bank (PDB) will be mapped onto their corresponding reference library
counterparts, and conversely, reference library entries will be mapped into
instances of these structures in the PDB. It is anticipated that multiple
validation cycles and much fine-tuning will be needed to achieve self-
consistency and completeness.

Domains are the fundamental building blocks of proteins. It is hypothesized that
only a few thousand distinct architectures can be realized by a domain-sized
protein, a limitation imposed by the chemistry of the protein backbone in water.
If validated, the domains hypothesis would exert a broad influence on future
directions in protein science and biochemistry in general. The ultimate goal is
to develop a complete modular parts list of structural domains and use it to
reconstruct the evolutionary past of protein molecules. En route to that goal,
this inquiry is expected to provide a practical framework for protein
engineering and for assessing current whole genome-based initiatives. The
principal investigator will provide close personal mentorship for a postdoctoral
researcher dedicated to this project and at its conclusion will write a book
describing the outcomes of this research for the general public.