* 1309341
* RUI:  Quantum Phases in Hybrid Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Andreas Bill, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 120,001.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education in theoretical and computational
condensed matter physics to offer insight into the coexistence of quantum phases
at the nanoscale and the possible emergence of new quantum phases. The project
focuses on hybrid nanostructures made of a superconducting material in proximity
with either inhomogeneous magnetic materials or a graphene multilayer. These
systems are of interest for building novel electronic and spintronic devices.

In the case of superconducting-magnetic heterostructures, the magnetic
inhomogeneities considered are tunable domain walls. The merit of the particular
model-system lies in the ability to tune continuously the influence of the
inhomogeneity through the application of a weak external perturbation. This
offers a unique opportunity to understand within one and the same probe how
inhomogeneities affect the state of the system. It leads to a consistent unified
picture of coexisting phases in superconducting-magnetic nanostructures that are
experimentally realizable. Particular emphasis will be placed on magnetic
Josephson junctions incorporating the tunable domain wall in the clean limit for
their potential to be used as building blocks for novel devices. Both static and
dynamic equilibrium properties will be studied under the application of external
perturbations.

In graphene-based hybrid structures the main tuning parameter is the finite but
arbitrary number of graphene sheets. The stacking of individual graphene layers
affects dramatically the single-electron and the electronic collective modes of
the structure. The tuning of the hybrid nanostructure will allow a better
understanding of these collective modes, charge screening properties and
superconductivity in layered materials. The analysis of hybrid nanostructures
will also be extended to the newly discovered topological insulators and
superconductors.

The award supports the PI's educational activities through the training of
Master's and undergraduate students in performing research in condensed matter
theory, presenting results through talks at conferences and the writing of peer-
reviewed publications and Master's theses. The award will contribute to the
development of a strong and solid Master's program that serves the community by
offering practical training and problem solving skills for those entering the
workforce and by being a bridge from the undergraduate degree to PhD programs
across the nation, one that is traditionally inclusive of groups of the
population that are underrepresented in materials research.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

The award supports research and education in theoretical and computational
condensed matter physics in a primarily undergraduate institution. The project
is devoted to the study of coexisting phases of matter at the nanoscale. The
purpose of the study is to better understand the behavior of electrons at these
scales when materials with different ground states are in contact. Understanding
at the fundamental level how phases mingle in a heterostructure will allow
harnessing the physical properties of these systems and offer avenues to develop
new electronic and spintronic devices, for example in the areas of sensors or
quantum computing.

This study will focus on nanostructures made of layers of different materials.
These hybrid nanostructures exhibit a variety of peculiar properties and phases.
Emphasis is placed on layered systems composed of alternating superconducting
thin films and thin films made of familiar magnetic materials. In
superconductors, electrons form an organized state of stable pairs that can
conduct electricity without loss. Electrons in the heterostructures can 'tunnel'
from one material through the other and are exposed to very different
interactions along the way. The goal of project is to describe how electrons
organize themselves in these different environments as they travel among the
layers.

The PI will also study novel heterostructures where the magnetic system is
replaced with recently discovered novel materials. For example, the PI will
incorporate graphene multilayers and nanoribbons, and topological insulators
into the structure. These systems have rather different properties and
electronic organization, and the PI aims to understand effects of these
different materials.

The award supports the PI's educational activities through the training of
Master's and undergraduate students in performing research in condensed matter
theory, presenting results through talks at conferences and the writing of peer-
reviewed publications and Master's theses. The award will contribute to the
development of a strong and solid Master's program that serves the community by
offering practical training and problem solving skills for those entering the
workforce and by being a bridge from the undergraduate degree to PhD programs
across the nation, one that is traditionally inclusive of groups of the
population that are underrepresented in physics.