* 1309658
* EAGER: Localization in Ad-Hoc Wireless Networks: Investigation into Fusing Dempster-Shafer Theory and Support Vector Machines
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Vijaya Kumar Devabhaktuni, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 01/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

Objective: The objective of this project is to perform exploratory investigation
into accurate wireless node localization for wireless as hoc networks in
realistic network environments, where signal obstruction due to multipath or
shadowing is a major concern. To address such practical challenges, this project
explores a new and reliable localization technique that mathematically fuses
range estimates derived from Received Signal Strength (RSS) and Time Difference
Of Arrival (TDOA) measurements.

Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit lies in the design and implementation
of an efficient, hybrid algorithm integrating Dempster-Shafer theory with a
state-of-the-art machine-learning tool referred to as Support Vector Machine
(SVM). The hypothesis is that SVM-based signal propagation models will possibly
help improve the accuracy of range measurements. The proposal entails high-risk
as it is applied to real-time environments that are unpredictable and dynamic.
If successful, there will be a high-reward in terms of accurately mapping RSS
and TDOA signal information into distances, and offering precise node-position
with no hardware upgrades whatsoever.

Broader impacts: The broader impacts are reflected in several aspects. This
exploratory research will benefit US-based business enterprises that thrive on
wireless network applications, particularly in such strategic areas as emergency
services and wildlife habitat monitoring. The node localization challenge will
be investigated from an interdisciplinary perspective combining the fields of
Computer Science and Communications, Geomatics Engineering, and Applied
Mathematics. Finally, the proposed research will lead to (i) Creation of new
interdisciplinary graduate curriculum for students including minorities and
underrepresented groups and (ii) Promotion of interdisciplinary NSF research.