* 1309423
* Physics of Archaeal Viruses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Joseph Rudnick, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

Technical Summary

This award supports theoretical research and education with the aim to develop a
physical description of the unique features of the protein shells, or capsids,
of viruses that infect the archaea. These viruses are stable under environments
with extremes of temperature, salinity, and acidity as might be found in geysers
or oil wells. This makes them particularly important for understanding the
mechanisms of self-assembly, structural integrity, and even adaptability of
materials designed for use under such extreme conditions. Many archaeal viruses
have extraordinary capsids with negative Gauss curvature, rendering inapplicable
the existing structural classification of viruses. An important characteristic
of many archaeal virus capsids is that they consist of protein-lipid composites
that are unusually stable against large deformation, and under conditions of
extreme acidity or salt concentration.

The PIs will study these protein shells of viruses by utilizing methods from the
physics of surfaces with negative Gauss curvature, the physics of lipid
bilayers, the physics of composite materials, and electrostatics of molecules in
ionic solutions. Their work will result in a theory capable of explaining the
physical mechanisms responsible for the "pleomorphism" exhibited uniquely by
archaeal viruses. These developments may provide fascinating realizations of the
long-standing problem of the statistical mechanics of the melting and shape
fluctuations of two-dimensional freely suspended layers.

This interdisciplinary research project will provide training to new physical
scientists interested in working on a new area of biological physics, and
continued support for scientific outreach activities that include the
maintenance of an open source software package for continuum modeling of viruses
and other structures in soft matter biophysics, visits to local K-12 schools,
and recruitment of undergraduate and high school students for undergraduate
research. It will contribute to development of innovative educational activities
in biological physics, in particular activities that create interaction between
the physical sciences and engineering.

Nontechnical Summary

Many of the single-celled microorganisms of the archaea kingdom are found in
severe environments such as hot-spring geysers, oil wells, or even beneath the
bottom of the oceans. Under these extreme conditions the very physical and
chemical interactions that hold molecules together are dramatically changed, so
much so that the study of archea has caused speculation about the possible
properties of extraterrestrial life. Despite their unparalleled robustness in
such harsh environments, these organisms are susceptible to another biological
threat - archaeal viruses - which have evolved to hijack the protein-
synthesizing machinery of the cells they infect, and to self-assemble by means
of the same extreme physical and chemical interactions that hold archaea
together. This award will support research to understand how passive protein
building blocks of viruses are able to assemble automatically in nature into
closed shells called 'capsids,' like puzzles that can put themselves together.
The PIs will achieve this goal through combining mathematical methods for
describing the physics of soft biological materials and molecules with
mathematical techniques developed to analyze composite materials, as often used
in the design of strong and lightweight structures in aerospace, mechanical, and
civil engineering. This research has the promise of transforming the way to
design new synthetic materials and producing the know-how needed to create
robust and adaptive in extreme physical environments. The team of investigators
from physics and engineering will provide training to a new generation of
scientists interested in working in a new and highly interdisciplinary area of
biological physics. This award will provide support for scientific outreach
activities that include the maintenance and free availability of software
package for mathematical modeling of viruses and other soft biological
materials, visits to local K-12 schools, and recruitment of undergraduate and
high school students for undergraduate research. It will provide funds for
development of innovative teaching activities in biological physics, in
particular activities that create interaction between the physical sciences and
engineering.