* 1309137
* Growth and Predictive Modeling of InSb Nanopillars by Catalyst-Free Selective Area Epitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Diana Huffaker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 430,000.00

Technical Description: This project offers a new epitaxial growth approach for a
historically difficult material system, InSb. Indium antimonide has attractive
properties in several advanced technology applications such as mid-wavelength
infrared sensing, ultra-high-speed electronics and thermoelectrics, but it has
reached a plateau in evolution because of a lack of semi-insulating, lattice-
matched substrates, and generally complex epitaxial requirements. The approach
used in this project involves two innovative components to address the
limitations of traditional InSb epitaxy: catalyst-free semiconductor InSb
nanopillar epitaxy and multi-scale epitaxial modeling of nanopillar formation.
Efforts in growth involve control of three-dimensional growth, dopant
incorporation, defect formation, and surface passivation in catalyst-free InSb
nanopillars by selective-area epitaxy metal-organic chemical vapor deposition.
Epitaxial modeling is accomplished using first-principles electronic-structure
calculations and atomistic kinetic-Monte-Carlo simulation to correlate to
experimental results for a complete understanding of the detailed process of
InSb nanopillar self-assembly and inform future
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The broader impacts
of this project are addressed at several levels, including undergraduate and
graduate research experience and community outreach efforts to broaden
participation in nanotechnology. Graduate students act as mentors to
undergraduate students, providing valuable lab experience and exposure to
scientific research, and in turn gain leadership and management skills. The
dual-department collaboration (mathematics and electrical engineering) at UCLA
will help build stronger relationships between theorists and experimentalists to
improve our understanding of nanopillar self-assembly and lead to future
projects. The resulting technology of this project will provide the foundation
for a new InSb nanomaterial platform where lateral dimensions and site-location
are controlled via lithography. These materials will potentially serve as
building blocks for mid-wavelength infrared/terahertz optoelectronic devices and
ultra-high-speed transistors.