* 1309573
* Low Probability of Detection Wireless Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Donald Towsley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 08/31/2016
* USD 374,724.00

The objective of this project is to establish the fundamental underpinnings of
low probability of detection (LPD) communication systems operating over
classical or quantum mechanical channels. This provides a transformative impact
in two ways: (1) establishing a new approach that transforms the largely dormant
(and socially compelling) area of LPD communications; (2) introducing and
developing the foundations of the LPD optical channel, which requires quantum
mechanical considerations.

Intellectual merit:

The intellectual merit is based on a fundamental approach to the LPD
communications problem that employs a broad array of tools to establish a new
branch in the large field of wireless communications security. This project will
also demonstrate the intellectual richness of the security problem that arises
when quantum mechanical considerations are considered in optical communications.
Tools from classical communications and networks, in particular information
theory, mix with tools from quantum information systems.

Broader impacts:

The broader impacts are focused on impacting society and education. The hiding
of the existence of transmissions while still communicating reliably has clear
application in both military and civilian societal contexts. The results of this
project will allow communicating parties and those whom attempt to detect them
to understand the fundamental limits on such communication and techniques to
achieve those limits. Finally, the project includes an integrated program of
educational engagement that utilizes the extensive resources of both UMass-
Amherst and BBN, with the latter contributing both theoretical expertise and
experimental facilities for quantum information processing that will provide a
unique opportunity for UMass students.