* 1309331
* Beyond wrinkles and creases: Generalized and tailored instabilities of polymer films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Ryan Hayward, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2016
* USD 336,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Recent experimental and theoretical progress on mechanical instabilities of
polymer surfaces has provided a good understanding of two fundamental modes of
instability: wrinkling, driven by buckling of a stiff film on a soft substrate,
and creasing, driven by buckling of the soft substrate itself. However, real
material systems found in biological and technological contexts often show a
diversity of behaviors that defy explanation based on these simple paradigms
alone, due to the greater complexity in terms of both geometry and material
properties when compared to the simple model systems that have been carefully
studied to date. This project seeks to advance understanding of polymer surface
instabilities by developing a comprehensive picture of the landscape of surface
buckling modes that occur in elastic bilayers, as parameterized by the mismatch
in thickness and stiffness between the two layers, as well as the level of
compression felt by each. Experiments will be carried out to quantitatively
characterize the onset and development of different instability modes, the
mechanisms of transitions between these different states, and the presence of
hysteresis and bistability upon cycles of loading and unloading. Comparisons
with finite element models will provide further insights into the driving forces
for each of these behaviors.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Buckling mechanics are central to a wide range of phenomena, ranging from the
development of functional structures in biology, to the operation of micro-
electromechanical devices in consumer electronics. This project seeks to provide
an integrated understanding of the interplay between two fundamental surface
buckling modes that are of key importance for polymeric materials. It will
provide model experimental systems that offer the potential to improve our
understanding of morphogenetic processes in biology and diseases such as asthma,
and will also open new routes to technologically applicable materials with
switchable properties such as adhesion and optical transparency. The project
will also provide mentoring and research opportunities for a diverse group of
participants including high school students and teachers, graduate students, and
undergraduates. Lasting partnerships with teachers and students from nearby
school districts that serve large populations of under-represented minority
students will be developed to aid in efforts to diversify the field.