* 1309490
* Nitride Compounds: Property Anomalies Near Structural Instabilities
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Daniel Gall, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 299,519.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project is developing a new type of material
consisting of a mixture of two different materials that are forced together.
Naturally these two materials would not mix; however, if mixed artificially, the
mixture exhibits unique properties because a small external stimulus can lead to
a large change in the material structure. The unique properties anticipated for
this material include a strong deformation when applying a voltage or a magnetic
field. For example such a material is useful for building a new type of
frequency filter, which would increase the data rate of mobile devices by ten to
hundred times. These new properties may facilitate a whole range of
transformative applications, including, for example, magnetically driven micro-
switches for biomedical implants, emergency valves in nuclear power plants that
operate without any external power source or communication pathway, tough and
resilient coatings that remain functional despite frequent temperature cycling
(for possible application in high-temperature fuel-efficient jet
engines).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project is developing an
understanding of structural instabilities in ternary nitrides ABN where AN and
BN form different equilibrium crystal structures. The key idea is that single-
phase solid solutions of such ternaries with an intermediate composition exhibit
a structural instability that leads to anomalous physical properties, including
a reversible plastic deformation or a diverging piezoelectric response. Ternary
nitride layers are deposited by reactive sputtering. Epitaxial constraints,
composition variations, and ion-surface interactions are used to control the
emerging phases, microstructure, texture, strain, and possible phase separation.
The structural instabilities of single-phase solid-solution ternary nitrides at
elevated temperature and pressure are studied to determine the structure-strain-
energy landscape, using in situ x-ray diffraction, Raman and infrared
spectroscopies. Emerging anomalous properties are measured and an understanding
of how the structural instability leads to a reversible plastic deformation, an
anisotropic effective Poisson's ratio, a divergence in the piezoelectric
response, a magneto-mechanical coupling, and a reversible stress-induced shear
transformation are developed. The project includes training of graduate and
undergraduate students in state-of-the-art materials synthesis and
characterization, as well as involvement in major outreach efforts to encourage
girls to consider a career in science and engineering.