* 1309765
* Atomistic Simulations of Nanoparticle Self-assembly: Ionic Solutions, Solvent Interfaces, and Electric Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Petr Kral, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 232,751.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports precise atomistic
modeling of materials self-assembled from colloidal nanoscale components
(nanoparticles, large molecules) in bulk solutions, at solution interfaces, and
in the presence of electric fields. In collaboration with several experimental
groups, the PI group will explore the exact conditions under which material
systems can self-assemble from different colloidal nanocomponents, characterize
the structure and properties of such self-assembled materials, and provide
guidance for their future experimental preparation. Of particular interest is to
prepare materials with active planar and spherical interfaces covered with
nanoparticles and bio-molecules, where their self-assembly processes and overall
activity can be controlled by pH, ionic strengths, and electric fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this work are:&lt;br/&gt;1) to
study how functionalized nanoparticles and small proteins self-assemble in
different solvents, at solvent interfaces, and in the presence of external
fields, &lt;br/&gt;2) to evaluate the structure and material properties of such
material self-assemblies, &lt;br/&gt;3) to decipher the rules which determine
the conditions, under which the systems arrange in different conformations and
phases, &lt;br/&gt;4) to closely correlate the experimental and computational
studies, and guide the experimental studies to explore possible applications of
the materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is to use large scale atomistic
molecular dynamics simulations, parameterized by quantum ab-initio codes, to
address the proposed objectives in materials formed by self-assembled nanoscale
components. The simulations will be performed with the goal to collect
atomically precise data about the studied systems, rigorously analyze the data,
and disclose the necessary information from them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
graduate and undergraduate students will be actively engaged in these studies.
They will write the codes, runs the simulations, analyze the data, visualize the
obtained structures, and prepare the material for publications, presentations,
and proposals for computation resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research in the area of advanced materials formed by self-assembly of nanoscale
components of inorganic and biological origins. The research will provide
fundamental understanding and predictive modeling of the self-assembly process
in three types of material systems: (a) colloidal nanoparticles at the
interfaces of ionic solutions in electric fields, (b) hybrids of nanoparticles
with proteins in ionic solutions, and (c) biologically-inspired non-spherical
colloidal nanoparticles. The main aim of this research is to understand the
conditions under which these systems form, guide experimentalists in their
preparation and optimization, and examine the possible use of these systems in
various industrial, energy, and biomedical applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational objectives are: 1) to prepare the next
generation of professionals in nanoscience by direct teaching and research
experience for graduate students, undergrads and high school teachers, 2) to
promote access to science and technology to underrepresented groups of students
by reaching women students at all levels through the WISE (Women in Science and
Engineering) program at UIC, which includes the WISE Wing inhabitants and the
K-12 teachers and students in the WIN (Women in Nanotechnology) program with
Motorola and the US Department of Labor, and 3) to attract the general public to
nanoscience.