* 1309868
* Coupling Multifunctional Oxides to Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Charles Ahn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 660,000.00

Technical Description: A fundamental approach in materials science involves the
fabrication of new materials that couple properties in heterogeneous structures.
Transistors for logic devices use the transport of charge in a semiconductor to
process information. There are now alternate proposals to use the electron spin
to process information, both to reduce power consumption of and add
functionality (such as memory) to the transistor. Currently silicon and
germanium are widely used as a channel material because they transport charge
well, and these semiconductors also transport spin very efficiently. This
project focuses on coupling spin from a ferromagnetic oxide to germanium through
an insulating oxide barrier. This novel materials system is being developed
using atomic layer synthesis by molecular beam epitaxy to manipulate and control
spin tunneling into germanium through chemical and structural modifications of
the interfaces. Using atomic layer control, key aspects of the interfaces can be
manipulated to control spin coupling. These include chemical composition,
electric polarization, strain, atomic layer termination, and band offset. Both
the physical and electronic structures of each layer are characterized using a
combination of in- situ x-ray photoemission spectroscopy, synchrotron x-ray
diffraction, x-ray absorption spectroscopy, and transmission electron
microscopy. The fully epitaxial design enables the understanding of structural
properties governing the function of a promising spin-based device
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: New materials are
required to develop new electronic devices for computing applications. These new
materials are designed to either require less power or offer additional function
in microprocessors. The strategy of the project is to use the spin of an
electron as a bit of information rather than charge, as is currently done. The
project synthesizes new materials that manipulate electron spin by stacking thin
films together one atomic layer at a time. The positions of the atoms are
determined using x-ray facilities at the National Laboratories. As part of this
work, students and young technicians will be trained in state of the art
semiconductor technology, preparing them for careers in the semiconductor
industries.