* 1309786
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Causes and consequences of biodiversity in coffee agriculture
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2014
* David Gonthier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2014
* USD 16,965.00

Although it is well established that species diversity affects the function of
ecological systems, more research is needed to understand the mechanisms
responsible for these effects and thus how to conserve ecological function
through the management of biodiversity. This project will use laboratory
experiments to investigate how the diversities of carnivores and herbivores
interact to determine amount of herbivory, and how mutualisms between carnivores
and herbivores can modify both predation and herbivory. Researchers will
manipulate diversities of insects that eat coffee plants in southern Mexico and
diversities of insects that eat them, including diversity of insect-eating ants
and presence of a coffee-eating bug that ants tend for its sugary secretion. The
project will test the hypotheses that diverse assemblages of herbivores are
better controlled by more diverse assemblages of predators whereas only a low
diversity of predators is needed to control a low diversity of herbivores, and
that mutualisms between carnivores and herbivores can reduce the function of
carnivore diversity as a control on herbivory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have important broader impacts on agriculture and strengthen international
collaboration and the scientific workforce. Because coffee is a major crop and
the project uses combinations of herbivores and predators actually found in
coffee plantations, results will have immediate applications to crop production.
The work builds upon a well-developed collaboration between U.S. and Mexican
researchers and coffee growers. Research will help train a Ph.D. student,
undergraduates, and local research assistants. Public dissemination of findings
is planned through a display at the University of Michigan?s Botanical Gardens
and talks at coffee plantations.