* 1309694
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Justin Havird, Havird                  Justin         C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Justin Havird of Auburn University to conduct a research
project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at The University of
the Ryukyus in Okinawa, Japan. The project title is "Molecular Mechanisms of
Salt Balance in Unusual Japanese Shrimps." The host scientists are Drs.
Yoshihisa Fujita and Michio Hidaka.

The molecular mechanisms of ionic/salt regulation in crustaceans (i.e.,
osmoregulation) have only been characterized for a narrow range of species,
mainly decapod crabs with a marine ancestry. Atyid shrimps from anchialine
habitats (coastal ponds and pools) represent an opportunity to address this lack
of knowledge since they have a decisively freshwater ancestry but have adapted
to live in these "extreme" environments characterized by drastically fluctuating
salinities. Previous research found that the Hawaiian endemic atyid Halocaridina
rubra has atypical patterns of gene expression following salinity transfer.
Specifically, genes typically and dramatically up-regulated (~100 fold) during
salinity transfer in other crustaceans do not change significantly in H. rubra.
However, no published studies have examined the molecular mechanisms of
osmoregulation or functional evolution of anchialine shrimp species. To examine
this in an evolutionary context, the molecular mechanisms of osmoregulation from
additional anchialine shrimp species from the Ryukyus Islands, Japan are being
investigated using high-throughput measures of gene expression (RNA-Seq). These
shrimp species represent independent invasions of anchialine habitats (from both
freshwater and marine environments) and characterizing their mechanisms of
osmoregulation will thus further our limited understanding of the molecular
basis of euryhalinity and address convergent evolution in response to similar
natural selection pressures. This project illuminates the evolution of
osmoregulation, a critical biological process for all living organisms.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, undergraduates from underrepresented groups
in the sciences are being trained and mentored during this project.
Additionally, this project is fostering research collaborations between
scientists at Auburn University and Oregon State University in conjunction with
a recent NSF Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant (DEB 1311500) to the
Fellow. The experiences gained from this EAPSI fellowship will be presented to
students at Auburn University in an attempt to raise local awareness about
international research collaborations in general and the opportunities
associated with an EAPSI fellowship specifically. Lastly, anchialine habitats
and organisms are being used to engage K-12 students in a variety of biological
concepts, building on a current anchialine module in the outreach program
Alabama Science in Motion.