* 1309725
* US-German Collaboration: Circuit models of form processing in primate V4
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Anitha Pasupathy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 691,465.00

This collaborative study aims to advance the understanding of visual object
recognition by combining electrophysiology, computational, modeling and
psychophysics to probe the implications of newly discovered properties of
neurons in visual cortical area V4, an important intermediate stage in the shape
processing pathway of the brain.

V4 neurons respond selectively to a variety of shape attributes, but recent
studies demonstrate that they are also selective for the contrast polarity of
stimuli and can be broadly classified into four categories based on their
preference for the luminance contrast of shapes relative to a uniform
background. Specifically, Equiluminance cells respond best to stimuli defined
purely by a chromatic contrast with no luminance contrast while Bright, Dark and
Contrast cells respond best to positive contrasts, negative contrasts or either,
respectively. Because these categories are based on simple stimuli, it remains
unknown how these cells respond to more naturalistic stimuli, where boundaries
are seldom defined by a fixed luminance contrast, and whether the different cell
classes have different functional roles for encoding objects. Characterizing V4
neurons with a parameterized set of naturalistic stimuli that are developed with
rigorous psychophysical testing will provide novel insights into underlying
circuitry and function and open new understanding about V4 and the ventral
stream.

Computational models of visual form processing in the brain have also been
limited: they have not taken account of realistic physiological cell types known
to exist from the retina to the visual cortex, they have been largely aimed at
processing achromatic signals, and have relied heavily on feedfoward processing.
This study will generate models that overcome these limitations and are
invaluable for gaining insights into the circuits and mechanisms underlying form
processing. These models will be available in an open, online framework designed
to set a standard for ease of use and transparency, to spur further
collaboration between theoreticians and experimentalists, and to facilitate
education.

Finally, there has been a longstanding debate in vision science, motivated from
the psychophysical literature, that questions whether and how chromatic signals
contribute to form processing. The traditional view has been that boundary
detection and segmentation are solely based on luminance contrast. Color then
paints a surface within the confines of the identified boundary. Recent
psychophysical and theoretical studies are at odds with this view and argue that
color is important for segmentation and form processing in natural scenes, for
example, fruit amidst leaves, where detection based on luminance contrast is
very difficult. The experiments in this study will inject much needed physiology
data into this debate and the models developed here will shed light on the
functional organization of cortical pathways at multiple stages, revealing how
different aspects of our natural visual input contribute to form perception.

This award is being co-funded by NSF's Office of the Director, International
Science and Engineering. A companion project is being funded by the German
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).