* 1309540
* Scanned-probe characterization of degradation and charge generation in organic semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* John Marohn, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 07/31/2016
* USD 417,000.00

Prof. John Marohn and his research team examine two performance-determining
processes in organic semiconductors by using electric force microscopy to
acquire time-resolved and wavelength-resolved images of surface potential and
capacitance. In the first study, the research team fabricates organic thin-film
transistors (from a series of n-channel organic semiconductor molecules using
different materials for the transistor's dielectric layer) and uses time-
resolved, spatially resolved, and wavelength-resolved measurements of the rate
of charge trap formation and decay to reveal charge-trapping mechanisms and,
potentially, the internal electronic energy levels of the charge-trapping
species. In a second study, these researchers prepare solar-cell films (by
spinning polymer blends and polymer:molecule blends onto substrates with
patterned electrodes having varying, well controlled work functions) and study
local charge generation kinetics in these films as a function of spatial
position and illumination wavelength to obtain a better microscopic
understanding of the dependence of charge generation efficiency on background
charge density in organic solar cell films.

Energy plays a central role in the U.S. economy. For environmental and security
reasons, it is expected that solar power generation will become a crucially
important component of the U.S. energy portfolio of the future. It remains a
challenge to devise a solar cell that can be manufactured in sufficiently large
quantities at reasonable cost. Since plastics can already be made in large
quantities, it makes sense to understand how to make better solar cells from
plastics. In order to accelerate the manufacturing of improved plastic solar
cells, this research investigates the details of two key processes - how plastic
solar-cell materials degrade under operation and how they turn light into
electricity. The students and postdoctoral scientist mentored during the course
of this research are needed for the U.S. to retain and improve its lead in the
nanotechnology-based energy-generation and energy-storage industries.