* 1309172
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Joseph Bahlman, Bahlman                 Joseph         W
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2016
* USD 209,000.00

Mechanics of hummingbird flight: upstroke vs downstroke performance

In flapping flight, a wingbeat is divided into two motions, an upstroke and a
downstroke. The two motions are powered by separate muscles, and contribute
different amounts of aerodynamic force to the total force. Hummingbirds are able
to modulate the total aerodynamic force they produce to perform different flight
behaviors. Previous work studying how hummingbirds modulate force examined only
kinematic parameters that describe the entire wingbeat, but not parameters that
describe the separate motions and contributions of the upstroke and downstroke.
The goal of this study is to use a combination of direct force, kinematic, and
muscle activity measurements to determine how the upstroke and downstroke are
differentially controlled to modulate aerodynamic force production. The
experiments will be repeated on multiple species with various wing morphologies
to determine how wing morphology affects differential stroke usage and overall
force production.

The fellow will be trained in husbandry of hummingbirds, muscle physiology
techniques, biomechanical fieldwork, and phylogenetic analysis. Broader Impacts
of the research include developing a new method for directly measuring whole
body forces on a flying animal, and providing results that can help inform the
programming of micro air vehicles. As part of the proposed work, the fellow will
work with the Special Populations and Programs coordinator at the host
university to develop workshops that help underrepresented students prepare for
the graduate school application process. The fellow will also work with the
local biodiversity museum to develop a public lecture and exhibit on flight.