* 1309998
* Spectral Methods for Contextualizing relational data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Karl Rohe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

Networks (or graphs) can represent the relationships in complex systems with
myriad interacting elements. Two primary examples are social networks that
represents the set of friendships in a group of people and biological networks
that represent the functional relationships between proteins in a living cell.
Many substantive questions can be phrased as questions of (a) the network
structure and (b) supplementary measurements on the actors and their
relationships. This project will provide a statistical framework to
simultaneously analyze relational (i.e. network) data and its contextualizing
measurements. The primary objective is to study the joint variability between
the relational data and covariate measurements on the actors in the network. A
secondary objective is to begin studying the joint variability among a sample of
networks on the same set of actors. In both objectives, this project will (1)
propose a general nonparametric model and a set of simple parametric models, (2)
devise fast spectral estimators, and (3) provide estimation theory that examines
the statistical performance of the spectral estimators under the nonparametric
and parametric models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the age of big data, data sets
are both larger and more complex, often coming from measurements on complex
systems with myriad interacting elements; social and biological networks can
represent the relationships in complex systems and these substantive questions
are, in essence, questions regarding networks. The biological networks in the
ENCODE research are an example. Moreover, the relationships in complex systems
are often measured with a rich set of supplemental information on the actors and
their relationships. This research program will provide a statistical framework,
including models, algorithms, and theory, to study the supplemental information
in tandem with the network, thereby contextualizing the network and the
relationships.