* 1309701
* Foundations for Trapped Molecular Ion Parity-Violation Studies
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Brian Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 35,000.00

This project develops techniques which enable measurement of mirror-symmetry
violation, using molecular ions held for long periods of time, nearly at rest,
and well isolated from their environment in linear radiofrequency traps. The
major challenges to be overcome are development of capabilities to control and
non-destructively read out the rotational quantum state of a single trapped
molecular ion. Although molecules require extra care in control and readout as
compared with atoms, the principle advantage is that opposite-parity rotational
levels are intrinsically nearby in energy and thereby more substantially mixed
by the weak force than are electronic levels of typical atoms. Nuclear spin-
dependent parity violation is important for understanding purely hadronic weak
interactions of the Standard Model, and they provide a special low-energy
approach for searching for new physics at TeV energy scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is motivated by nuclear spin-dependent parity-
violation investigations, but other important applications of improved precision
molecular spectroscopy include measurements of time-variation of the electron-
proton mass ratio, study of parity violation in the structure of chiral
molecules, and discovery of an electron electric dipole moment. Furthermore, the
ingredients for single molecular ion spectroscopy, internal and external quantum
state control and state readout developed here, could be essential elements for
molecular-ion quantum information processing applications and for studies of
low-temperature chemical reactions. The spectroscopic techniques being developed
in this proposal have potential to impact other areas of science as diverse as
atmospheric and astrophysical spectroscopy -- where there is great interest in
developing improved methods and tools for molecular rotational and vibrational
spectroscopy in the so-called molecular "fingerprint" region of the
electromagnetic spectrum. A strong program of undergraduate and graduate
education and training is maintained by the research. The current group of
students in the lab is diverse and includes underrepresented minorities.