* 1309892
* Dynamical Coupling Between Particles and Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Rubinstein, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research on the motion of nanoparticles in a polymer matrix. The
mean square displacement of microscopic particles larger than polymer chains
provides information about rheological properties of the surrounding matrix.
However, structure and dynamics of complex polymeric materials on sub-molecular
length scales as well as microscopic details of polymer-particle interactions
are poorly understood. The PI will analyze the motion of nanoparticles smaller
than the surrounding polymer chains. Particularly interesting is the coupling of
the nanoparticle dynamics to dynamical modes of matrix polymer chains on length
scales equal to or smaller than the particle size and to modes of chains
adsorbed or grafted to the particle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theory of the
dynamical coupling between nanoparticles and a polymer matrix will be
systematically developed starting from a model of non-sticky particles freely
diffusing in polymer networks and gels. Mobility of these trace particles is
highly sensitive to the relation between their dimensions and the diameter of
the confining tube of the entangled matrix chains. Upon uniaxial and biaxial
deformation of polymer networks and gels, the corresponding change of the tube
diameter causes anisotropic diffusion of tracer nanoparticles. A method for
characterization of the non-affine deformation of the confining tube by
measuring the anisotropy of nanoparticle mobility will be developed and tested
by computer simulations. The developed models will also enable quantitative
analysis of translational and rotational diffusion of non-spherical
nanoparticles, such as nanorods with diameter smaller than the mesh size of
polymer gels and length longer than this mesh size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
model will be extended to the case of sticky nanoparticles that exhibit hindered
diffusion through polymeric liquids or solids due to chains attached to these
particles. The time dependence of the mean square displacement of the sticky
particles will reflect both dynamics of attached chains as well as of the
surrounding polymer matrix. The proposed theory will allow separation of both
contributions and determination of the structure and dynamics of the polymer
layer adsorbed on nanoparticles. This theory will be modified to treat the
finite lifetime of the bonds between particles and adsorbed polymers and the
lifetime of labile bonds in reversible networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory
of mobility of sticky particles will be extended to treat heterogeneous medium
with a distribution of local sticky regions using an activated hopping model. A
general solution of this model will be obtained to allow the derivation of the
distribution of attraction strengths of different sticky regions from the
analysis of particle trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as well
as postdoctoral fellows in analytical and numerical techniques for soft
materials. Some of the results of this research will be used in the development
of new problem sets and supplementary materials for the PIs textbook "Polymer
Physics." The project will also be used as a tool for engage the interest of
high school students in modern scientific methods by engaging them in active
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research to study nanoparticles,
particles some 100,000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair, moving
within a material made up of a tangle of long chain-like molecules called
polymers. Understanding the mechanisms by which the nanoparticles move provides
useful information about the properties of materials made of polymers. The PI
will develop a theory that can handle nanoparticles of different sized and
shape, as well as kind, including nanoparticles with smooth surfaces and
nanoparticles that have polymers attached to them which tend to make them
"sticky" as they interact with the polymers that make up the material. This
research will has impact on technological applications, such as optimizing
composite materials and designing nanoparticles for drug delivery applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral fellows in
analytical and numerical techniques for soft materials. Some of the results of
this research will be used in the development of new problem sets and
supplementary materials for the PI's textbook "Polymer Physics." The project
will also be used as a tool for engage the interest of high school students in
modern scientific methods by engaging them in active research.