* 1309531
* Physics of Non-Fermi Liquid Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Qimiao Si, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education in strongly correlated
electron systems, with a particular focus on quantum criticality in heavy-
fermion metals. Electronic properties in conventional solid-state materials are
well described by a theory of weakly interacting electrons. However, there are
many materials in which electron correlations are important, which give rise to
such striking phenomena as high temperature superconductivity and "heavy"
electrons with a proton-scale effective mass. In recent years, there is a
growing realization that quantum criticality plays an important role in these
materials. Heavy-fermion metals represent prototype systems in this context.

The PI will investigate the notion that quantum criticality tends to nucleate
new phases. Several specific issues will be explored:

First, the PI plans to investigate the various magnetic phases in a recently
proposed global phase diagram, and to study the nature of superconductivity near
Kondo-destruction quantum critical points where Fermi surfaces undergo large
fluctuations.

Second, the PI intends to go beyond recent work in topological insulators
primarily focused on non-interacting systems, to explore the viability of heavy
fermions as a setting in which interaction effects can be manifest in
topological phases.

Third, the PI will investigate recent experiments on an iridium-based pyrochlore
heavy fermion metal to understand the origin of the observed large anomalous
Hall effect.

Fourth, in order to elucidate novel excitations near quantum critical points in
broader settings, the PI will explore several low-dimensional systems to study
the dynamical properties that are influenced by quantum criticality.

Through the proposed research, the PI will engage postdoctoral fellows, graduate
students and undergraduate students. The PI will also collaborate with
international groups as appropriate, which enrich the research environment of
students and junior scientists in the US. Finally, while the proposed research
is at the fundamental level, it will contribute to the understanding of advanced
materials relevant to future technologies.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education in correlated electron
systems. In materials such as the rare-earth-based "heavy-fermion" systems,
electrons strongly interact with each other, leading to electronic properties
that are highly unusual. A particular focus here is on quantum criticality, the
collective behavior of matter undergoing a phase transition at the absolute zero
of temperature. Such phase transitions represent the quantum analogue of the
familiar phase transitions in daily life, such as water freezing into ice or
evaporating into steam. Theoretical methods will be developed to study how
quantum criticality gives rise to novel electronic states such as
superconductivity, in which electricity flows without experiencing any
resistance. Also to be studied is the interplay between magnetism and quantum-
mechanical states of the electrons that involve an unusual topology. Finally,
novel dynamical properties in quantum critical systems at low dimensions will be
explored. The proposed research will engage not only junior scientists but also
graduate and undergraduate students. The research will contribute to the
understanding of modern electronic materials that may be important for future
technologies.