* 1309738
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Adam Mueller, Mueller                 Adam           L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Adam Mueller of Western Michigan University to conduct a
research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Harbin Institute of
Technology in Harbin, Heilongjiang, China. The project title is "Evaluation of
Collaborative Tools for Economical Structural Seismic Simulation." The host
scientist is Dr. Bin Wu.

The proposed research consists of geographically distributed hybrid simulations,
in which a prototype structure is separated into substructures that are tested
or simulated in different geographic locations. This particular research project
utilizes numerical and physical substructures at Harbin Institute of Technology
in China and Western Michigan University in the US. Two collaborative tools,
namely Multi-Site Substructure Pseudo-Dynamic Simulation Coordinator (UI-SimCor)
and Networked Structural Laboratories (NetSLab), that were developed in the US
and China respectively to coordinate such distributed hybrid simulation, are
implemented in this project. This project evaluates structural seismic responses
obtained from geographically distributed hybrid simulations and demonstrates the
effectiveness and reliability of this economical seismic simulation method. In
addition, the functionality and compatibility of the two software frameworks are
studied through implementation, and recommendations of using these two
frameworks for future hybrid simulations are made.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the knowledge gained through the research is
applied to a wide-ranging audience. The Fellow will incorporate new
understanding of distributed hybrid simulation into graduate level education in
structural dynamics at Western Michigan University. In addition, the Laboratory
of Earthquake and Structural Simulation (LESS) at Western Michigan University
participates in educational outreach to local middle school and high school
students. The Fellow will integrate his newfound knowledge into these outreach
activities to further promote earthquake engineering education.