* 1309402
* Collaborative Research:  Interaction between Spherical Particles and Biomembranes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Michael Dennin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2016
* USD 280,000.00

The Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research funds the
collaborative efforts of researchers at University of California Irvine and
University of California Los Angeles to study how nanoparticles cross the
surfactant-decorated air-water barrier within the lungs. This project is
cofunded by the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology program in the Division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation. To understand this transport of
nanoparticles within the lung, the researchers plan to address the fundamental
physics governing the interaction of small particles and monolayers, which in
turn has broader implications for their interaction with biological membranes.
The main focus of this study will be to understand the role of monolayer
dynamics, e.g., the compression and expansion of the lung during breathing, and
on particulate transport through the monolayer. This experimental approach would
be developing a new experimental model combining dynamic Langmuir monolayer
techniques 'expanding and compressing of a surfactant layer' with cellular
culture models used in traditional static studies of the lung. In addition, new
theories for nonequilibrium monolayer structure and dynamics, e.g. folding, will
be developed as part of this project. The proposed teaching and training include
interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students in materials
research, physics and biology, and they will be participating in the design and
development of the new experimental and theoretical studies, and close
collaboration with researchers at UCLA Center for Biological
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of nano- and micron-scale
particles with the air-water barrier in the lung has significant health impacts,
some positive and some negative. On the negative side, small particles making up
part of air pollution have a negative impact on health when they enter the
bloodstream through the lung. On the positive side, a better understanding of
how particles cross the lung barrier into the blood stream will allow for the
creation of new aerosolized drugs that could be delivered without injections
providing a range of health benefits. For example, this provides great benefit
to diabetics and others who otherwise require frequent injections. To better
understand how particles cross the lung barrier, one needs a model system that
incorporates the compression and expansion of the lung that occurs during
breathing. This award will support the work necessary to develop such an
experimental system and to understand theoretically how particles cross the lung
barrier. The research also provides for the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in the interdisciplinary techniques at the boundaries of
physics and biology, which is necessary for the next generation of researchers,
and development of the scientific work force of the future.