* 1309642
* SusChEM: Synthesis and Characterization of Pyrite Thin Films - Towards Sustainable Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Christopher Leighton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Technical Description: Understanding and controlling doping in pyrite iron
disulfide films is a major challenge that would have significant impact towards
realization of a sustainable, inexpensive, high-efficiency thin-film solar cell
technology. To this end, the overarching goal of this research project is to
understand and control the electronic properties of thin iron disulfide films to
such an extent that fabrication of homojunction p-n solar cells is enabled. In
addition to understanding electronic transport mechanisms, the research
activities focus on establishing control over the charge carrier type and
density by executing a detailed and systematic examination of the influence of
sulfur stoichiometry and substitutional doping on the electronic properties of
iron disulfide. The research team uses reactive sputtering and ex-situ
sulfidation of iron films, as well as single crystal growth, to synthesize iron
disulfide. The systematic research of film and crystal synthesis is accompanied
by a battery of complementary characterization techniques designed to provide
feedback and guidance on the effects of synthesis conditions on film properties
and, in particular, on carrier densities and
mobilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Achieving
sustainable solar-to-electric energy conversion with solar cells made from
inexpensive, abundant and non-toxic materials is one of the most challenging
problems of the twenty-first century. While the materials dominating the current
solar cell market each offer unique advantages, none are able to satisfy all of
these requirements. Pyrite structure iron disulfide has been acknowledged as a
sustainable material with great potential to satisfy these criteria, replacing
critical materials used in the current technologies. However, control over the
electronic properties of this material, which is required for efficient solar
cells, has not yet been achieved. This research project aims to utilize multiple
synthesis and processing strategies to achieve unprecedented control over the
electronic properties in iron disulfide. This research is integrated into
outreach and educational activities through interactions with the Science Museum
of Minnesota, via mentoring of undergraduate students, particularly those from
under-represented groups, via mentoring of high school teachers for developing
science content for their classrooms, and through creation and delivery of an
interactive presentation on Sustainable Materials and Chemistry designed to
augment the science curriculum in the eighth grade Minneapolis Public Schools
system.