* 1309734
* Spin-Photon Interface with Microcavities Coupled to Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Anthony Vamivakas, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 05/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;An approach to implement novel quantum
photonics devices is to exploit the three-dimensional quantum confinement of
electron and holes in an epitaxial semiconductor quantum dot. Such artificial
atoms confine spins, interact efficiently with light, and can be integrated with
functional structures such as optical microcavities to dictate the electronic
states and photonic density of states. In this project the combination of
quantum confinement and heterostructure functionality will create an ultra-
tunable nano-lab, useful for investigating single and multiple particle physics
and spin-cavity quantum electrodynamics. In the last decade, remarkable progress
in this domain has been made with quantum dots interacting with visible light.
Nonetheless, microcavities working at telecom wavelengths exhibit much higher
performances enabling the use of spin-driven light-matter interactions to build
integrated quantum photonics devices. Through this award a graduate student will
be supported and trained in advanced techniques of nanoscience and solid state
physics. The expertise acquired by the student through this project will provide
excellent training for either a career in academia or in an advanced technology
sector of the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The realization of semiconductor devices that harness
quantum mechanics for their core operation has provided the foundation for a
number of extraordinary advances in physics and technology. Attempts to apply
quantum optics, the quantum theory of light, to manmade ultrapure semiconductor
crystals have recently attracted considerable attention. The main motivation is
to exploit nanoscience and mature semiconductor technology to integrate
optoelectronic devices exhibiting quantum-enhanced performance at telecom
wavelengths. This award initiates research that will integrate quantum dots,
designer artificial atoms, with nanophotonics structures such as microcavities
on a single crystal. This project will lead to new insights into materials
science, solid-state physics, and spin-driven light-matter interaction as well
as explore optoelectronic devices leveraging the unique features of quantum
mechanics. A graduate student will be supported through this award and trained
in advanced techniques of nanoscience and condensed matter physics. The
expertise acquired by the student through this project will provide excellent
training for either a career in academia or in an advanced technology sector of
the economy.