* 1309849
* Defect and Surfactant Mediated Growth of High Quality Single Crystal Metallic Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Robert Cammarata, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 12/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Defect mediated growth (DMG) and surfactant
mediated growth (SMG) are novel electrochemical deposition methods of producing
extremely high-quality epitaxial single-crystal metallic materials. DMG involves
reversibly co-depositing with the metal that is to become the epitaxial
overlayer a mediator metal. This mediator (e.g., Pb) is repeatedly deposited as
a submonolayer on the film surface and then completely stripped by the cycling
of the electrochemical potential as the film is grown. Each cycle creates new
nuclei on the surface of the growing film, adding to the surface clusters that
developed on previous cycles. A high density of two-dimensional clusters can be
maintained by appropriately choosing the deposition flux and cycling frequency,
resulting in a monolayer of the film material being completed when the two-
dimensional clusters eventually coalesce. In this manner, two-dimensional rather
than three-dimensional film growth is obtained. SMG uses up to a monolayer of
the mediator metal acting as a surfactant that is continuously maintained at the
surface during deposition, resulting in two-dimensional growth. Using these
approaches, atomically flat single-crystal films (free of the mediator metal)
can be electrodeposited at ambient temperature, and the film quality is similar
to that obtained by molecular beam epitaxial growth for systems that often
display three-dimensional growth during ambient temperature deposition. Specific
systems to be studied include Cu on Au, Ni on Cu, and Cu, Ag, Ni, and Co on Si.
New features of this work will be the in situ monitoring of the thin film stress
generation in real time during DMG and SMG and correlating the stress behavior
with the morphological evolution. This of interest both scientifically and
technologically, as the stress behavior is associated with microstructural
features of growth, and it is important to characterize the stress if DMG and
SMG-produced systems are to be used in technological applications (e.g., Cu on
Si for interconnects). Real-time monitoring of the stress will also be used to
optimize growth conditions and to monitor film quality during
deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
produce high-quality single-crystal materials for thin film applications (e.g.,
microelectronics) is critical for maintaining and advancing many important
technologies. Defect and surface mediated electrochemical growth are recently
developed methods of producing such materials in an inexpensive manner and are
processes that can be incorporated into existing and next-generation
technologies. The research will investigate synthesizing material systems of
both scientific and industrial importance and includes real-time stress
monitoring for quality characterization and control. This will be the first time
stress measurements will be employed during these synthesis methods and will
greatly enhance the potential of converting them into technologically viable
processes. This work will be conducted in collaboration with researchers at
Arizona State University (ASU) and at IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center.
Outreach activities associated with this project include engaging middle-school
students in science-technology-engineering-mathematics (STEM) education through
field trips, mentoring, and hands-on modules. The students will be from the
Baltimore City Public Schools who are both underrepresented and underserved in
STEM education.