* 1309247
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Virginia Burger, Burger                  Virginia       M
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2015
* USD 138,000.00

Order within disorder: Understanding the conformational landscape of
intrinsically disordered proteins

Proteins bind specific partners to perform functions such as building molecular
structures and transmitting molecular signals. Traditionally, proteins were
understood to have a stable structure, however, research in the last twenty
years has revealed that over one third of eukaryotic proteins contain long
unstructured regions. Such intrinsically disordered proteins transition among an
ensemble of conformations, a behavior responsible for their ability to bind
multiple partners, and leading to their enrichment in cellular pathways. In
certain classes of bacterial antitoxin proteins, transitions between extended
and compact conformations directly control stress response pathways. Using a
hybrid computational and experimental approach, the PI will determine the (1)
conformational ensemble of a specific antitoxin, (2) function of each
conformation, and (3) transition rates between the conformations. Mutations that
modify the antitoxin?s conformational ensemble affect interaction with other
macromolecules in the toxin-antitoxin regulatory network will be investigated.

This project will provide new understanding of stress response pathways in
bacteria and will yield novel methods for determining transient conformations of
intrinsically disordered proteins and their functions. The PI will obtain
training in experimental methods and expand her computational abilities.
Algorithms and results of this work will be placed on the web to facilitate and
advance future research in the field. Additionally, the PI will mentor a summer
high school student on a bioinformatics project examining disordered regions of
antitoxin proteins.