* 1309150
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Ryan Gelfand, Gelfand                 Ryan           M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

Development of an optical trap based fiber optic nanopipette for studying
single-virus single-cell interactions

In this project, a single particle aperture trap will be fabricated onto the end
of an optical fiber to provide optimal coupling to the trap and also to have a
robust, fully integrated device. Furthermore the optical fiber is portable, easy
to work with, has mature commercialized optical components and unlike optical
tweezers, it can be moved mechanically without disturbing the optical field and
releasing the trapped particle. Single virus entities will be trapped and
transported near a single cell, and the interactions between both particles will
be observed. The broad application of this technique will offer valuable insight
not only into the workings of different viruses with both human and bacterial
cells leading to advances in pharmaceuticals and genomics but also in the future
can be used to study protein cell interactions advancing the field of
proteomics.

This proposed research provides a new framework to optically trap a single virus
particle without the need for molecular tethers. This nondestructive technique
can be applied to other biomolecules such as proteins. The findings will be used
to further advance the understanding of the physics of biological interactions,
specifically between a virus and a cell, leading to future advances in disease
treatment. The results of this research will be incorporated into a course on
biophotonics taught to both undergraduate and graduate students to teach
students about basic optics and its application to emerging biological
applications.