* 1309809
* Problems in Distributed Sensing and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* A. Morse, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Current interest in distributed control has led to a very
rapid increase in the application of graph theoretic ideas to problems of
analyzing and synthesizing a variety of desired behaviors such as swarming,
rendezvousing, reaching a consensus, as well as well as a variety of sensing and
communication tasks associated with distributed averaging, search and rescue,
environmental monitoring, security, etc. While this in-depth assault on these
problems using a combination of graph theory and system theory has been underway
for about a decade, it is likely to signicantly expand in the years to come. One
line of research which illustrates the combined use of these concepts, is the
recent theoretical work by a number of individuals focused on the coordination
of networks of mobile robots and mobile sensors by means of rigidity-based
formation control. Another is the recent surge of interest in the deployment and
management of sensor networks of all types and in particular the development of
distributed computational procedures for addressing basic numerical problems
such as estimating parameters of a static linear system or solving a system of
algebraic equations. In broad terms these are these are the problem areas within
which we propose to work. In particular we propose to address distributed
sensing and control on two fronts, both requiring the use both of traditional
systems concepts and graph theory. First we propose to explore various
algorithms for controlling both directed and undirected rigid formations in a
distributed manner. We will address the question of robustness to measurement
errors and parameter discrepancies among agents and will attempt to find a way
to avoid the recently discovered fundamental robustness issue with undirected
formation control. In the area of distributed computation we will seek to
develop distributed and asynchronous algorithms for solving unstructured systems
of linear algebraic equations across a given network of autonomous agents
assuming limited communication between agents and time-varying coefficent
matrices. We will make use of recent advances in distributed optimization and
also work by ourselves and others with dealing with special versions of this
problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will advance
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning in
at least two different ways. First, graduate students involved in the project
will be expected to attend and present their results at technical meetings.
Second, project graduate students will contribute to and participate in a short
course on the topic which we envision organizing and giving towards the end of
the project. Two of the graduate students working on this project will be from
under represented groups. This project will enhance infrastructure for research
and education in at least two ways. First we expect to continue our cross-
disciplinary collaboration with our environmental biologist colleagues with whom
we've already been working for several years. Second, we expect to continue to
collaborate with our experimentalist colleagues at Yale who are building mobile
sensor network test beds for trying out various control algorithms. Much of our
research has been and will continue to be in close collaboration with an group
at Australian National University in Canberra. We will also continue our recent
collaboration with the faculty at the University of Illinois. We hope to
continue to contribute to broadening dissemination to enhance scientic and
technological understanding by organizing and running boni-fide
interdisciplinary technical gatherings like the Block Island Workshops on
Cooperative Control we co-organized and which took take place in June, 2003 and
again in June, 2009. We also expect to give overview talks on the subject such
as the plenary presentation "Multi-Agent Formations and Sensor Networks" which
we gave in December 2006 at the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control in San
Diego and the keynote talk on "Deterministic Distributed Averaging" which we
gave at the Chinese Control and Decision Conference in Mianyang, China in May
2011. Finally we are scheduled to give a 21 hour short course in May 2013 on
Distributed Control at the EECI-HYCON2 Graduate School on Control in France. We
gave a similar course at the same place last May.