* 1309787
* Protein-based Materials with Tunable Adhesive and Mechanical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Jonathan Wilker, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1309787 PI: Liu, Julie ORG: Purdue University

Title: Protein-based Materials with Tunable Adhesive and Mechanical Properties

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Major, invasive surgical procedures introduce tissue damage
from the use of sutures and staples. Designing effective surgical glues will be
transformative owing to decreased tissue damage that occurs from these
traditional joinery methods. At this time, however, there are no suitable
materials that fulfill all of the major criteria for an effective surgical
adhesive of soft tissues: (1) set in a wet environment, (2) create strong bonds,
(3) be biocompatible, and (4) be flexible to match the stiffness of soft tissues
being bonded together. This proposal will develop new biomaterials that combine
the adhesive properties of mussel adhesive proteins, which mussels use to
strongly bind themselves to surfaces, and the flexible properties of the protein
elastin, which contributes to the ability of blood vessels to withstand the
mechanical demands of pulsatile flow. These studies will establish the material
design parameters that modulate the adhesive and mechanical properties of the
proposed biomaterials, thus allowing us to tailor the material for several
procedures in which surgical adhesives are needed. The specific objectives are
to: (1) Develop a family of recombinant proteins with both adhesive and flexible
regions, (2) Establish the relationship between protein design and the adhesive
and elastomeric properties, and (3) Evaluate the potential of the proposed
biomaterials in biological applications. As a result of this work, we expect to
develop novel materials and demonstrate the potential for a soft tissue surgical
adhesive.

BROADER IMPACTS: By providing an alternative to sutures and staples, the
proposed biomaterials will improve clinical outcomes for patients undergoing
invasive surgeries. Moreover, the biomaterials may have other clinical
applications such as implant coatings and tissue-engineered matrices. The
proposed research will serve to provide the basis for training and mentoring of
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. Both investigators are
committed to motivate and encourage females and underrepresented minorities to
become engineers, as evidenced by past and future activities. Specifically, the
PI will continue collaborating with the Purdue Women in Engineering Program and
develop a laboratory module to engage K-12 female students with the concept of
developing and evaluating adhesive materials. The co-PI will continue general
public outreach efforts with media presentations. In addition, this proposal
will support the active participation of community college students in research.
Finally, we will disseminate the research results through published journal
articles, presentation at national conferences, and inclusion in classroom
material.