* 1309731
* Spectroscopy, Structure, and Reactivity on Electrode Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrew Gewirth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

Professor Andrew A. Gewirth and his students at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign are supported by the Chemical Measurements &amp; Imaging (CMI)
Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop new tools to examine the
reactivity associated with different types of electrode processes. Featured in
this work is the use of advanced Raman and electrochemical surface stress
measurements to interrogate electrode composition and reactivity during
electrocatalytic events. The processes slated for investigation include the
catalysis of nitrate reduction on bare and bimetallic electrode surfaces, carbon
dioxide reduction on modified surfaces, especially those involving Ag, and the
oxygen evolution reaction. The group also plans to investigate hydrocarbon
oxidation catalysis using non-stoichiometric oxides.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrocatalysts are substances that promote
electrochemical reactions so that they occur more quickly, efficiently or under
milder conditions. Electrochemical reactions are those that proceed with
electron transfer, such as the burning of fuel and the plating of metals. Many
important natural and technological processes such as corrosion, deposition,
remediation and energy storage involve electrochemical reactions and therefore
can be improved by advances in electrocatalyst technology. The studies that will
be conducted in this project will advance electrocatalyst technology by
developing tools that can reveal how electrocatalysts influence the structure
and behavior of chemicals involved in electrochemical reactions. The project
will include focus on understanding the electrocatalysis of reactions that
impact pressing societal needs, such as the reduction of nitrate and carbon
dioxide, ubiquitous products of agricultural and industrial activity,
respectively and the oxidation of hydrocarbon fuels and water. This work also
serves as a vehicle for interdisciplinary research training. Students from many
backgrounds, including those underrepresented in science, will be mentored, and
hands-on science and chemical demonstrations will be performed in local schools.