* 1309929
* Local Moment and Heavy Fermion Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Piers Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to study the correlated, collective behavior of electrons in heavy
electron materials. These are lanthanide or actinide intermetallic compounds in
which the close vicinity to magnetic instability gives rise to fundamentally new
kinds of electronic material behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by many
new experimental results, a theoretical study of the break-down of conventional
metallic behavior that occurs in a quantum critical heavy fermion metal will be
carried out. This will involve developing theoretical models for the "intrinsic"
quantum criticality recently discovered in Ytterbium rare earth heavy fermion
systems YbBAl3 and YbAuAl. Specifically, the research is aimed to develop a
mixed boson-fermion theoretical framework to describe the co-existence of
localized magnetism and delocalized heavy electron behavior that is observed to
occur in various Cerium-based heavy electron materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
second part of the research will study the development of novel forms of
electronic order in heavy-electron materials. The PI will develop theoretical
models for the 115 heavy fermion superconductors to understand the entanglement
of the local moment spin degrees of freedom with the pair condensate, described
by "composite pairing", and the unusual robustness of these superconductors
against pair breaking. This research will also study the phenomenon of hidden
order URu2Si2 and analogous praseodymium heavy electron materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education to study the fundamental origins of
new kinds of order in heavy fermion materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrons
in metals interact with one another via their mutual Coulomb repulsion. When
these interactions become large, the conventional metallic state becomes
unstable and the electrons organize themselves via a phase transition, into new
states of order. Ordered states include familiar ferro-magnets in which the
intrinsic magnetism of each of the electrons is aligned, anti-ferromagnets, in
which the magnetic order is staggered in space, and superconductors in which
electrons form of a fluid of Cooper pairs which flows without resistance. These
new states bring new kinds of materials properties, such as the fierce magnetism
used for hybrid car motors, or the zero resistance of a high temperature
superconductor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase transitions that occur at the
absolute zero of temperature are entirely driven by the zero-point quantum
motion of the electrons; there is no thermal motion. Through quantum phase
transitions, metals develop new forms of electronic order. In many quantum phase
transitions, the transition to order is preceded by a point where the quantum
mechanical jiggling of the emergent order becomes very intense, spreading
throughout the entire metal. This kind of "Quantum Criticality" develops when
the phase transition temperature is tuned to absolute zero.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research to advance current
understanding of the transformations in metallic behavior induced near a
magnetic quantum critical point. The research will be focused on "heavy fermion"
materials, whose properties make them highly tunable for the study of quantum
criticality. The PI aims to develop a new mathematical framework to describe the
transformation in the magnetic character of the electrons at a quantum critical
point, as they transform from mobile waves to localized magnetic moments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second part of this research concerns the new kinds of
electronic order that develop in heavy fermion materials near a magnetic
instability. The PI will focus in part on heavy fermion superconductors, which
display in miniature, much of the physics observed in high temperature
transition metal superconductors. Normal superconductivity develops in response
to the formation of Cooper pairs between electrons. This research will refine
the concept of "composite pairs", whereby magnetic moments bind to electron
pairs to form a "composite pair" that drives
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also investigate the
phenomenon of "hidden order" observed to develop as a precursor to
superconductivity in the heavy fermion compound Uranium Ruthenium-2 Silicon-2 .
The PI seeks to generalize the concepts that underlie a new kind of order he has
proposed, called hastatic order, and to understand its relationship to the
superconductivity that develops with the hidden order. The possibility that
similar types of order can occur in closely related intermetallic materials will
be examined.