* 1309040
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Adam Huttenlocker, Huttenlocker            Adam           K
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2016
* USD 207,000.00

The origins of mammalian and avian red blood cells and vascular supply in long
bones: Biological insights from Recent and fossil bone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Red
blood cells (RBCs) are essential for uptake and delivery of oxygen to tissues
vertebrates. The sizes and shapes of RBCs vary considerably across vertebrate
groups, variation that partly reflects the relationship among RBC size,
capillary diameter, kinetics of gas uptake, and aerobic capacities. The
structure of cortical canals in bone limits capillary sizes and flow rates, and
affects shear stresses in the capillaries. Fellowship funds will support three
years of postdoctoral research at University of Utah, during which the fellow
will learn imaging technologies (like µ-CT visualization) and experimental
paleophysiology techniques, and about ethical research and public outreach
activities aimed at disadvantaged students. Lab activities will include surveys
of blood values, RBC sizes, and femoral cortical vascular supply (using
traditional histology and µ-CT), as well as experiments to study effects of
ambient oxygen on vascular supply to bone of alligators. The fellow will analyze
data from fossils to identify fossilizable indicators of blood and oxygen
transport in non-avian dinosaurs and mammal ancestors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fellow's research will support student projects on histology and analytical
resources at the University of Utah, fostering the professional development of
future scientists. The fellow will collaborate with the sponsoring scientist and
the Natural History Museum of Utah in constructing "toolboxes" for educating
blind children about evolutionary biology, the fossil record, and functional
morphology. By reaching out to blind students, the fellow will broaden
participation in biology to people who aspire to be future leaders in biological
sciences. Data resulting from this project will be archived on a freely-
accessible online database of histology images, facilitated partially through
the National Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent) and NSF-supported
MorphoBank.org.