* 1309687
* GOALI: Atomic Scale Modeling and Experimental Characterization of Non-Basal Deformation Modes in Mg Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Louis Hector, Jr., Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Abstract:

This project will provide a scientific basis for a quantitative and systematic
approach to design Magnesium alloys with favorable combinations of strength and
ductility through selective alloying. The approach is based on electronic-
structure calculations of non-basal deformation modes including <c+a> slip and
twinning including accurately accounting for chemistry effects due to alloying
coupled with experimental observation and verification of computational
predictions. Ab initio and atomistic simulations will be done to investigate (i)
Mechanisms for tension twin nucleation and alloys that promote nucleation and
growth of twins (ii) the core structures and mobility of <c+a> dislocations in
Mg (iii) effects of alloying on the structure and collective behavior of <c+a>
dislocations. Conventional transmission electron microscopy including bright
field, and weak beam techniques will be conducted on deformed single crystal of
Mg and binary Mg alloys to understand the effect of chemistry on <c+a>
dislocations -based deformation response for specific forms of loading. This
will provide connections to computations. Furthermore, aberration-corrected high
resolution electron microscopy of dislocation core structures will enable a more
direct connection with results from computations. The experiments and
computations together will provide a comprehensive understanding of non-basal
deformation in Mg alloys, the effect of chemistry on its relative ease, and a
pathway to microstructurally-guided and scientifically-informed alloy design.

Non-technical Abstract: The high strength-to-weight ratio of magnesium and
magnesium-based alloys makes them excellent candidates for the transportation
sector and in particular, the automotive industry that is focused on producing
lighter-weight, more fuel-efficient vehicles. However, limited room temperature
formability (a feature required to produce useful shapes by forming in a die for
example) has prohibited the widespread use of Mg alloys. Forming at elevated
temperatures adds cost and makes the material less competitive. Formability is
related to the ease of plastic deformation, a phenomenon that is facilitated by
atomic level processes called slip and/or twinning. In essence, these atomic
level mechanisms are the material's response to application of external forces
and these mechanisms enable permanent macroscopic shape change in a material,
referred to as plastic deformation. Difficulty in plastic deformation encourages
an alternate undesirable response which is premature failure/fracture. In the
case of magnesium alloys, the limited formability is related to anisotropic
plastic deformation. This means plastic deformation is easy in some directions
of the sheet that is being formed but not in others. The cause of this
anisotropy lies in the strong differentials in stress (or force) needed to
trigger some forms of plastic deformation as opposed to others, a characteristic
of this alloy system. This project is focused on identifying alloying elements
using a combination of computations and experiments that can reduce the critical
stress differential between these deformation modes to facilitate isotropic
plastic deformation and thereby improve room temperature formability.