* 1309611
* Clustering and Charging in Granular Flows
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2019
* USD 730,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The project employs freefalling streams of
granular material to investigate particle interactions and aggregation in two
closely coupled research efforts. First, tribocharging of same-material grains
is investigated, a phenomenon of high significance scientifically as well as for
applications, whose detailed mechanism is still being debated. Tracking
tribocharged grains in dilute granular streams as they enter a region of uniform
electric field makes it possible to collect the full statistical distribution of
grain charge and its dependence on grain size. Results from this work will not
only provide a better understanding of the fundamental mechanism giving rise to
tribocharging, but also new insights that can help to control it. Second, by
increasing the particle density inside the stream, the probability of particle-
particle interactions can be increased systematically. This makes it possible to
induce particle capture processes and follow in-situ the subsequent
agglomeration into larger clusters, providing a first detailed look at the
interplay of short-range cohesion and longer-range electrostatic forces. The
project will train a PhD student and a postdoc in forefront materials research,
and it includes the active participation of undergraduates. The research
component of the project will be integrated with a multi-faceted set of
education and outreach activities, including activities with the nearby Chicago
Museum of Science and Industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Granular materials are large aggregates of small
particles. Within condensed matter physics and materials science, these
materials pose a challenge because their complex behavior falls outside the
established predictions for ordinary solids or liquids. At the same time, the
handling, storage and transport of granular materials are critical to our
economy, and improved knowledge opens up new opportunities for better control.
The objective of this project is to establish a fundamental understanding of how
particle collisions can drive agglomeration into particle clusters and what role
electrostatic charging plays in this process. The research is centered around a
unique experimental facility in which freely falling streams of particles are
imaged and tracked with very high spatial and temporal precision. Better control
of particle clustering and charging will impact areas from physics to
engineering to environmental sciences. The clustering of charged particles is
also relevant to the formation of aggregates in interstellar dust. The project
will train a PhD student and a postdoc in forefront materials research, and it
includes the active participation of undergraduates. The research will be
integrated with a multi-faceted set of education and outreach activities,
including activities with the nearby Chicago Museum of Science and Industry.