* 1309114
* Computational design and atomic layer deposition synthesis of stereochemically active multifunctional oxide nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Christos Takoudis, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a research program dedicated to
exploring novel multifunctional tin-containing oxide materials, where the 2+
oxidation state of tin is associated with the presence of electron 'lone pairs.'
Large ionic displacements induced by these sterically active, but chemically
inert electrons lead to large elastic deformations and strong polar properties.
The PIs' synergistic approach includes both materials theory and computation,
and growth and characterization as essential interconnected parts of the
project. Utilizing the combination of these tools, the PIs will: (a) investigate
complex coupled phenomena - including elastic, polar and electronic ones - in
bulk, thin-film and nanostructured forms of tin-based oxides, (b) identify
rational pathways for achieving enhanced or yet unknown new properties in these
compounds that will lead to advanced functionalities, (c) develop synthetic
processes to grow tin-based oxides utilizing atomic layer / chemical vapor
deposition as well as processing technologies to incorporate them into a variety
of nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration between
the University of Connecticut and University of Illinois at Chicago, and
includes a collaboration with Argonne National Laboratory. The PIs will use a
unique atomic layer / chemical vapor deposition reactor to fabricate new
multifunctional oxide materials with dimensions ranging from bulk-like multi-
micron to nanometer, while preserving a high degree of structural conformality.
The pertinent electroactive and electrochemical properties of these materials
will be investigated as functions of not only composition and structure, but
also film thickness from the micron length scale to the atomic, sub-nanometer
regime. The utilization of an integrated simulation approach with established
information flow from atomic / molecular scale to mesoscale will provide both
support and guidance for the experimental growth and characterization efforts.
Theory-and-simulation tasks include initial selection of candidate structures
for synthesis, predictive evaluation of their properties, identification of
optimal growth conditions and coarse-grained evaluation of functional behavior
of nanostructures of different shapes and sizes made out of these materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will be integrated into educational
and mentoring experiences for undergraduate and graduate students by training
them in experimental and computational materials science techniques and
incorporating the research results into courses in Condensed Matter Physics and
Materials Science. Both PI institutions are located in areas with large
populations of underrepresented minority students and provide well established
programs for disseminating research findings and methodologies to middle and
high school students and teachers either in the form of new physics, chemistry
and engineering modules, or through series of workshops in science, math, and
technology. The PIs will use both of these routes to encourage students from
underrepresented minority groups to participate in science and technology
activities related to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a research program dedicated to exploring
novel multifunctional tin-containing oxide materials, intended as
environmentally benign replacements of lead-based compounds for a variety of
technological applications including energy harvesting, storage and conversion,
for example between mechanical and electrical forms of energy. The PIs'
synergistic approach includes the use of materials theory and computation, and
growth and characterization as essential interconnected parts of the project.
The combination of these tools will help investigate elastic and electronic
properties of bulk, thin-film and nanostructured forms of tin-based oxides, and
develop synthetic processes to grow these structures with layer-by-layer
deposition techniques as well as processing technologies for their potential
incorporation into a variety of electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a collaboration between the University of Connecticut and University
of Illinois at Chicago, and includes a collaboration with Argonne National
Laboratory. A unique layer-by-layer growth chamber will be used to fabricate new
tin-oxide compounds with dimensions ranging from multi-micron to nanometer,
while preserving a high degree of material quality. Electronic and mechanical
properties of these materials will be investigated as functions of chemical
composition and length scale of the grown samples. Computer simulations will
provide support and guidance for the experimental growth and characterization
efforts. Theory-and-simulation tasks include initial selection of candidate
structures for synthesis, evaluation of their properties and identification of
optimal growth conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will be
integrated into educational and mentoring experiences for undergraduate and
graduate students by training them in the experimental and computational
materials science techniques, and incorporating the research results into
courses in Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science. The institutions
involved are located in with large populations of underrepresented minority
students and provide well established programs for disseminating research
findings and methodologies to middle and high school students and teachers
either in the form of new physics, chemistry and engineering modules, or through
series of workshops in science, math, and technology. Both these routes will be
used to encourage students from underrepresented minority groups to participate
in science and technology activities related to new materials.