* 1309560
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Rex Lundgren, Lundgren                Rex            O
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Rex Lundgren of the University of Texas at Austin to conduct a
research project in the Math and Physical Sciences area during the summer of
2013 at The University of Tokyo Institute for Solid State Physics in Tokyo,
Japan. The project title is "Entanglement Spectrum of Metallic Systems." The
host scientists are Dr. Masaki Oshikawa and Dr. Shunsuke Furukawa.

The proposed project is to theoretically calculate the entanglement spectrum of
metallic condensed matter systems, i.e. systems without an energy gap in their
band structure. The entanglement spectrum and possible entanglement applications
of these systems have not been well explored. In insulating systems, the
entanglement spectrum has provided a wealth of information and applications. In
particular, the entanglement spectrum allows one to identify topological systems
of matter, such as a topological insulators or the fractional quantum hall
states, from just the ground state wave function. This theoretical calculation
is being done with a combination of powerful non-perturbative and perturbative
analytics and numerics, on which the host scientists at the University of Tokyo
are world renowned experts. Studying the entanglement spectrum of metallic
systems allows one to better understand strongly correlated condensed matter
systems and investigate the potential entanglement applications of these
interesting systems, which could lead to wide ranging broader impacts outside
the physics community.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow will submit this research in a
paper to a leading condensed matter journal and to to submit a poster on the
work for the Mathematical Statistical Physics conference in Kyoto, Japan in July
2013. Upon his return, the Fellow plans to give a talk to the local
undergraduate physics club about the experience in Japan and why studying the
entanglement spectrum is important. The talk will focus on the experience in
Japan and the broader impacts of the entanglement spectrum and physics in
general. In addition, the Fellow plans to give talks about the experience to a
few local high schools, especially those with a large number of minority
students.