* 1309463
* High-Frequency EPR Studies of Strong Spin-Orbit Effects in Molecular Magnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Stephen Hill, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The ability to rationally design magnetic
molecules with properties tailored for specific applications represents a key
goal within the molecular magnetism community. The past few years have seen
remarkable breakthroughs in this regard, aided by the study of molecules
comprised of magnetic ions with strong spin-orbit anisotropy, e.g., orbitally
degenerate transition metals and lanthanides. In order to develop a theoretical
understanding of these highly anisotropic magnetic materials, electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) studies performed at very high fields and
frequencies are essential. Recent instrument developments at the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), spanning unprecedented field and frequency
ranges, will open up the EPR technique to many more materials of current
interest. The information obtained will lead to improved theoretical
understanding of the important static and dynamical processes that dictate the
behavior of these materials. Strong collaboration with chemists will provide a
crucial feedback loop, with the potential for transformative advances in
molecule-based magnetic materials. Two female graduate students will participate
in the research. Interdisciplinary workshops will also be organized, providing
outstanding educational opportunities for a significant number of young
researchers from diverse backgrounds, and a pipeline for knowledge transfer from
within the NHMFL EPR program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental studies of nano-scale molecular magnetic
materials are essential for future advances in information processing
technologies. The past few years have seen remarkable advances in this field,
aided by investigations of molecular magnets based on heavier elements found
further down the periodic table than those that have traditionally been of
interest, e.g., rare-earth elements. The unusual properties of these materials
that make them attractive for applications necessitate the development of new
measurement techniques. This project will bring to bear on this problem the
uniquely high magnetic fields available at the US National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory, together with recently developed magnetic resonance methodologies,
with a view to obtaining improved understanding of the physical processes that
give rise to technologically useful properties. Strong collaboration between
physicists and chemists will provide a crucial feedback loop, with the potential
for transformative advances in molecule-based magnetic materials. Two female
students will participate in the research. Interdisciplinary workshops will also
be organized, providing outstanding educational opportunities for a significant
number of young researchers from diverse backgrounds.