* 1309853
* High Temperature Shape Memory Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Robert Weiss, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 374,237.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the NSF-funded
research are to develop and understand the structure and properties of high
temperature shape memory polymers (HTSMPs) based on mixtures of an ionomer and a
low molecular weight crystalline compound (LMWC). This includes developing a
fundamental understanding of the molecular origin of shape memory in these two-
component systems. The permanent crosslink in these materials is based on
microphase separation of ionic nanodomains in the ionomer or covalent
crosslinks, and the advantages/disadvantages of each design will be assessed.
The temporary network derives from strong intermolecular interactions between
the ionomer and the LMWC dispersed phase, and the switching temperature, Tc, is
controlled by the melting point of the LMWC. The experimental work includes
preparing HTSMPs by melt compounding and the characterization of their
morphology, physical properties and mechanical properties. Shape memory
characteristics will be assessed by shape memory cycles measured by dynamic
mechanical analysis and the sustainability of the shape reversibility will be
evaluated from cyclic testing experiments using larger prototype samples. The
initial focus of the research will be mixtures of partially sulfonated
poly(ether ether ketone) and sodium oleate with a targeted Tc ~ 200°C, but other
systems based on high temperature ionomer matrices derived from polysulfones and
polyimides and other LMWCs such as fatty acids, eutectic mixtures, fusible
metals, ionic liquids, high melting point organic compounds, tin alloys and
phosphate glasses will be considered to assess the efficacy of the ionomer/LMWC
shape memory polymer design. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory polymers (SMP) are materials that have the
capability of changing shape when exposed to an external stimulus (e.g.,
temperature, light or electrical or magnetic fields). Applications of these
smart materials include orthodontic wires, polymer stents, biodegradable
implants, artificial muscles, actuators, sensors, switches and smart textiles.
Most SMPs are soft, thermally-activated materials with shape-switching
temperatures lower than 100°C. Higher temperature applications, such as
expandable structures with high strength and stiffness (e.g., deployable solar
arrays, antennas and reflectors) and shape morphing surfaces and structures
(e.g., airplane wings) require higher operating and switching temperatures. This
NSF award supports research on the development of high temperature shape memory
polymers made from mixtures of a thermoplastic polymer containing bonded ionic
groups and a low molecular weight additive that interacts strongly with the
ionic polymer. In addition to the development of new materials for high-
performance applications, such as aerospace components, this project will
include training scientists to work in the emerging field of smart materials.
The research will involve graduate, undergraduate and high school students and
high school science teachers. Special efforts will be made to recruit students
form under-represented STEM groups to participate in the research.
Collaborations will be sought with private industry and national laboratories to
develop new fundamental knowledge of the subject materials and advance the
development of new commercial applications. The scientific results from the
research will be broadly disseminated through rapid publications in major
scientific journals and presentations by the PI and students at national
scientific meetings.