* 1309509
* Real Time Nanoscale Observations of Localized Corrosion in Metallic Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* David Duquette, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 07/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project employs a novel in-situ transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) method to study corrosion reactions at liquid-solid interfaces
in real-time. Using a micro-fluidic chamber sealed between electron transparent
membranes, nanoscale corrosion processes that occur at interfaces between water
and pure aluminum or aluminum alloys are studied. The program focuses on the
fundamental issue of pit initiation in passivating films. This in-situ method
addresses a long standing problem of examining passive films in electron
microscopes where vacuum is known to affect the structure and properties of the
films by maintaining hydrated surfaces throughout the characterization of the
passivation and corrosion processes. This in-situ technique allows the
observation of the formation of passive films and also allows the introduction
of pit inducing chloride solutions in real time. By synthesizing passivating
films of varying crystallinity and thickness prior to initiating corrosion,
differentiation between nucleation events dominated by the intrinsic surface
structure and chemistry of the films, and those controlled by the structure and
chemistry of the metal can be accomplished. Alloy films of Al-Li and Al-Cu, will
also be studied to understand the interaction of the alloying elements with the
growth and stability of the passivating films and the subsequent pitting
reactions. While it is known at the micrometer scale that alloying elements
affect pitting behavior, it is not known if that is due to electrochemical
interactions at the nanometer level or if the elements are also incorporated
into the passive films, thus affecting the intrinsic resistance of the films to
localized breakdown. The in-situ TEM methods are supplemented by x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy and Auger electron spectroscopy, utilizing deposition
and reaction chambers directly attached to the instruments.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The impact of corrosion upon the national infrastructure
and upon manufactured goods is enormous (estimated at 5-10% of GNP), creating a
substantial drain on the national economy and having major impacts upon
infrastructure and transportation safety. A recent study published by the
National Academies of Science and Engineering identified a number of important
research areas that should be pursued to alleviate the drain of corrosion on the
nation's resources. Among those areas identified is the problem of localized
corrosion such as pitting, since its occurrence is often unpredictable. This
project employs a novel in-situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) method to
study corrosion reactions at liquid-solid interfaces at the nano-scale in real-
time. The fundamental knowledge derived under this research program may help to
understand, and subsequently to mitigate, localized corrosion reactions. While
this program primarily addresses passive film formation and local breakdown on
aluminum and aluminum alloy films, the information obtained from the program
will be applicable to the technological problem of localized corrosion in other
metal and alloy systems. The advantage of an in-situ, real time examination
method is that it allows the observation of nanometer-scale phenomena under
environmental conditions typical of actual corrosion events. In addition to
advancing scientific knowledge of an important corrosion phenomenon, this
project contributes to the nation's intellectual base by educating graduate
students at the Ph.D. level. In the aforementioned NAS/NAE study of the nation's
needs in corrosion research, the absence of an adequate cadre of trained
corrosion scientists was clearly identified. Another major aspect of the program
is that it uses undergraduate laboratory researchers, exposing them to advanced
research methods and the opportunity to be involved in the understanding and
possible mitigation of an important technical problem.