* 1309542
* Toward an integrative understanding of mammalian cell motility
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,362,003.00

There has been significant progress over the last few years in understanding
many of the detailed dynamical mechanisms underlying mammalian cell motility.
These include the role of focal adhesions, the spatio-temporal organization of
actin flow, the response of the leading-edge membrane to actin polymerization
and conversely the role of myosin minifilaments in creating contractile stress
at the rear. It is now an opportune time to combine this knowledge into a
mathematical model which can treat the morphodynamics of the whole cell, and
correlate motion with both mechanical data (such as traction-force measurements)
and sub-cellular signaling information (such as localization data for specific
molecular players.) This proposal aims at constructing and validating such a
model for endothelial cells. From the mathematics side, the novel element
includes embedding all of the aforementioned processes into a moving cell
geometry, enabled by the phase-field approach; the latter has shown its
relevance in many moving boundary problems in fields ranging from solidification
to multiphase fluid flow. Experimental data will be obtained by utilizing state-
of-the-art microfluidic devices so as to provide controlled cell environments
and will include the measurement of spatial patterns of signaling molecules
(location and activation) as well as forces. Model predictions will be tested in
a number of different cell lines and in cells subject to a variety of
pharamacological treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining a quantitative
understanding of cell motility is of importance for many critical biomedical
systems, ranging from cancer metastases to inflammatory response to pathogens.
Biophysical tools have reached the point where one can obtain high-quality data
about various parts of the motility mechanism; for example, we can measure the
forces exerted by the cell on the substrate on which it moves. At the same time,
advances in computational modeling have shown how to tackle complex problems
involving fluid flow and chemical reactions taking place inside a moving domain.
Our proposal aims at combining these two capabilities, experimental biophysics
and computational modeling to create a quantitative approach to the motion of a
specific type of mammalian cell. Once successful, our methodology could be
extended to other cell types and to cells moving in more complicated spaces. The
eventual payoff would be both an increased fundamental understanding and an
increased capability of affecting cell motility, perhaps to prevent cells from a
primary tumor from establishing secondary colonies in target
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal was submitted in response to the
Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research at the Interface of the
Biological and Mathematical Sciences. The grant is funded by the Program of
Mathematical Biology of the Division of Mathematical Sciences and co-funded by
the Program Physics of Living Systems in the Physics Division of NSF.