* 1309202
* GOALI: Spin-Transfer in Magnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Daniel Stein, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 475,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This NSF-GOALI project brings together leading
researchers in nanomagnetism from New York University and IBM with the aim of
furthering the understanding of the physics of spin-transfer and applications of
spin-transfer to high performance devices. Spin-transfer is a mechanism by which
a spin-polarized current can reverse the magnetic orientation of a nanomagnet
and induce magnetic excitations such as spin-waves. This is an exciting
development that will very likely enable dramatic improvements in magnetic
information processing and storage. This is because spin-transfer offers a
mechanism for rapidly reversing the magnetization of nanomagnets with large
magnetic anisotropy that would otherwise require huge local magnetic fields -an
achievement critical to increasing magnetic information storage density.
However, as nanomagnets are reduced in size their magnetic moments become more
susceptible to reversal due to random forces associated with thermal and
electrical noise. An understanding of the effects of noise on spin-transfer
driven magnetization dynamics is thus critical. This project will advance
understanding of spin-transfer physics through experimental studies of
individual nanomagnets excited by spin-currents, including a new research
direction that will use spin-currents generated through excitation of
ferromagnetic insulators. These experimental studies will be conducted in
concert and guided by a theoretical analysis of noise-induced transitions in the
presence of spin-transfer torques. The theoretical analysis will focus on new
phenomena generated by the interaction of a nongradient deterministic dynamics
with random forces. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this
collaboration will gain by interactions between academia and industry.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** This project brings together leading researchers
from New York University and IBM with the aim of furthering the understanding
and application of nanometer scale magnetic devices and materials. Magnetic
nanostructures are widely used in technology with the most advanced applications
found in information processing. This is a huge industry in the United States
that is growing rapidly, with the ever-increasing worldwide demands for data
processing and storage. It has been discovered that in miniature magnetic
devices a direct electrical current can switch the direction of magnetization by
a mechanism known as spin-transfer. This is an exciting development that may
enable dramatic improvements in magnetic information processing and storage.
There are important and fundamental questions about the nature of the
interaction between the current and magnetization that this project will address
through studies of individual magnetic nanostructures excited by spin-currents
using unique high frequency measurement techniques. This research will be
integrated with the training of young scientists in this forefront area of
magnetism research. Participating graduate and undergraduate students will gain
by interactions between academia and industry and through exchanges between NYU
and IBM. Their education will be enriched through exposure to a variety of
perspectives, expertise and techniques present in an industrial setting. High
school students will also participate in this research.