* 1309535
* Integration of Computation, Experiment, Simulation and Data to Predict Defect Properties in Semiconductor Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Robert Hull, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 617,220.00

Technical Description: This project seeks to develop the foundations for a new
framework for describing the processing of complex materials systems. It is
being achieved by integrating computation, experimental measurements, simulation
and data sets into a predictive descriptor of kinetic evolution during materials
processing. The specific focus / example is the development of predictive
simulation of the structural, electronic and optical properties of dislocation
networks in epitaxial films, with an ultimate goal of accelerating the
development of device-quality material in such systems. The project is first
extending an existing simulator developed for predicting dislocation generation
in the GeSi/Si system during growth and/or thermal processing. Phylogenetic
mapping methods, developed for the fields of evolutionary biology and
bioinformatics, are employed to refine materials parameters and fundamental
mechanistic assumptions in the simulator by optimizing the matching of
experimental and simulated data sets. An initial important goal is to define a
"minimum data set" necessary to adequately describe the energetic and kinetic
parameters of the evolving system, and enable quantitative predictions. Next,
the project is extending these methods to a new materials system, with
significantly different dislocation generation mechanisms, strained III-nitride
films. This enables both assessment of the generality of the simulator method,
and should advance understanding of dislocation generation in the III-nitride
systems. Finally, the simulator is being extended to enable prediction of
optical and electronic parameters that correlate to the observed /predicted
defect densities. This involves first-principle calculations of electronic
properties of specific defect configurations, enabling an additional generation
of simulator that correlates predicted defect densities and consequent
(opto)electronic activity to observed optoelectronic and device properties of
the dislocated material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: This
project is developing new frameworks for enabling predictive simulation of
defect generation during growth and processing of thin-film crystalline
materials, and the effects of these defects upon the performance parameters of
these materials. This enables accelerated device development cycle times by
predicting conditions for device-quality materials synthesis ahead of full
processing cycles. This ultimately contributes to the national need to
accelerate the transition from new materials discoveries to manufacturable
technologies. The method to be developed employs the comparison of predictions
from the simulator to extensive experimental data sets to refine and "train" the
simulator. It both improves the predictive capability of the simulator for the
given system in which it is trained, and accelerates transfer of its application
to new materials systems. The set of students working on this project are being
schooled in this vision of optimizing integration of calculation, experiment and
data management, thus helping to establish a workforce trained in these methods.
The research team is making the resultant process simulator accessible to the
research and development community and is responding to selected requests for
specific updates or enhancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program (EPM) and the Computational and
Data driven Materials Research Program (CDMR), both in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR).