* 1309721
* Switched-Mode Signal Processing: An Innovative Paradigm for High Performance Analog in Nanoscale CMOS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Peter Kinget, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 368,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of high performance analog
interfaces is becoming progressively harder as silicon semiconductor
technologies (like CMOS) keep scaling and circuits can only operate with smaller
supply voltages. At the same time, demands on circuit performance and power
efficiency are increasing. This program targets to research and demonstrate a
switched-mode signal-processing paradigm. It allows close-to rail-to-rail signal
swings and high efficiency for the output stages of operational amplifiers while
being very linear. It further facilitates the easy translation of signals
between switched mode, and analog or digital representations. Switched-mode
circuits are expected to enable performance gains in a versatile set of analog
functions including amplifiers, filters and oversampling analog-to-digital
converters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed signal representation and
processing paradigm uniquely exploits the strengths of nanoscale devices, in
particular their high switching speed, while avoiding the challenges associated
with their limited output impedance or voltage tolerance and resulting swing
reductions. It further pursues new avenues for circuit and architecture
explorations by representing analog information in a non-classical way, in
particular by moving the representation from the voltage to time domain in a
linear manner. Additionally, switched-domain representation offers seamless
conversion from one domain to the other, a challenge that has hindered progress
for other time-domain based representations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analog circuits perform the critical function of
interfacing the physical world to the digital world of signal processing and
storage. The performance of digital systems in nanoscale technologies can only
be reaped with analog interface with equally high performance in fully
integrated systems-on-a-chip. Such devices are a key enabling technology for
advances in many areas with broad societal and scientific impact from technology
to medicine, from communications to scientific discoveries. The majority of
applications have migrated to digital-centric architectures, owing to the
advantages of cost or robustness and the availability of significantly larger
digital signal-processing capability in nanoscale semiconductor technologies.
The paradigm and circuits researched here show promise for impact across a
variety of applications in multiple disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research includes theoretical, design and experimental efforts for the design of
several proof-of-principle demonstrators. Graduate and undergraduate students
will gain expertise in theoretical, fundamental, practical and experimental
aspects of the design of high-performance, analog interface circuits in
nanoscale silicon technologies. The results of this research will be
disseminated through publications and seminars and will be incorporated in
graduate level courses.