* 1309171
* Dissertation Research:  The genetic architecture and ecological function of a novel coloration phenotype
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Kelly Zamudio, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,778.00

A fundamental goal in evolutionary biology is to understand how natural
selection acts on organisms to form novel traits. Coloration is a key way in
which animals interact with their environments and may serve many important
roles, including attracting mates or avoiding predators. Although the adaptive
context of coloration is well studied in wild populations, we know very little
about the genetic basis of this important trait, limiting our interpretation of
how coloration evolves. This proposal investigates the genetic basis and
ecological function of sexual dichromatism (coloration that differs between
males and females of the same species) to test hypotheses about the evolution of
this trait in a diverse group of frogs. Specifically, this research integrates
functional genomics, ecology, and behavior to elucidate both the genetic basis
of a trait and its function under different selective environments.
&lt;br/&gt;The fieldwork component of this research takes place in the forests
of sub-Saharan Africa, which are home to incredible amphibian diversity, much of
which is still undescribed. Amphibian surveys associated with this project will
therefore contribute to ongoing efforts to document and conserve species
diversity in this region. To facilitate these efforts, the PIs have developed a
collaborative network of researchers, NGO personnel, and students (from
Equatorial Guinea and the USA) with shared interests in conservation and
biodiversity research. The PIs on this grant have an established record in
student training (including under-represented minority and international
students), outreach, and public communication of science, which will continue in
this project.