* 1309983
* SusChEM:   Ceramic Based Nanocomposite Films and Sensors for Life Cycle Monitoring of Materials in High Temperature Harsh Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Robert Lad, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 722,500.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Significant cost savings can be achieved by
optimizing the maintenance and servicing of machinery that is used in high
temperature harsh industrial environments, such as those found in turbine
engines, petrochemical processing plants, combustion burners, power plant
boilers, oil/gas drilling, metals smelting and refining, and ceramic
manufacturing. Unfortunately, currently available thin film materials rapidly
degrade in the high temperature harsh conditions of interest to the high
temperature industry sector, making sensors and other monitoring devices
unstable and short-lived. This project focuses on developing a new class of
ceramic-based thin film materials that are stable in these extreme high
temperature harsh environments. The development of these high temperature
components will improve sustainability by enabling the deployment of
miniaturized sensors, actuators, and other electronic components that can be
used to reduce overall energy usage and increase the longevity of complex,
expensive high temperature machinery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
Investigations are being carried out on nanocomposite multilayer thin film
structures consisting of oxides, borides, or silicides integrated with Pt-based
materials on sapphire, langasite, and Inconel substrates. Rapid materials
screening experiments are used to determine the most stable nanocomposite
architectures consisting of diffusion barriers, adhesion layers, conducting
electrodes, and capping passivation layers. Experiments on the most promising
nanocomposite systems focus on probing materials processes such as surface
reactivity, interdiffusion, phase formation, oxidation, recrystallization,
agglomeration, and roughening. Prototype sensor devices comprised of the
ceramic-based nanocomposite films are being evaluated within controlled
environment furnaces and small scale turbine engines. The project is educating
and training three graduate students and four undergraduates in the areas of
ceramic film synthesis, high temperature materials, and characterization of
sensor devices. The students are also learning about materials sustainability
strategies and technology transfer to the sensor community.