* 1309017
* Collaborative Research: Development of Novel Nonlinear Optical Contrast for High-Resolution Morphological and Chemical Imaging of Historical Artwork
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Martin Fischer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2017
* USD 635,689.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Instrument Development for Biological Research (IDBR)
program in the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI), Professors Martin
Fischer, Warren Warren, Robert Opila, Dr. Jennifer Mass and their groups will
develop multi-wavelength nonlinear optical microscopy techniques for the
extraction of novel molecular contrast at microscopic resolution from highly
scattering materials ranging from biological tissue to historical artwork. This
team has recently extended microscopy methods originally developed for skin
imaging to historical pigments, demonstrating non-destructive, high-resolution
structural and chemical contrast in historic painting cross sections and an
intact painting. This interdisciplinary study between museum conservators and
academic researchers will focus on making this a broadly useful method for
imaging both biomedical tissue and historic works of art: the study will broaden
the range of accessible contrasts and documented pigments, demonstrate high
quality imaging with maximum flexibility, and build a portable device. This work
integrates seemingly disparate fields (molecular imaging, analytical chemistry,
laser spectroscopy, fundamental nonlinear optics, and biomedical engineering) to
address fundamental questions impacting medical imaging and cultural heritage.
In the studies of artworks the use of nonlinear optical microscopy has been
hindered by the lack of useful image contrast in highly complex layers of paint
(most of which do not fluoresce). Pulse shaping and pulse train shaping
technology, recently developed for biomedical imaging, now provides access to
weaker but more pigment-specific structural and molecular contrast, which could
help determine authenticity, provenance, technology of manufacture, and state of
preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program could dramatically impact
biomedical imaging and conservation science by providing a non-invasive imaging
modality that can extract comprehensive structural and chemical information from
these highly scattering environments, complementing established mapping
techniques. Students involved will have access to the laser labs at Duke
University, the NC Museum of Art Conservation Center and the Winterthur
facilities; in turn NCMA and Winterthur staff will actively participate in the
imaging studies. This exchange will encourage interdisciplinary inquiry between
scientists, conservators, curators, and educators. The program will result in
training opportunities in an interdisciplinary environment spanning conservation
science, art history, physics, chemistry and engineering for graduate,
undergraduate, and high-school students.