* 1309258
* Understanding the Deformation Mechanisms in Austenitic Iron-Manganese Steels with Changes in Stacking Fault Energy, Strain Rate and Tempeature
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* James Wittig, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 05/31/2018
* USD 352,883.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;To understand the complex deformation mechanisms
exhibited by austenitic iron-manganese steels, which include transformation-
induced plasticity (TRIP), twinning-induced plasticity (TWIP), and dislocation
glide, requires systematic mechanical testing with materials characterization
down to the atomic scale. Changes in stacking-fault energy (SFE) with
composition and temperature strongly influence the active deformation mechanism.
Although the determination of SFE is challenging and most investigations rely on
calculated values, careful experimental methods using weak-beam dark field
(WBDF) imaging of partial dislocation separation can provide accurate SFE
measurements. In addition to the composition and deformation temperature,
important microstructural and processing parameters include grain size and
strain rate. Correlation of the SFE with the mechanical behavior is a critical
aspect for developing a basic understanding of the structure-property-processing
relationships that will allow for future advances in the design of new high-
manganese austenitic steels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;In the last five years, there has been a significant increase
in the research activity associated with high-manganese austenitic steels as
evidenced by both the number of scientific publications and patent applications.
These steels are excellent candidates for applications requiring high
formability and energy absorption such as cold-stamping of automotive parts
owing to their exceptional ductility, strain-hardening, and toughness. This
proposal describes collaboration between Vanderbilt University, the Ohio State
University, the RWTH University and the Max-Planck-Institut f√ºr Eisenforschung
in Germany, and the Oak Ridge National Laboratory to address the basic science
involved with the future development of high-manganese austenitic steels. This
international collaboration not only allows the combined expertise of the
individual investigators to be focused on understanding the complex deformation
mechanisms in these alloys, but it will also promote the education of graduate
students who will benefit from the international experience. Student education
and training will be enhanced through international collaborations. Educational
opportunities enabled by these activities will be made available to under-
represented groups through the Vanderbilt-Fisk Bridge program.