* 1309978
* RUI: Targeting the Terminus for Site-Specific Recognition and Labeling of Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Adam Urbach, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Adam Urbach of Trinity University explores
the hypothesis that the terminus of a polypeptide chain has unique structural
and conformational properties that may provide a general approach to protein
recognition that is specific to a single site and is predictable both from the
sequence of amino acids and from the receptor's ability to recognize short
peptides of the same sequence. The project has three complementary aims. The
first aim focuses on the discovery and characterization of new motifs for the
recognition of peptide termini by synthetic receptors. The second part asks
whether these receptors can recognize proteins containing the same terminal
sequences. The third part involves the application of the recognition work to
the labeling, capture, and release of proteins using conjugates of the synthetic
receptors to bring functionality to the terminus of the proteins targeted in
these studies. In addition to the societal benefits of being able to identify,
isolate, and label specific proteins, the broader impacts involve intense
training of undergraduate students in the research laboratory and a plan for the
training of postdoctoral scholars that addresses crucial aspects of professional
development in scholarship, teaching, and service in order to best prepare them
to begin a career at a primarily undergraduate institution.

The ability to distinguish between the numerous proteins in living systems is
crucial to biological and biotechnological processes, but currently only
antibodies can do this reliably and antibody-based technology can be very
costly. This research aims to address this problem by developing new methods for
interacting with proteins using synthetic receptors, which can be much less
expensive and easier to modify. The focus of this project is to explore the
recently developed concept that the very end of a protein chain (the terminus)
is an ideal site for interacting with a receptor because the tail, like the end
of a ball of string, can easily unravel. If successful, this research would
establish a general method for predictably interacting with proteins, and it
would form the foundation for developing tools that substantially improve our
understanding of protein function in living systems.