* 1309507
* Flexible Modeling for High-Dimensional Complex Data: Theory, Methodology, and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Ning Hao, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2017
* USD 150,000.00

In high dimensional data analysis, the relationships among predictors can be
highly nonlinear and non-additive, and taking into account such complex
structures may significantly improve model prediction power and provide crucial
insight about the underlying data generation mechanism. The goal of this project
is to develop and study new statistical and data mining methodologies for
detecting nonlinear and non-additive patterns in high dimensional sparse models.
When the data dimension is ultra-high, interaction selection is extremely
challenging, both numerically and theoretically, due to curse of dimensionality.
There are very limited tools available in practice and theory is scant. In this
project, the investigators give a comprehensive treatment to the problem of
high-dimensional interaction selection. They propose and study novel selection
and modeling techniques for a variety of regression and classification models.
Fast and robust large-scale computational algorithms are derived. In addition,
the investigators are committed to establishing high dimensional theory for
interaction selection and providing a solid foundation for the new methods. The
investigators also propose and study a unified theory and computation framework
to identify nonlinear effects for a broad class of nonparametric regression
models. Special effort is spent on addressing computational issues such as
multiple parameter tuning, regularization solution path/surface algorithms, and
development of user friendly statistical software
packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Big and high dimensional data offer us
fascinating and unprecedented opportunities to gain extraordinary insight from
data. On the other hand, the scale and volume of data create tremendous
challenges for standard analysis tools to extract useful information. The goal
of this project is to develop innovative statistical and data mining methods,
solid mathematical theory, and powerful computational tools and software to
capture hidden and possibly complex patterns when the data dimension is high.
One challenging problem to be tackled in this project is high dimensional
interaction selection. In genome-wide association studies (GWAS), there is
growing evidence that gene-gene and gene-environment interactions can provide
key insight about complex biological pathways that underpin human diseases.
However, there are very few effective, well-grounded, and computationally
attractive tools available in practice to identify interactions for high
dimensional data. The investigators try to fill this gap by conducting thorough
investigation on the problem. The results from this project research can
significantly advance theory and as well as contribute new statistical tools for
practical use. The proposed methods have a wide range of scientific applications
such as biology, biomedicine, and environmental studies. This project integrates
research, education, and interdisciplinary collaboration through developing new
graduate and undergraduate courses and involving students in the research
activities.