* 1309130
* Exploring the Nucleon with Electromagnetic Probes
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Evangeline Downie, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Edmundo Garcia-Solis
* 12/31/2017
* USD 334,986.00

This project will address some of the current challenges in our understanding of
the proton: the proton radius puzzle, whereby the highly precise muonic hydrogen
measurement of the radius is seven standard deviations from the currently
accepted value from electron-based measurements; and measurement of the scalar
and spin polarizabilities of the proton. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
theoretical calculations of the proton scalar polarizabilities describe the data
as well as dispersion-relation-based analyses, but produce a magnetic
polarizability twice that of the dispersion analyses. The spin polarizabilities
are predicted within many theoretical frameworks, but, until recently,
experimental measurement of these properties was unfeasible. We will perform a
series of singly- and doubly-polarized Compton scattering measurements to
provide a high quality extraction of the scalar polarizabilities, and a world-
first independent extraction of all four spin polarizabilities. The measurement
program will be carried out within the framework of the A2 Collaboration at the
MAinzer MIkrotron accelerator in Mainz, Germany, where the PI is a lead PI on
the polarizability program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MUon Scattering Experiment
(MUSE) at the Paul Scherer Institute (PSI) in Switzerland will access the proton
radius for the first time via muon scattering, achieving a level of precision
comparable with the current electron scattering data. The beam, a mixture of
muons, pions and electrons / positrons, will be employed in both charge states
and electron and muon scattering data will be taken in parallel. This will allow
for an extraction of the radius from both proton and muon elastic scattering to
a level of precision comparable with that currently obtained in electron
scattering experiments. In so doing, it provides a thorough test of lepton
universality, two-photon-exchange corrections relevant to the extraction of the
radius from the scattering data and accesses regions where possible beyond
standard model physics is postulated to occur. The two photon exchange
corrections will be further tested in a complementary dilepton photoproduction
experiment at the High Intensity Gamma Source (HIGS) at the Triangle
Universities Nuclear Laboratory (TUNL) in North
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;--------------&lt;br/&gt;All visible matter with which we
interact is formed of atoms, which are in turn composed of neutrons, protons and
electrons. We know that the nucleons: the protons and neutrons themselves have
substructure: components known as quarks. As these quarks are so strongly bound
together, it is impossible for us to pull them apart in order to examine the
internal structure and binding of the proton. Instead we have to form theories
of how they might be bound together, and make predictions based on those
theories which we can test experimentally in order to gain understanding of
these building blocks of our everyday lives. It is a little like looking at a
catalogue of Lego models and trying to infer the shape and binding mechanisms of
the bricks from the possible configurations in the catalogue. We will
investigate two properties of the proton in this proposal: its radius and
polarizabilities. In so doing, we aim to gain a better understanding of this
fundamental building block of the universe and, though it, to better understand
the strengths and limitations of current theoretical models of nuclear physics.
These models influence many modern technologies such as those involved in
nuclear power or radiotherapy treatment, and determine how the stars burn in the
sky. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The involvement of undergraduate and graduate
research students in international research offers excellent training
opportunities both in physics and in international relationships. The leadership
of a young female PI will hopefully encourage more individuals from
underrepresented groups to consider a career in the natural sciences.