* 1309750
* Room Temperature Tunable Plasmonic-Enhanced Graphene Terahertz Photodetectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* H. Dennis Drew, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Objective: The proposed research seeks to develop a new type of graphene
photodetector that operates at room temperature and exploits plasmonic
resonances to achieve tunable spectral sensitivity throughout the terahertz
spectral regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Graphene is a unique
two-dimensional material that has the potential to transform the field of
terahertz and infrared photonics. Favorable thermoelectric transport properties,
including low specific heat and weak electron-phonon interaction allow for
sensitive detection and ultrafast response time in graphene devices. While a
single layer of graphene can yield a small, but measurable photoabsorption,
structured graphene films can support collective plasmonic excitations that show
a far greater photoabsorption, at a resonance frequency that can be electrically
tuned through the application of a gate voltage. The device concept proposed
here could lead to a transformative advances in terahertz photonics, by enabling
tunable room-temperature sensitivity and noise performance that is orders of
magnitude superior to existing detector
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Practical room temperature
terahertz photodetection could have far reaching impact in a number of key
sectors ranging from pharmaceutical development to homeland security and medical
imaging, and could spur the development of a robust terahertz technology.
Furthermore, we propose a new outreach activity that would introduce young
scientists from developing countries to new economical techniques for advanced
signal recovery.