* 1309441
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Matthew Holliday, Holliday                Matthew        R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Matthew Holliday of the University of Arizona to conduct a
research project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at the University of Auckland in Auckland, New Zealand. The
project title is "Classroom Expectations: The Relationship between Teacher
Beliefs and Student Achievement." The host scientist is Dr. Christine Rubie-
Davies.

Many studies have explored the relationship between classroom teacher
expectations of their students' academic abilities and the differential learning
outcomes that result from these expectations. Unfortunately, teacher
expectations often serve as self-fulfilling prophecies; teachers tend to
dedicate more of their instructional energy towards their perceived academically
stronger students while neglecting those for whom they have lower expectations.
However, less is known about the impact of teaching beliefs (e.g., whether
teachers believe they can help improve students math scores or foster
creativity) and perception of classroom climate (i.e., the context in which
student and instructor interact) in relation to students' academic achievement.
This project uses a secondary dataset to examine the interplay between teacher
expectations, beliefs, motivation, and classroom climate perceptions in relation
to student academic achievement as measured by student scores on the mathematics
portion of a nationally administered standardized test. Data were collected from
March through October 2012 and included 60 middle school teachers and their
approximately 2,000 students in Auckland, New Zealand. With respect to New
Zealand, the researchers are also interested in discovering if there are varying
teacher expectations of the under-represented MÃ¢ori and Pacific Islander
students, and whether these potential differences relate to (1) teacher
motivation and beliefs about teaching and (2) this subgroup's academic
achievement as measured by their mathematics exam score.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this study contributes to the promotion of
teaching, training, and learning. Findings will help guide the development of
teacher training programs and advance educational policy reform, as well as
provide researchers and practitioners across interdisciplinary fields with
insight on the effects of expectations and self-fulfilling prophecies. The
Fellow will disseminate the findings widely in order to enhance the
understanding of the relevance of expectancy theory in disciplines beyond
psychology. The Fellow intends to report the results through diverse forms of
multimedia, such as pamphlets, TV interviews, and websites, in order to reach
the parents, teachers, students, and researchers who are not accustomed to
reading educational psychology research publications.