* 1309323
* Mechanism and Structure in an Enzyme Superfamily
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Dirk Iwata-Reuyl, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2017
* USD 389,944.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Dirk Iwata-Reuyl of Portland State University to
investigate the molecular/structural basis for the divergent chemistries
exhibited by enzymes belonging to the Tunneling-fold superfamily (T-fold).
Members of the T-fold superfamily catalyze a remarkable diversity of
chemistries, and while T-fold proteins typically exhibit very low sequence
homology, their topological homology is extremely high. Specifically, this
project addresses two T-fold enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of the
modified tRNA nucleosides queuosine and archaeosine, the enzymes QueF and
QueF-L. QueF catalyzes the reduction of a nitrile precursor to an amine in the
queuosine pathway in Bacteria, the only example of a nitrile reduction known in
biology. QueF-L exhibits high sequence homology to QueF by catalyzes the
chemically distinct conversion of a nitrile to an amidino group in the
archaeosine pathway in Archaea. These systems will be studied via the
application of kinetic (steady state and pre-steady state), mechanistic, and
X-ray structural studies of the wild-type and mutant enzymes to elucidate the
chemical mechanisms, as well as the structural basis for substrate/cofactor
binding and catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large number of protein
structures elucidated through X-ray crystallography over the past several
decades whose coordinates are available through the Protein Data Bank has
revealed that the number of basic protein scaffolds responsible for the myriad
proteins in biology is surprisingly small. Elucidating the molecular basis for
the different functions exhibited by members in a given structural family is one
of the next challenges facing structural and mechanistic biology, impacting our
ability to correctly identify the function of new proteins identified by whole
genome sequencing, to engineer proteins for new functions, as well as our
understanding of how proteins evolve. This project focuses on elucidating the
mechanistic chemistry of several members of the so-called Tunneling-fold family
and identifying the protein structural elements responsible for that chemistry.
The work is multidisciplinary, approaching the problem with tools from
chemistry, biochemistry, and structural and molecular biology to provide an
understanding of the molecular basis for the biological function of this
functionally diverse family of proteins. In addition to supporting the work of
graduate and undergraduate students, the project also incorporates the efforts
of high school teachers through a summer outreach program that engages K12
teachers in research.