* 1309277
* Non-Classical Precipitation Mechanisms in Titanium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Rajarshi Banerjee, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 241,032.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The proposed program focuses on novel non-classical
mechanisms of solid-state precipitation in metallic alloys, with a primary focus
on titanium (Ti) alloys. The significance of the proposed program stems from the
interrelationship between microstructure and properties in these alloys where
these interrelationships have been determined experimentally. To reduce the time
and costs of materials development and optimization, in the future these
quantities will be the subject of prediction by computational models. The
successful development of such computational models of microstructural evolution
depends critically on accurate descriptions of the nucleation process, so that
the models may be as physically relevant as possible. Hence, it is the role of
the proposed program to provide such accurate descriptions of the factors that
influence the nucleation process. The specific non-classical mechanisms of
precipitation in Ti alloys that will form the subject of the proposed research
are, the refined distribution of the alpha phase in Ti precipitated from a
matrix of the beta phase by the pseudo-spinodal mechanism and the coupled mixed-
mode mechanism of omega precipitation, with concurrently occurring displacive
and diffusional processes, in contrast to the legacy understanding. The
formation of an even more refined distribution of alpha-Ti in a beta-matrix with
the omega phase as a precursor will also be investigated. In the main, the
research will involve the application of novel state-of-the-art characterization
tools to the study of critical issues related to the two novel non-classical
precipitation mechanisms. Emphasis will be placed on determining the mechanisms
underlying the early stages of second phase nucleation. In addition, the
elemental partitioning between the different phases and compositional profiles
at interphase boundaries in these alloys will be determined at the highest
achievable accuracy and precision. A concurrent theme will be to determine the
accuracy, fidelity and interpretability of data and information obtained from
the two different types of analytical procedures, namely scanning transmission
electron microscopy-based electron energy loss spectroscopy and x-ray energy
dispersive spectroscopy, and the local electrode atom probe tomography.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The proposed research program involves a focused effort
aimed at formulating a detailed understanding of novel non-classical
precipitation mechanisms in Ti alloys. The proposed research effort brings
together state-of-the-art characterization tools for addressing these mechanisms
associated with Ti alloys. While the focus of the proposed program is on
titanium alloys, it should be noted that the mechanisms being investigated,
especially non-classical precipitation mediated via compositional fluctuations
of small amplitude, are applicable in general to other metallic materials, and,
in principle, also to ceramic and semiconducting systems. Additionally, the
program will also result in the development of useful new research tools for
nanoscale characterization which will be applicable to a wide range of metallic
materials beyond Ti alloys. The proposed research program is part of a larger
effort aimed at the provision of computation tools for the prediction of
microstructure evolution and microstructure/property relationships in materials,
an integral part of the national efforts under the Materials Genome Initiative
(MGI) and the Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) initiative.
The successful implementation of the proposed research will result in new
science and have a significant impact on industrial exploitation of materials
and hence will make a positive contribution to the Nation's economy. The
provision of research tools capable of prediction of properties in these alloys
will have a marked impact on industry. The educational outreach programs will
have a significant influence on encouraging high school students with diverse
ethnic backgrounds to enter science and engineering disciplines. To that end, a
very successful outreach program has involved interactive demonstrations at the
Columbus' Center of Science and Industry (COSI) where children and students of
all ages experience the world of materials through scanning electron
microscopes. Due to its geographic location, the College of Engineering and the
Department of Materials Science and Engineering at UNT, are in a unique position
to offer such education and training to the workforce of the Dallas-Fort Worth
Metroplex.