* 1309450
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Testing long-standing adaptive hypotheses for floral traits in the UV spectrum using comparative methods
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Tia-Lynn Ashman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2016
* USD 19,825.00

Plant species that vary in flower color are excellent models for understanding
the evolutionary processes that maintain variation. However, the insects that
are attracted to the flowers and subsequently pollinate them perceive color in
the ultraviolet (UV) spectrum, and many plants have UV floral patterns (i.e.,
variation in the degree of UV reflectance) that go unseen by the naked human
eye. The main hypothesis for the evolution of UV flower color is pollinator
attraction and efficiency. However, factors like abiotic stress may also impose
natural selection. Neither of these hypotheses has been adequately tested, thus
we are far from a synthetic view of the evolutionary processes influencing
floral patterns as they appear to insects. This project will address this gap
using Potentilla, a plant genus highly variable for floral UV pattern, some
species have patterned flowers while others are UV-absorptive or reflective. The
research will examine the evolutionary relationships within the genus and
characterize floral traits and habitat for all species to reveal evolutionary
transitions in UV pattern. Further, field-based experiments will test putative
biotic and abiotic drivers of UV pattern diversification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolution of diversity of flower color
is important to conservation of biodiversity. In addition, understanding plant
pollinator interactions has important practical implications for agriculture.
Genetic data on the plants will be made available through public databases. The
project includes mentoring several undergraduates in the scientific process as
well as graduate student training. The project will also include outreach
through the University of Pittsburgh Middle School Outreach Program, including
teacher training and classroom participation.