* 1309894
* Millimeter-wave Micro and Nano-Ferrite Circulators Integrated in CMOS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2020
* Valencia Koomson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 457,921.00

The objective of this program is to develop the next generation broadband
millimeter-wave circulators integrated in CMOS using nano- and micro-hexaferrite
materials operating in the 10 GHz to 100 GHz range. The proposed research
objectives will be revolutionary in the emerging area of a low-cost,
miniaturized millimeter wave devices and technology. The approach is based on
micro- and nano-sized hexagonal ferrite crystalline with strong internal
anisotropic magnetic field which can provide strong ferromagnetic resonance in
the millimeter wave length without strong external magnetic field. The post-
processing compatible with the standard state-of-art commercial CMOS process
will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this program
is the development of novel microstrip circulators and the innovative post-
processing methods for complete system on-chip millimeter-wave integrated
circuits in CMOS using micro- and nano-ferrite materials. A comprehensive
characterization study will be performed to analyze the dielectric and magnetic
properties of nano- and micro-ferrite. The study will expand the current body of
knowledge on fundamental characteristic properties of micro- nano-size ferrites,
and techniques to assemble unidirectional field ferrite layers on CMOS
substrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this program include:
(i) developing the high-frequency millimeter-wave circuits in low-cost silicon
CMOS processes with ferrite materials which enable the realization of high-
performance components for critical applications ranging from phased-array radar
to wireless transceivers for military as well as for satellite communications;
(ii) providing interdisciplinary training to students in ferrite material
science, electromagnetic waves, millimeter wave circuits, semiconductor
processing, as well as in application areas such as wireless network and radar,
with a particular focus on inclusion of members of underrepresented groups in
science and engineering; and (iii) enabling outreach by communicating to a wider
audience, the exciting interdisciplinary nature of the proposed device
development and the research it will enable, through public lectures, websites,
magazine articles, and undergraduate course material.