* 1309957
* Collaborative Research: Computational Thermochemistry of Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Christopher Wolverton, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 247,500.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
data enabled research and education on the thermochemistry of materials. Despite
its importance, both fundamental and practical, measured enthalpies of formation
are currently available only for a fraction of known compounds. The PIs will
perform large-scale computations of quantitatively accurate enthalpies of
formation for a significant fraction, of the order of 30,000-40,000, of known
compounds and create a publicly available database. They will use data mining to
extract quantitative relations among formation enthalpy values and physical and
chemical properties describing both the compounds and their elemental
constituents.&lt;br/&gt;These goals will be achieved by employing a
computational approach, called FERE, for computing accurate enthalpies of
formation using only structure and composition as inputs. Having such a database
will reveal interesting relationships between formation enthalpy values and
physical and chemical properties of compounds and their elemental constituents
which are so far undiscovered. Discovering those relations by applying modern
data mining techniques is an equally important goal of the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately ~150,000 compounds known today fall into the
category of "incomplete structural information." A recently developed
computational tool, the FPASS structure solver, is capable of providing
structures of compounds where only partial experimental information is
available. The PIs will begin solving some of these unknown crystal structures,
thereby allowing FERE calculations of the formation enthalpies, and continuous
expansion of the database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs also aim to develop a
tutorial "Materials for Sustainable Energies: Linking Experiment and
Computations" geared toward graduate students interested in energy-related
materials, as well as early-career faculty members and industrial
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and data enabled
research and education on the thermochemistry of materials. The enthalpy of
formation, the energy needed to form a compound out of its elemental
constituents, is one of the fundamental quantities characterizing a material. It
is also of great practical value and essential for many aspects of materials
science and chemical engineering. However, measured enthalpies of formation are
currently available only for a fraction of known compounds. This award supports
large-scale computations of quantitatively accurate enthalpies of formation for
a significant fraction of known compounds, on the order of 30,000 - 40,000,
creation of a publicly available database, and data mining to extract
quantitative relations among formation enthalpy values and physical and chemical
properties describing both the compounds and their elemental constituents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be achieved by employing a recently developed
method, named FERE, for computing accurate enthalpies of formation, and applying
it to known compounds with known crystal structures. The database will be
continuously updated with the formation enthalpy values of compounds with
partially known crystal structure by utilizing a computational tool that is
capable of providing structures of compounds where only partial experimental
information is available. The data mining of the resulting database will reveal
material/property relationships and provide deeper understanding of trends in
formation enthalpy values across the periodic table. Once created the database
will fill large gaps in the literature and offer numerous possibilities for
studying materials thermodynamics and thermochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is multidisciplinary in the sense that it draws on computational
techniques developed in the physics, materials science, and chemistry
communities to tackle problems of relevance to a wide range of disciplines. This
project will train a new generation of researchers conversant in all these
disciplines through mentorship of graduate and undergraduate students. The PIs
also aim to develop a tutorial "Materials for Sustainable Energies: Linking
Experiment and Computations" geared toward graduate students interested in
energy-related materials, as well as early-career faculty members and industrial
participants. Furthermore, this effort will extend beyond the core students
through workshops targeted for science teachers from predominantly minority
and/or underprivileged K-6 schools.