* 1309927
* Reconfigurable All-Digital CMOS Frequency Synthesizers for Cognitive and Milimeter-Wave Radios
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Jeyanandh Paramesh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Wireless communication has had an immeasurable economic, societal and scientific
impact worldwide. However, with the recent explosion of smartphones and tablets,
and the expected emergence of new types of networks such as sensor swarms and
the internet of things, the current model of licensed access to spectrum being
appears increasingly unviable. There is currently active research into two
complementary solutions: (1) spectrum sharing cognitive radios and (2) wireless
networks based on dense, short-range millimeter-wave links. The development of
highly reconfigurable, power-efficient radios is critical to the long term
success of these technologies. This proposal addresses a critical circuit-level
challenge by developing design techniques for agile, spectrally pure and
reconfigurable "universal" frequency synthesizers. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Compared to analog-based frequency synthesizers commonly used in current
radios, all-digital frequency synthesizers are less sensitive to the analog-
imperfections of nanoscale CMOS, are highly reconfigurable and can be rapidly
ported across technology nodes, and are therefore promising candidates for
universal frequency synthesis. However, the design of widely tunable
oscillators, high-resolution/high-linearity time-to-digital converters and the
interface between the two pose obstacles to the successful realization of all-
digital frequency synthesizers. Several new concepts and techniques are proposed
to address these challenges. These include multi-resonance mode switched and
phase-change via-reconfigurable oscillators, time-to-digital converters with in
situ statistical linearization, real-time digital assistance for the analog
components of the synthesizer and built-in monitoring, adaptation and self-test
circuitry. A CMOS prototype will be designed and fabricated to validate these
concepts. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact The outcomes of this research will fill a
critical need towards the realization of practical devices for use in future
wireless systems using advanced spectral access technologies. The outcomes will
also fill a pressing near-term need for prototypes that form the basis of pilot
testbeds. The educational components of this proposal include scientific
publications, public relations, mentoring, and outreach through various programs
conducted by the CMU Gelfand Center for Service Learning and Outreach; these
programs include the Moving 4th into Engineering and Summer Engineering
Experience for girls in middle school programs and other outreach programs for
women and other underrepresented groups. The outcomes of this research will be
integrated into various classes taught by the PI. A new capstone course on
Mixed-Signal Integrated Circuit Design will be developed. The PI will continue
to recruit and train undergraduate students through the the Summer Research
Experience Program Carnegie Mellon, with a special focus on attracting students
from minority groups and institutions.