* 1309579
* Collaborative Research: Biomimetic Bone: from Nano to Micro
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Ruberti, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,796.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1309657 PI: Gower, Laurie ORG: University of Florida

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1309579 PI: Ruberti, Jeffrey ORG: Northeastern University

Title: Collaborative Research: Biomimetic Bone: from Nano to Micro

Technical Part: Bone is a hierarchically-structured composite material which at
the nanoscale comprises an interpenetrating network of hydroxyapatite (HA)
nanocrystals dispersed within the interstices of self-assembled collagen
fibrils. The goal of the proposed research is to use a combination of biomimetic
processing techniques to synthesize collagen-hydroxyapatite composites with a
hierarchical structure emulating bone, and thus reproduce its mechanical
properties. The proposed work extends prior success in mimicking the
interpenetrating nanostructure of bone, by integrating it to the next level of
hierarchy: the lamellar microstructure of bone. To accomplish this goal,
densely-packed arrays of highly organized collagen will be produced using
liquid-crystalline precursor collagen solutions and then laminated to mimic the
twisted plywood structure found in the lamellae of osteonal bone. The
microlaminated structures will then be mineralized by the PILP process, which
has been shown to lead to intrafibrillar mineralization of collagen, with
oriented nanocrystals of hydroxyapatite embedded throughout the interstices of
the collagen fibrils. Compositions matching bone, with 60-70 wt% mineral, can be
achieved with the PILP process; however, even with this high degree of
mineralization, the inherent porosity of reconstituted collagen sponges prevents
the composites from supporting high loads. Thus, a highly-organized collagen, as
is found in bone, is needed for reproducing the properties of bone. If the
densely-packed collagen arrays can be mineralized via the PILP process, it
should be possible, for the first time, to match the modulus, strength and
toughness of bone. Micromechanical testing will be performed on the multilevel
composites generated with different lamination strategies to assess the quality
of the structures that are produced, and how the various structural parameters
(such as lamellar thickness, fiber diameter/organization, degree of
mineralization, etc.) correlate to mechanical properties. Finally, because bone
is a mechanical structure, the PILP process will be conducted on both loaded and
unloaded collagen arrays to determine if load might play a key role in bone
morphogenesis.

Non-Technical Part: Bone is a remarkable composite from which its underlying
structural design may help guide the design of future composite materials. There
have been many studies on the mechanical properties of bone, but because of its
hierarchical structure, it is difficult to isolate the effects of various
strengthening and toughening mechanisms that underlie each level of structure.
By developing an in vitro model system that can mimic separate levels of bone
structure, such properties might be examined without this overriding
complication, and benefit from the ability to tailor individual components of
the composites. This work also has important biomedical implications, both at
the fundamental science level with respect to understanding bone formation and
properties, and the applications side of developing the next generation of
orthopedic biomaterials. This biomimetic approach has the potential to lead to
load-bearing bioresorbable bone substitutes which are remodeled through the
cellular processes that occur during natural bone remodeling. With respect to
education, bone, due to its hierarchical structure, provides an interesting
forum for training students about composites in the materials science field.
Outreach programs such as Research Experience for Teachers (RET) and Biomimetic-
Materials Outreach Program (BMOP) will be continued, which have included
training and outreach to students at the graduate, undergraduate, and K-12
levels. A new outreach program is also proposed, in which public lectures will
be provided to aquarists in nearby cities to show them the interesting materials
science behind the invertebrate biominerals they enjoy as a hobby (such as sea
urchins and mollusk shells), and the similarities/differences between these
biominerals and vertebrate biominerals, to show how biomimetic engineers are
developing novel hierarchically-structured composite materials.