* 1309665
* Collaborative Research:   Renyi Divergence-based Robust Inference in Regression, Time Series and Association Studies.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Tharuvai Sriram, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2017
* USD 75,999.00

This collaborative research project focuses on developing a novel approach to
dimension reduction in regression, time series, and multivariate association
studies based on a family of Rényi divergences, with a central theme of
providing estimators that are inherently robust to data contamination,
sustaining only a minimal loss in efficiency. This family not only characterizes
the conditional independence underlying the concept of sufficient dimension
reduction in regression and time series, but also characterizes independence
between canonical variates in multivariate association studies. The novelty of
the approach lies in exploiting a tuning parameter of the family, which balances
the efficiency and the degree of robustness of the estimators. In each of the
three areas, this project focuses on investigating a host of issues such as: (i)
the computation of estimates, (ii) the detection of the true dimension, (iii)
the selection of an optimal tuning parameter, and (iv) a formal justification of
the method via theory. Furthermore, the project focuses on carrying out an in-
depth study of robustness via influence functions and sample/empirical influence
functions. Finally, the project focuses on finding an optimal Rényi divergence
measure that is both robust and efficient, without the need for prior outlier
detection or removal.

Rapid advances in technology have led to an information overload in most
sciences. A typical characteristic of many contemporary datasets is that they
are relatively high-dimensional in nature. This has prompted a shift in the
applied sciences toward a different relationship-study genre arising in
regression, time series and multivariate association, popularly known as
dimension reduction, whose goal is to reduce the dimensionality of the variables
as a first phase in the data analysis. However, the presence of outliers in
high-dimensional datasets adversely affects the performance of existing
dimension reduction methodologies, resulting in conclusions that are not
completely reliable. Given that outliers are commonly encountered in high-
dimensional datasets and that their presence is hard to detect, there is an
urgent need to identify dimension reduction methods that possess some degree of
automatic robustness, or non-sensitivity, to outliers. The proposed project
provides robust dimension reduction methods, which would contribute
significantly to the analysis of high-dimensional data arising in fields such as
the social sciences, machine learning, sports, economics, environmental studies,
morphometrics and cancer studies, among others. In fact, this project will not
only provide novel tools for scientists in various disciplines to obtain
reliable conclusions on high-dimensional data analysis, but also significantly
advance the statistical theory, thereby paving a new research path in dimension
reduction.