* 1309094
* Micromagnetic Study of Controllable Domain Wall Motion in Ferromagnetic Nanowire Arrays via Transverse Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Andrew Kunz, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2016
* USD 126,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and undergraduate
education efforts on ferromagnetic materials and magnetization dynamics.
Undergraduate physics majors will be supported by this award to conduct research
on understanding the processes necessary to control a single domain wall in an
array of ferromagnetic nanowires each of which contain multiple domain walls.
Domain wall motion is being intensely investigated due to a variety of
interesting physical properties and potential applications in data storage and
sensing. However the bulk of the research efforts have been focused on the
behavior of one domain wall in a single wire. The viability of the technologies
here depends on the ability to manipulate a given domain wall in large arrays of
wires. Since each domain wall in the system potentially responds to the driving
mechanism, techniques need to be developed to select and control a given domain
wall.

The PI has identified an important characteristic of domain wall motion which
has the potential for improving selectivity and control. Local magnetic fields
applied along the primary domain wall magnetization direction, a transverse
field, can be used to select a particular domain wall and to move it reliably.
Because the transverse field gives additional pressure to a domain wall the
combination of the transverse field and the overall driving mechanism, which
could be an external field or a spin-torque applied by a current, can be used
for selection. New theories will be developed to assist in explaining the
overall behavior and predict reliable combinations.

Micromagnetic simulation is an ideal tool for this research as the technique
allows for picosecond time resolution with concurrent nanometer spatial
resolution; each of which is necessary for accurately depicting the high speed
magnetization dynamics. The tool is accessible to undergraduates and additional
computer programming and theoretical efforts will be combined to analyze and
understand the results. The PI and Marquette University are committed to
encouraging underrepresented groups in the STEM fields to participate in
research. Local outreach efforts will be continued with the help of this award
and research by the PI and his students. NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational and theoretical research on ferromagnetic
nanowires by undergraduate physics majors. Nanowires are very tiny wires that
are some 10,000 times smaller in diameter than a human hair.

In a magnetic material a domain wall forms between two regions of oppositely
oriented magnetism. When formed in a nanowire, devices have been demonstrated in
which the high- speed motion of a domain wall is used: to carry out logic
operations, for high capacity data storage, and as sensors via varying
magnetoresistance. In addition to increased data storage capacity, magnetic
devices are non-volatile, consume less energy, and have operational speeds
significantly faster than today's technologies. These devices will necessarily
consist of multiple ferromagnetic nanowires each containing multiple domain
walls, but the majority of the prior effort in understanding domain wall motion
has focused on single domain walls in a single wire. This award will be used to
develop techniques to control an individual domain wall, in the presence of
other domain walls with which there will be interactions, through an individual
wire in the array.

The project engages undergraduate physics majors to participate in carrying out
computer simulations and theoretical modeling. The computer simulations follow
an equation of motion for each tiny magnetic region in the nanowire. The
equation of motion is essentially a torque equation and as such is easily
accessible to undergraduate physics majors. Students benefit from the research
experience which in the process adds to their education in magnetic materials
and nanotechnology. Some of the simpler interpretations and results are used for
current topics in introductory courses to highlight the importance of classical
physics in modern research and technology and models have been developed to use
in outreach efforts. The PI is committed to providing opportunities for students
underrepresented in the STEM fields.