* 1309346
* CRCNS: Collaborative Research: A Computational and Neuroimaging Investigation of Prediction and Learning in Cognitive Control
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Angela Yu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 542,839.00

An important component of healthy human brain function is inhibitory control,
the ability to stop the currently adopted behavioral strategies in response to
changing task demands. Traditionally, it has been thought that the capacity for
inhibitory control is fairly stable in an individual; however, recent
experimental data have revealed that human subjects readily alter their measured
inhibitory control capacity in response to environmental changes. In this
proposal, Dr. Angela Yu of the University of California, San Diego and Dr.
Chiang-Shan Li of Yale University will use a new computational framework to
account for such flexibility in terms of the underlying component processes in
the brain. They will record brain activity from the volunteers when they must
interrupt a habitual response and utilize a Bayesian ideal observer framework to
model subjects, internal representation of the task demands, and dynamic
adjustment of that representation and consequent changes in behavioral strategy
based on experienced outcomes. This project is expected to facilitate an
integrated theoretical and neurobiological understanding of human cognitive
control as a more dynamic and adaptive phenomenon than traditionally
envisioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deficits in inhibitory control afflict a number
of psychiatric conditions, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder,
depression, drug abuse, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Understanding the
brain's computational and organizational principles underlying inhibitory
control would help to unravel how malfunctions of the underlying components may
lead to different types of pathology, a focus of Dr. Li's current research. This
proposal will allow Dr. Yu to continue to train graduate and undergraduate
students in cognitive neuroscience research and, in particular, to support women
scientists, who are under-represented in this field. This effort will also allow
Dr. Li to broaden his participation in the Perspectives in Science and
Engineering, a research program at Yale University dedicated to training
undergraduates with advanced knowledge in science and engineering. Finally, Dr.
Yu and Dr. Li will participate in the big data sharing effort by making the data
available to support other efforts that aim to make use of real data in the
teaching of STEM-related courses and to enable participation in discovery
science by those who would otherwise have no access to such data.