* 1309230
* Collaborative Research: High Performance Integrated InAs QD Laser Based Si Photonics Optical Transceiver
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Wei Guo, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2017
* USD 186,717.00

Intellectual merit: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to demonstrate
direct modulated high performance InAs quantum dot laser array integrated with
passive a-Si:H waveguides and multiplexer components by a novel in-plane
integrations scheme and achieve, for the first time, an integrated optical
transceiver on the Si platform. High performance integrated optical transceiver
circuits on the Si platform have been elusive, and their demonstration is
transformative and can be considered a milestone in the field of Si photonics
when the proposed integrated silicon photonic chips are compared with the
discrete component-based photonic IC counterparts. The unique quantum dot laser
structures and novel in-plane integration scheme are more suitable in silicon
photonics than other devices and integration schemes that are currently being
explored.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are the
interdisciplinary nature of the program. Outreach projects are highlighted to
provide research experience for undergraduates and K-12 students and expose them
to science and engineering disciplines. Demonstration of the operation of an
optical interconnection circuit with discrete components will be given to K-12
students through the Beyond-9.8 outreach program. The proposed program provides
a broader impact to our society beyond technical merits, it bridges
optoelectronics with microelectronics, physics and materials science and
engineering, and it can extend optoelectronics to real applications.