* 1309356
* Estimation of Convex Objects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Adityanand Guntuboyina, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2017
* USD 257,510.00

In this proposal, an aspect of the interaction between convexity and statistics
is addressed where nonparametric statistical estimation problems are studied in
which convexity is present largely as a constraint controlling the unknown
object of interest. Attention is focused on four prominent such problems
including convex regression and log-concave density estimation. The importance
of these problems is well recognized in the statistical community as well as
various other disciplines and many papers have been written on them. However,
many unsolved questions exist in the estimation theory and methodology for these
problems especially in the multidimensional case. Indeed, the theory and
methodology here is nowhere as sophisticated as that of certain other areas of
nonparametric statistics such as classical function estimation under smoothness
and sparsity constraints. The main goal of this proposal is to bridge this gap.
The emphasis is on the following areas of research: (a) Studying the theoretical
properties of the commonly used estimators such as MLE and least squares
estimators, (b) Establishing a minimax theory (determination of the minimax rate
of convergence, constructing of approximately minimax estimators etc), (c)
Understanding adaptive estimation, (d) implementing practical algorithms for
computing minimax and adaptive estimators, and (e) constructing alternative
simpler estimators based on classical ideas from nonparametric function
estimation such as smoothing and kernel based estimation. Our methods of
analysis involve ideas from convex geometry, empirical processes, nonparametric
statistics and information theory.

In recent years, there has been a significant influx of ideas and methods into
statistics from the fields of convex geometry and optimization. A main reason
for this is the predominance of large datasets in contemporary applied
statistics where efficient computation is a necessity and convex optimization
techniques are tailor-made for such applications. This proposal aims to further
our understanding of this deep connection between convexity and statistics by
focusing on statistical problems where convexity is present as a constraint
controlling the unknown objects of interest. The main goal of this research is
to bring the theoretical and methodological developments in this important area
of statistics to the same level of sophistication present in other well-studied
related areas of statistics such as classical function estimation. The proposed
research has applications in a diverse set of fields ranging from engineering to
economics. Specifically, the problems studied here arise in areas such as
computed tomography, target reconstruction from laser-radar measurements,
robotic tactile sensing, image analysis, geometric tomography, estimation of
production, utility and demand/supply functions in economics and operations
research, decentralized detection etc. Results coming out of this research will
also contribute to the mathematical fields of approximation theory, convex
geometry and theoretical statistics.