* 1309173
* AGEP-Transformation: The CIC Professorial Advancement Initiative
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2021
* Linda Mason, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 02/28/2021
* USD 345,740.00

The CIC Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate's Professional
Advancement Initiative (PAI) was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF
12-554) for the AGEP-Transformation (AGEP-T) track. The AGEP-T track targets
strategic alliances of institutions and organizations to develop, implement, and
study innovative evidence-based models and standards for STEM graduate
education, postdoctoral training, and academic STEM career preparation that
eliminate or mitigate negative factors and promote positive practices for
URMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIC AGEP PAI is a collaboration between the
University of Illinois-Champaign (UIUC) and Purdue University (PU) to partner
with other university members of the Committee on Institutional Cooperation
(CIC): Indiana University, University of Iowa, University of Michigan, Michigan
State University, University of Minnesota, University of Nebraska-Lincoln,
Northwestern University, Ohio State University, Pennsylvania State University,
and University of Wisconsin-Madison. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance is
creating a "Professorial Advancement Initiativ" (PAI) with a goal to increase
the number of underrepresented minority (URM) faculty members hired within the
CIC partnering institutions. The PAI Alliance participants are URM U.S. citizen
in STEM fields. The two objectives for this project are:&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1:
To create a pool of URM post-doctoral fellows, prepared and trained to enter the
academy as tenure track facility.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: To educate faculty and
faculty search committees about unconscious bias and diversity
hiring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives have the following measureable
outcomes associated with them:&lt;br/&gt;1. The number of URM postdocs recruited
into the PAI.&lt;br/&gt;2. The number of PAI applications submitted to the CIC
partnering institutions.&lt;br/&gt;3. The number of URM postdocs interviewed
with the CIC partnering institutions.&lt;br/&gt;4. The number of offers extended
to URMs in the CIC partnering institutions.&lt;br/&gt;5. The number of offers
accepted.&lt;br/&gt;6. The number of faculty mentors recruited to participate in
the PAI.&lt;br/&gt;7. The number of faculty members participating in PAI hiring
committee training program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities that contribute
to the model for the CIC's AGEP PAI include implementing: &lt;br/&gt;- A program
of small group mentoring for URM postdoctoral fellows across STEM disciplines in
the CIC partnering institutions;&lt;br/&gt;- Interactive video-teleconferences
for mentors and protégés (aka, the postdoctoral fellows); and&lt;br/&gt;- A
program for training faculty and hiring committees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal includes a social science research study focusing on determining how
the mentoring environment, ranging from a micro-systems (e.g., peer-to-peer
interactions, faculty-to-peer interactions) to macro-systems (e.g., broader
social context), affects the self-efficacy and identity of postdoctoral fellows
within their STEM disciplines. Specifically, the team is exploring answers to
two primary questions that address the research goal of this project:
&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the influence of mentoring on URM postdoctoral fellows'
self-efficacy and identities as STEM researchers?&lt;br/&gt;2. How does the
degree of importance that STEM postdoctoral fellows place on having a matched
mentor background influence their self-efficacy and identities?&lt;br/&gt;A
third question explores the impacts of faculty bias on postdoctoral fellows:
What is the influence of mentoring experience on faculty's subtle bias towards
URM postdoctoral fellows' in STEM disciplines?