* 1309571
* Polarization Quantum Beat Spectroscopy in Diatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Burcin Bayram, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

In this scientific project, energy transfer processes in collisions between
atoms and molecules are investigated. These processes play an important role and
are essential to the understanding of combustion dynamics, astrophysical plasmas
and plasma formation. The results can serve as bench marks with which to verify
theoretical models of the processes. Theoretical models are themselves useful
because they may be then conveniently applied to physical systems that are more
difficult or more expensive to study experimentally. The amount of energy
transfer arising from collisions between atoms and molecules will be studied by
using two lasers. First, the internal properties of the quantum states of
molecules will be manipulated by a laser beam. These molecules then oscillate
like vibrating violin strings and collisions can alter their quantum properties.
A second probe laser will arrive at the system after some time delay and sense
this alteration. By varying the delay time between the two lasers as short as 10
picoseconds, time evolution of the molecular properties can be mapped out,
similar to the way a stroboscope maps out the motion of macroscopic objects.
These studies can provide exceptional spectroscopic precision and understanding
of the various transfer processes.

This project provides understanding of energy transfer processes that are
important in combustion and plasma formation. It has an essential and socially
important educational aspect as well. This project integrates research
components into course work at Miami University while providing students with
hands-on laboratory experience with state-of-the-art technology. The extensive
research training and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students
contribute to the future professionals entering science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) fields.