* 1309318
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Brian Connelly, Connelly                Brian          D
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 05/31/2015
* USD 138,000.00

The Co-Evolution of Cooperation and Communication in Quorum Sensing Systems

Quorum sensing is a widespread form of communication among bacteria that allows
populations to adapt to changing environments. Communication occurs through the
production and detection of signaling molecules. When the level of these signals
surpasses a threshold, quorum sensing triggers rapid and potentially broad
behavioral changes. Because these changes often involve social behaviors, quorum
sensing is now understood to play a vital role in cooperation. By allowing
populations to cooperate only when beneficial, quorum sensing stabilizes
cooperation both in changing environments and in the presence of cheaters. This
project combines bacterial experimentation with mathematical- and computational
modeling to address three key aspects related to the link between quorum sensing
and cooperation: how communication allows cooperators to respond to changing
environments, how communication allows cooperators to resist invasion by
cheaters, and how communication and cooperation co-evolve. Each of these
outcomes is critical for the evolution and maintenance of cooperation in natural
communities, which are typically composed of many interacting species, and which
face constant environmental change.

Training objectives focus on multi-model investigation using a combination of
biological, mathematical, and computational approaches. This project will
strengthen and expand on the fellow's skills in microbial experimental evolution
and mathematical modeling. Broader impacts include mentoring undergraduate
students, the production of open source software modules for teaching evolution
both in educational settings and at home by the general public, and the creation
of interactive art which captures and illustrates the dynamics of evolving,
cooperating systems.