* 1309410
* Cracking the Color Code of DNA-stabilized Metal Nanoclusters with Rapid Optical Array Characterization and Machine Learning
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,03/31/2018
* Elisabeth Gwinn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2018
* USD 315,000.00

Technical Abstract

Elisabeth Gwinn of the University of California, Santa Barbara is supported by
an award from the Computational and Data Driven Materials Research program for
research to combine computational machine learning tools with strategic data
obtained from fast, array format optical characterization, with the goal of
discovering and developing a versatile new class of photonic nanomaterial.
Specifically, the work will investigate fluorescent, DNA-stabilized, few-atom
metal nanoclusters, or DNA-mNCs. DNA-mNCs based on silver clusters are already
beginning to be used in innovative imaging, molecular logic, and selective
sensor applications. The recent discovery of copper-based DNA-mNCs suggests that
the formation of fluorescent clusters in DNA hosts may generalize to other
coinage metals.

The PI's prior work revealed the special sensitivity of silver cluster
fluorescence to the sequence and secondary structure of the host DNA. Studies of
small sets of various DNA strands have found DNA-AgNCs with fluorescence colors
spanning 500 - 900 nm. Together with the compact sizes of DNA-mNCs, which are
compatible with the finest resolutions accessed by DNA nanotechnology, this wide
color space may open new arenas beyond current solution applications, in
nanoscale photonic arrays for information processing and signaling of
biochemical and physical events. However, there is essentially no current
understanding of how the properties of DNA-mNCs relate to the sequence of the
host DNA. Even for the relatively well-studied DNA-AgNCs, there are no
identified sequence motifs that govern fluorescence color, brightness or
stability. This is despite the fundamental importance of these properties to all
applications, and to the underlying materials science. But, only ~100 strands
have been examined as potential hosts for chemically stable DNA-AgNCs. This is a
miniscule sampling of the space of possible sequences.

This research aims to crack the code for the sequence characteristics that
govern the properties of DNA-mNCs, by applying machine learning tools to much
larger, strategically selected data sets. The data will be acquired by robotic
synthesis and rapid array optical characterization of Ag-based DNA-mNCs. Strand
selection will leverage the knowledge of DNA-AgNCs developed in the PI's prior
work. To elucidate the role of the specific metal from which the cluster is
formed, experiments on other coinage metals, including copper, will also be
made.

The undergraduate and graduate students who participate in the work will be
trained in advanced techniques encompassing materials science, computer science
and nanotechnology. High school students will be exposed to aspects of the work
through UCSB's School for Scientific Thought (SST).

Non-Technical Abstract

This work focuses on tiny clusters composed of just a few atoms of metal, that
are made stable in water by wrapping the clusters up in short strands of DNA. It
has been known for many years that "bare" clusters made of a few metal atoms
have very interesting optical properties. In particular, they can be
fluorescent, meaning that the clusters emit photons after they are placed in an
excited state. These DNA-encapsulated, few-atom metal nanoclusters may have many
potential uses, such as fluorescent sensing of toxic ions and of targeted DNA
and RNA strands.

The most fascinating and potentially useful feature of these materials is the
fact that different DNA sequences can produce clusters of different color.
Cracking the code for the DNA sequence characteristics that govern this color is
the focus of this work. The primary focus will be on silver clusters, building
on previous work, but to elucidate the role of the specific metal from which the
cluster is formed, experiments on other metals, including copper, will also be
carried out.

The undergraduate and graduate students who participate in the work will be
trained in advanced techniques encompassing materials science, computer science
and nanotechnology. High school students will be exposed to aspects of the work
through UCSB's School for Scientific Thought (SST).