* 1309337
* Collaborative Research: Search for the Zero-Magnetic-Field Wigner Solid
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Sergey Kravchenko, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;First predicted by Eugene Wigner in 1934,
the realization of the electronic solid (Wigner Crystal) which forms when the
interactions between electrons strongly exceed their kinetic energy has been a
long-standing challenge. A classical Wigner crystal has been realized for
electrons on the surface of liquid helium, and possible evidence of
crystallization of quantum electron systems has been obtained in strong magnetic
field. The aim of this project is to realize the quantum Wigner crystal in zero
field, to obtain definitive evidence of its existence, and to study its
formation as a function of temperature, magnetic field, electron density and
disorder. The search for the zero-field Wigner solid is especially promising at
this time because: (a) we have recently obtained compelling evidence that there
is a genuine phase transition in a dilute 2D electron system driven by
interactions to a low-density phase that may be a precursor phase or the Wigner
Crystal itself; (b) samples are now available that far exceed the quality of the
samples used 20 years ago in which measurements suggested the possibility of
Wigner crystallization. We will investigate the nonlinear transport and noise
spectra of low-density, low-disorder, strongly correlated two-dimensional
electron systems in metal-oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs)
and strained silicon quantum wells in Si/SiGe heterostructures. This project
will support the education of a PhD student in these advanced technologies,
which has historically shown itself to be excellent training for many scientific
careers from academia to our most advanced technology
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;In
most metals, electrons behave like a gas and move randomly through the structure
formed by the massive positive ions. Eugene Wigner predicted in 1934 that when
the energy of motion of the electrons is much lower than the energy of
interaction between them, the electron gas will instead freeze into a lattice,
forming a "Wigner crystal" or "Wigner glass". Realized for electrons on the
surface of liquid helium, and possibly in semiconductors in strong magnetic
field, the Wigner solid has not been found in semiconductors in the absence of
magnetic field. By measurements of the nonlinear resistance and noise spectra of
low-density two-dimensional electron systems in silicon metal-oxide
semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) and Si/Si-Ge heterostructures,
we plan to realize and investigate the long sought-after zero field Wigner
crystal, thereby providing opportunities for studies in a heretofore unexplored
region, and adding a deeper fundamental understanding of semiconductors -
materials that are of great importance to our current technology. This project
will support the education of a PhD student in these advanced technologies,
which has historically shown itself to be excellent training for many scientific
careers from academia to our most advanced technology industries.