* 1309152
* Heegaard Floer homology, knots, and three-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Zoltan Szabo, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2017
* USD 452,367.00

The central themes of this project are Low Dimensional Topology and Knot Theory.
One of the main techniques involved is Heegaard Floer homology, developed by
Peter Ozsvath and the principal investigator. The investigator will study knots,
three-manifolds and smooth 4-manifolds by using recent advances and developing
new techniques. In a different direction the PI investigates the relationship
between different homological invariants for knots and links. The PI also
studies foundational problems in Heegaard Floer homology and knot Floer
homology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies various three-dimensional
spaces (three-manifolds), and also embedded loops inside three-manifolds.
Heegaard Floer homology, developed by the principal investigator and Peter
Ozsvath, plays a central role in the project. This theory has close ties to
gauge theoretical invariants that originated from interactions between
Mathematics and Mathematical Physics. Some of the recent results in Knot and
Heegaard Floer homologies are also related to different mathematical fields,
such as combinatorial constructions and algebraic techniques. A better
understanding of the central problems in the project are expected to lead to
further discoveries and new bridges between different mathematical fields. The
project is also aimed to enhance graduate student research and introduce
graduate students to the areas of Low Dimensional Topology and Heegaard Floer
invariants.