* 1309072
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Tests of parallel divergence processes in montane plants: links between population differentiation and species diversity patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Robert Massatti, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,215.00

How did the cyclical advance and retreat of glaciers affect biodiversity within
mountainous regions? How do environmental gradients and geography influence the
current structure of diversity within species across their ranges? Researchers
will address these questions by utilizing hundreds of DNA sequences from six
closely related plant species native to the mountains of western North America.
Analytical modeling techniques will allow them to determine if speciation events
occurred uniformly among pairs of sister species or if they occurred under a
variety of different scenarios. Subsequently, researchers will determine if
glaciations that dramatically altered montane landscapes and suitable habitat
during the Pleistocene Epoch (from 2,600,000 to 20,000 years ago) impacted
species? distributions randomly or predictably. Finally, researchers will
investigate if the current molecular variation within each of the species is
distributed along environmental gradients (for example, the change in
temperature between a valley floor and a mountaintop), by geography, or from the
shifting of habitats during glaciations. Knowledge gained from these analyses
will help researchers understand how biodiversity was created in the mountains.
It will also help elucidate the relative importance of climatic stability versus
specific environmental and geographic conditions in structuring the distribution
of molecular diversity within species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms living in
montane ecosystems are facing an uncertain future as climate change alters
temperature and precipitation regimes. Many montane organisms will be forced to
move upslope as lower elevations become warmer and drier, and organisms already
restricted to the highest elevations may die off because suitable habitat will
no longer exist. Knowing what environmental variables influence the
distributions of plants across the landscape will allow land managers and
conservationists to counteract declines in species? population sizes. This
research will inform professionals about how habitat suitability will change
across the landscape, and help them to determine from where to source plant
material in order to have the best results for reintroduction or assisted
migration efforts. In summary, the results will contribute information relevant
to preserving biodiversity across montane landscapes by highlighting how
individual species are sensitive to different environmental conditions.