* 1309710
* Collaborative Research: Surface Coordination Chemistry: Toward Novel Functionality via Understanding Substrate Charge Transfer and Oxidation State
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Ludwig Bartels, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2019
* USD 242,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Talat S. Rahman of University of
Central Florida and Prof. Ludwig Bartels of the University of California,
Riverside, and their students will use a combination of scanning tunneling
microscopy and first principles electronic structure calculations to image and
understand the formation of metal coordination networks on a number of metallic
surfaces. They will explore in detail electronic properties of these supported
metal coordination centers to address properties such as (i) charge transfer
(between molecule &amp; substrate, metal-center &amp; molecule, and metal-center
&amp; substrate), and (ii) shape and energetics of molecular orbitals and their
relation to conventional metal organic chemistry. Tuning of the effective
oxidation state of metal-centers and of ligand HOMO-LUMO gaps by suitable choice
of the substrate electronic properties will provide descriptors for variation of
the local chemical and geometrical environment. Furthermore, general rules that
define the coordination geometry around metal-centers on surfaces will be sought
and conditions for stability of coordination centers with specific geometry
(e.g., triagonal vs. square) will be tested. Attention will also be paid to
understanding the magnetic characteristics of metal coordination centers: metal-
center/molecule/substrate combinations which conspire to produce stable magnetic
networks will be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide state
of the art modeling and/or laboratory experiences for graduate and undergraduate
students and junior scientists who will be learning the techniques of chemical
synthesis, formation of metal coordination networks on various metallic
surfaces, imaging, and complementary ab initio electronic structure
calculations. The project consists of a systematic exploration of coordination
chemistry at metal surfaces which will provide the framework for establishing
the rules that distinguish it from conventional ligand field and crystal field
theory, which govern solution-phase metal organic chemistry. Examination of
vibrational and magnetic characteristics of the systems and the special role of
dispersion forces will add further value to the proposed work. Through
leadership by a theorist, this project is certain to create systematic
understanding, deeper insights and faster validation of findings and their
generalizations to other systems. The proposed work is expected to have impact
on industrial methodologies and society at large by providing access to metal
coordination networks in a deterministic fashion. Control of such structures
will allow continuous surface patterning from the atomic to the macroscopic
scale, which should prove important for a large range of microelectronic,
optoelectronic and magnetic applications. The work will also provide
opportunities for educational and outreach activities with proven broad
national, international and societal impact.