* 1309212
* Low-Dimensional Contact and Symplectic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Thomas Mark, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2017
* USD 141,321.00

The topology of smooth 4-dimensional manifolds presents an ever-deepening
mystery. It is natural to impose geometric constraints to narrow the
possibilities, and an interesting such constraint is the existence of a
symplectic structure. In the case of 4-manifolds with boundary the natural
structure arising on the boundary is a contact structure; there are many deep
and fascinating questions involving contact and symplectic topology, and their
interplay with smooth topology coming from gauge-theoretic invariants. The PI
will use symplectic and contact geometry in conjunction with Floer homology
invariants to study several related questions. First, the PI has introduced
several new geometric operations on 4-manifolds that can be realized as
instances of monodromy substitutions in Lefschetz fibrations, and has proved
convexity results that mean such substitution operations are symplectic. The PI
will pursue this line of inquiry with the goal of finding new constructions of
exotic symplectic 4-manifolds. Second, the PI will study Stein fillings of
contact structures supported by planar open books: by translating the
classification problem for Stein fillings into a certain symplectic isotopy
problem, the PI will adapt pseudo-holomorphic techniques of Siebert--Tian and
others to study finiteness questions for this situation. Next, the PI will study
the problem of "symplectic fiber sum decomposition," which is the question of
whether a symplectic manifold diffeomorphic to a fiber sum can be realized as a
symplectic fiber sum. This question has bearing on the hypothesis that gauge-
theoretic invariants do not provide complete information on the diffeomorphism
types of 4-manifolds in a fixed homeomorphism class. Finally, he will pursue
recent work relating Heegaard Floer homology with an invariant of open book
decompositions of 3-manifolds called the fractional Dehn twist coefficient.

Since Einstein's description of mechanics and electrodynamics as inherently a
four-dimensional theory, the observed universe has generally been conceived as a
smooth four-dimensional manifold: that is, a four-dimensional analog of a smooth
surface such as a plane or sphere. A fundamental question is then: what manifold
is it? To pose a simplified analogy, the surface of the earth is generally
"flat" when viewed by a casual observer, but it is a mistake to infer that it is
planar. The universe is similarly "mostly flat" on an appropriate distance
scale, but its global topology or "shape" is not known. A goal of the 4-manifold
topologist, then, is to describe the list of possibilities for the structure of
the universe, in analogy with the relatively easy-to-understand list of possible
surfaces from which a "generally flat" object like the surface of the earth can
select. There are two ways to focus this effort: by introducing geometric
structures (in this case a "symplectic" structure, loosely a way of measuring
area or volume) that do not exist on every 4-manifold, yet leave a rich and
interesting class of examples to study and may also give a stepping-stone to the
general situation; and by "cutting" a complicated manifold into simpler pieces
and studying the latter individually. The work supported by this grant will use
both these approaches: apply techniques recently introduced by the PI and
collaborators to construct interesting new examples of symplectic 4-manifolds;
and also study whether and how symplectic 4-manifolds can be decomposed into
simpler pieces. Moreover, the PI hopes to make progress in classifying some of
the most rigid of these pieces, known as Stein manifolds, with the aim of
exploring some of the poorly-understood myriad of possibilities in smooth
4-dimensional topology.