* 1309817
* Probing Charge Transfer Dynamics in Single QD-Molecule Complexes Using QD or Molecule Modified AFM Tips
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Tianquan Lian, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 419,999.00

Professor Tianquan (Tim) Lian of Emory University is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the Division
of Chemistry to develop a new technique for imaging charge transfer interactions
in nanomaterials using integrated atomic force (AFM) and single molecule
(particle) fluorescence spectroscopy. By attaching electron donors or acceptors
on AFM tips, the spatial arrangement and interaction between the donor and
acceptors can be controlled by AFM, while their charge transfer interaction and
dynamics can be followed simultaneously using single molecule fluorescence
spectroscopy. Therefore, this research is expected to offer a new and general
approach for studying charge transfer interaction and dynamics in many donor-
acceptor complexes, which is particularly important for nanomaterials because of
the heterogeneous distributions of sizes, shapes and interactions.

The proposed study will lead to a better understanding of charge transfer
processes from nanostructures (quantum dots and quantum rod) and provide
guidance for the improvement of these materials and their applications in solar
energy conversion technology. In addition to the training of postdoctoral
fellows, graduate students and undergraduate students, the proposed research
also offers the opportunity to broaden the participation of under-represented
minority students through research collaborations with faculty in the Atlanta
University Center, undergraduate research programs co-sponsored by the Emory
Center of Science Education, and the Georgia Intern-Fellowships for Teachers
(GIFT) program.