* 1309414
* Investigating the Structure of Flexible Polyelectrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Omar Saleh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of California Santa Barbara is to investigate the structure of
polyelectrolytes of variable charge density so as to establish the relationship
of the classical 'electrostatic blob' picture of weakly-charged polymers to the
'snake-like chain' (SLC) model, which appears to hold for highly-charged
polymers. Additionally, this project is to broadly-establish the SLC nature of
flexible polyelectrolytes. Charged, flexible polymers are ubiquitous in biology
and technology, yet the basic physics underling their structure is poorly
established. The investigator's recent studies indicated that these structures
are best-defined as a so-called 'snake-like chain'. This project will
investigate the general role of soft monomer repulsions in creating SLC
structure using comb polymers that replace electrostatic repulsions with
entropic repulsions between side-chains. This project will investigate these
systems using low-force single-molecule elasticity measurements, and analyze
them in comparison to both simulation and theory. The work described in this
proposal is highly interdisciplinary, and so represents an excellent opportunity
for training young scientists. To exploit this opportunity, the project plans to
support graduate students and to continue investigator lab's extremely strong
record of involving undergraduate researchers. Undergraduate research
experiences are proven to have significant positive effects on student's nascent
scientific careers, and this project has identified specific potential
internship projects associated with this proposal.

Polyelectrolytes are long, string-like molecules that carry a large electrical
charge. The combination of this electric charge and the floppy nature of the
string-like structure itself permits polyelectrolytes to adopt a wide range of
different configurations that impart technologically- and biologically-important
properties. For example, polyelectrolytes are used in coating technologies (e.g.
to reduce UV transmission of windows), and as water soluble-materials in
diapers. In the biological arena, DNA, RNA, and many proteins can be considered
polyelectrolytes whose charge affects their structure, and thus their biological
functions. This proposal will use novel and powerful experimental probes to
better understand the physics of individual polyelectrolytes. The information
obtained will establish predictive models of polyelectrolyte configuration that,
in turn, can be used to improve both technological application of
polyelectrolytes, and our understanding of certain charge-based bimolecular
transactions. The scientific broader impact would be a greatly improved
understanding of polymer behavior, which in the long term could lead to better
materials development. The educational and outreach activities included
recruitment of undergraduate students from a variety of on campus programs
including those enabling research activities for students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in the physical sciences.