* 1309686
* Aligned Core-Shell Piezoelectric Nanofibers based Pressure Sensors on Catheter
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Xiaojing (John) Zhang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 07/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new class of miniaturized
sensors-on-catheter&lt;br/&gt;technology through the integration of functional
nanomaterials and flexible microsystems, for&lt;br/&gt;in situ blood pressure
and flow monitoring with high sensitivity, fast recovery time
and&lt;br/&gt;minimal invasiveness. In particular, we will develop highly
aligned core-shell piezoelectric&lt;br/&gt;nanofibers based flexible thin film
sensors patterned on catheter tips with dramatically&lt;br/&gt;reduced form
factor, which are ready to be deployed in intra-vascular
environment.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Real-time endovascular pressure
measurement techniques are crucial to evaluate the hemodynamics, which indicates
the physiological state of the cardiovascular system. &lt;br/&gt;We propose a
paradigm shift in designing the endovascular pressure sensing technology,
through developing thin film flexible sensing structures using nanoengineered
piezoelectric polymers which can be integrated on catheters without consuming
its internal lumen space. Broader Impact: Development of versatile microsensors
with built-in nanostructures as the core sensing elements can profoundly
revolutionize the catheter development. In addition, the technology generated
from this research can be extended to develop a broad class of flexible, robust,
and biocompatible sensing nanomaterials with emergent behavior that work with
the extraordinary effectiveness to quantify the biological processes.
&lt;br/&gt;