* 1309854
* Collaborative Research: Why Does Oxidation Improve Freezing? Using Laboratory Measurements and Molecular Simulations to Investigate Heterogeneous Ice Nucleation on Carbon Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Sarah Brooks, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 220,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) program of the Division of Chemistry
supports the collaborative research efforts of Sarah D. Brooks (Texas A&amp;M
University) and Valeria Molinero (University of Utah) to investigate the
heterogeneous nucleation of ice on model organic surfaces and soot using an
unprecedented combination of laboratory measurements and molecular simulations.
The primary objective of this project is to evaluate which specific chemical and
physical properties of carbonaceous surfaces modulate their ability to act as
ice nuclei for water freezing. The second objective is to elucidate the
heterogeneous mechanisms of formation of ice on these surfaces. Previous
laboratory results suggest that oxidation processes representative of
atmospheric aging improve the ice nucleating ability of aerosols, facilitating
contact freezing at warmer temperatures. Oxidation, however, alters carbon
surfaces not only by incorporation of hydrophilic groups but also through a
modification of the nanostructure of the surface. Laboratory experiments will be
conducted to determine the prerequisite temperature and relative humidity
required for immersion and deposition freezing on hydrocarbon and oxidized
hydrocarbon particles. Simulations will be used to determine the effect of
nanostructure, chemical modifications, and hydrophilicity of the surface on the
freezing temperatures, the heterogeneous mechanism of formation of ice, and the
size and structure of the critical ice embryo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abundant in
the atmosphere due to anthropogenic and biogenic sources, carbonaceous particles
display a wide range of effectiveness in promoting the nucleation of ice in
clouds. This variability causes major uncertainties in predictions of the effect
of aerosols on climate. The project will lead to an improved understanding of
the phase of water in the atmosphere and assist in the parameterization of
global climate models. A workshop to train high school teachers in the use of
freely available molecular visualization software to develop classroom
activities that complement and enhance the high-school curriculum will be
developed at the University of Utah. The molecular visualization tools and the
simulations that display the formation of ice will be incorporated into
undergraduate courses taught by the PIs.