* 1309250
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2013
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Jennifer Forecki, Forecki                 Jennifer
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2017
* USD 276,000.00

The role of the water channel aquaglyceroporin-3b (Aqp-3b) in cellular dynamics
during early nervous system development and neural tube closure

During early embryonic development, changes in the shape and placement of cells
causes the neural plate to form the neural tube. Transcription factors like Zic1
in the neural plate direct the expression of genes that regulate cellular
behavior during neural tube closure. While previous work has identified
aquaglyceroporin-3b (aqp-3b), a water channel, as a downstream target of Zic
factors, little is known about how aqp-3b affects nervous system development.
The zebrafish model system will be used to determine the role of Aqp-3b during
changes in cell shape and adhesion as the neural plate forms the neural tube.
The goal of this project is to use the genetic and optical assets of the
zebrafish embryo to study the closure of the neural tube, a developmental event
that has far-reaching consequences for normal nervous system development.

The training goals of this project are to provide experience in early nervous
system developmental research conducted across species and to provide experience
with developing undergraduate education. The education goals of this project
involve using the rapid development and genetic accessibility of the zebrafish
as a tool to integrate undergraduate instruction with molecular research.
Aspects of this project will be developed into a course for American Indian
tribal college students to introduce biological research and to create a lasting
positive effect on their future participation in the field of developmental
biology and neuroscience. This research-based course will expose students early
in their biology careers to research with the goal of increasing their future
success in STEM fields.