* 1309055
* AGEP: BPR: Understanding URM STEM graduate students identity integration and assimilation into a community of practice
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2021
* Susan Stapleton, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,250,601.00

Underrepresented minority graduate students in Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) face multiple challenges with identity negotiation as
they progress through graduate programs at Predominantly White Institutions
(PWIs). Underrepresented minorities hold multiple identities reflecting race,
ethnicity, gender, social roles, family roles, and career (e.g., scientist,
engineer). These identities often conflict and, consequently, influence their
choices, persistence, and success during the graduate years. This research
project builds on social identity theory to understand the process of identity
integration for underrepresented minority graduate students in STEM programs as
they integrate into a community of practice. Identity integration is essential
for lasting success. Little is known, however, about how multiple identities of
underrepresented minorities in STEM conflict, intersect, and integrate as
participants become productive members of a STEM community of
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a mixed-methods approach, this research
traces the experiences of underrepresented minority graduate students in order
to understand their negotiation of multiple, and often conflicting, identities
as they progress through their STEM graduate programs. Pre- and post-surveys
will measure changes in identity centrality and scientist-identity-interference.
Multiple, regularly-scheduled interviews will assess the process of identity
negotiation as graduate students become members of their disciplinary
communities of practice. Social network analysis will document peer, colleague,
advisor, and other support networks that URM graduate students construct as they
become members of their disciplinary community of practice in STEM. Participants
will be graduate students in STEM graduate programs at three PWIs. Studying
these students over time will enable comparisons of identity integration,
identity negotiation, and social networking. Collectively, these data will
inform the development of a model for underrepresented minority STEM graduate
student identity integration that identifies specific strategies for
institutional support needed to promote successful assimilation into a STEM
disciplinary community of practice.