* 1309347
* Homochiral Crystalline Porous Materials for Enantioselective Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Xianhui Bu, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 12/31/2017
* USD 380,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The proposed research, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, aims to
develop new synthetic methods for the creation of crystalline homochiral porous
materials for enantioselective applications. While significant progress has been
made in the synthesis of such materials by incorporating chiral structural
building blocks, their synthesis from nonchiral building blocks remains
challenging, and yet highly important. The proposed chirality induction method
seeks to construct homochiral porous materials from diverse nonchiral building
units while controlling absolute chirality by using inexpensive and often
naturally occurring enantiopure chiral induction agents (CIA). The project will
also study the metal-CIA interactions to uncover new mechanisms that can be
utilized for the chirality and enantiopurity control. A range of low-cost
organic and biomolecular CIAs will be studied under various synthetic conditions
for their effects during crystallization of porous frameworks. New homochiral
porous materials will be characterized by studying their crystal structures,
porosity and surface area, thermal and chemical stability, and
enantioselectivity.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The proposed activity, conducted at a Primarily
Undergraduate Institution, seeks to introduce new synthetic concepts and methods
that can be employed to create homochiral porous materials as catalysts and
adsorbents for the preparation of highly useful chemicals and pharmaceuticals.
The proposed research integrates a variety of research activities ranging from
chemical synthesis, self-assembly and crystal growth, to crystal structure
analysis and property characterizations. It will lead to the creation of new
functional materials with potential technological applications and a much-
enhanced understanding of synthetic and structural chemistry of solid-state
materials. The PI seeks to promote teaching and training of students by
establishing a highly interesting and important research program and by
developing the state-of-the-art synthetic and instrumental capability to broaden
learning opportunities and participation of both undergraduate and graduate
students with diverse cultural backgrounds.