* 1309236
* Research in the Geometry of Minimal and Constant Mean Curvature Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* William Meeks, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2016
* USD 159,122.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1309236, Principal Investigator: William H. Meeks

The researcher will study the geometry, asymptotic behavior, conformal structure
and topology of properly embedded minimal and constant mean curvature surfaces
in three-dimensional Euclidean space, and more generally, in simply connected
homogeneous three-manifolds X. One goal is to classify constant mean curvature
spheres in such spaces X and to investigate when they are embedded and if they
always represent solutions to isoperimetric problems in X. Another goal of the
proposal is to classify the asymptotic behavior of complete embedded constant
mean curvature surfaces of finite topology in three-dimensional Euclidean space,
and more generally, in homogeneous three-manifolds. Theoretical techniques
concerning removable singularities, compactness, regularity and convergence of
sequences of embedded minimal and constant mean curvature surfaces will be
investigated as well. A final goal is to understand the existence/nonexistence
problem for complete, bounded embedded minimal and constant mean curvature
surfaces in Euclidean three-space and in other three-dimensional spaces.

Classical minimal and constant mean curvature surface theory has its roots in 18
th and 19 th century mathematics. Minimal surfaces are the first important two-
dimensional examples of what is called the calculus of variations, a subject
first described by Euler around 1735; constant mean curvature surfaces were
first studied by Delaunay in 1835 and they also represent important examples in
the calculus of variations. Physically minimal surfaces can be modeled as soap
films on wires or by surfaces of least-area relative to their boundaries;
physically constant mean curvature surfaces can be modeled as soap films on
wires with a constant pressure difference on each side. Minimal surfaces play an
important role as a tool in the study of three-dimensional topology and
geometry. The research in this proposal concerns global and local properties of
embedded minimal and constant mean curvature surfaces and possible applications
of these results to basic research in three-dimensional topology and geometry.