* 1309362
* Inverse Source and Inverse Scattering Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* John Sylvester, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 209,088.00

The essential feature of remote sensing is that all information must be
transported through an intervening medium by (electromagnetic or acoustic)
waves. We observe only the scattered field, the wave after it has passed through
the intervening medium (which may be empty space). The simplest mathematical
model is the scalar wave equation, which decomposes, via Fourier transform, into
the scalar Helmholtz equation at each wavenumber. The phenomenon of evanescence
limits resolution by allowing only a finite dimensional family of waves to reach
the sensors with an amplitude that has not been severely attenuated. The
dimension of that family gives important information about the size of the
source of the wave, and the number of nonzero coefficients needed to represent
the wave in different bases (Hankel function expansions centered at different
points) carries information about the location of the source or sources. We are
developing methods to use this information. This is complicated by the fact that
the source is not uniquely determined by the scattered wave. We resolve this by
seeking the smallest set that supports (carries) a source that radiates that
scattered field, and must have been part of any other source that radiated the
same field. Examples show that there is no such set in general, but there is a
smallest union of well separated convex sets that satisfies both criteria. A
major goal of this project is to find an algorithm to find this union of well
separated convex sets, and give reliable estimates on how far apart sources of
various sizes must be in order to guarantee that the individual sources will be
visible in the data. This analysis is relevant to many other inverse scattering
problems. A particularly important application is understanding the
circumstances in which the Born, or single scattering, approximation is a
reliable substitute for the full scattering problem. While all practitioners of
inverse scattering techniques know that the farther apart two scatterers are,
the less they interact, and therefore the better the Born approximation works,
current mathematical theory seems to say the opposite. The apparent paradox is
due to the norms we use to measure and compare the waves. Most mathematically
tractable norms have features which misrepresent some of the physics. We
continue to work to formulate norms which are simple enough to allow
mathematical analysis and yet faithfully reflect physical reality.

A remote sensing experiment gathers information about an object from a distance,
without any direct contact. An underwater array of acoustic sensors that seeks
to locate a submarine (the source) based on the noise radiated from the
submarine's engine, is an example of passive remote sensing system. While a
sonar array that transmits its own wave in order to locate the submarine based
on the properties of the echo, is an example of active remote sensing system. In
this case the array, and not the submarine, is the primary source, and the
submarine is referred to as the scatterer.The inverse source and scattering
problems are an essential part of remote sensing, and algorithms for finding
small point-like sources and scatterers have had major impact on technological
development, including antenna design. The project aims to bridge the gap
between effective algorithms and theory by reformulating the analysis in a way
that more accurately reflects the way this algorithms work with finite data
sets.