* 1310096
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Theoretical and Methodological Framework for High Dimensional Markov Chain Monte Carlo
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Galin Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 100,002.00

The investigators study multivariate methods for assessing the quality and
ensuring the reliability of a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) experiment. This
work is strongly motivated by research in Bayesian methods for functional
neuroimaging experiments, but will be applicable in any MCMC simulation.
Usually, Markov chain output is used to estimate a vector of parameters that
contains multiple mean and variance parameters along with quantiles. A
fundamental question is when to terminate such a simulation. The investigators
study sequential fixed-volume stopping rules that allow construction of
confidence regions for estimating the target vector, which describe the
reliability of the resulting estimates. Using these methods requires that the
Markov chain converges at a geometric rate, which in turn yields a limiting
distribution for the Monte Carlo error with an associated covariance matrix.
Estimating this matrix forms a major component of the research-a long standing
open question in MCMC output analysis. The investigators improve on existing
methods, which enable effective estimation in the case where the target vector
is moderately large. Moreover, the investigators study several methods for
handling the setting in truly high-dimensional settings, i.e. when there are
many more parameters than iterations in the Markov chain. The investigators also
formally study the convergence rates of component-wise MCMC samplers often
encountered in the functional neuroimaging settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex probability models are commonly used to help gain
understanding of phenomenon in a range of fields including science, engineering,
medicine, education, and law. An example that motivates the investigators work
is that of applied cognitive scientists modeling brain activity. Inference from
such probability models is usually obtained from computational approximations.
For a widely used computational technique, the investigators study the
convergence properties and develop formal stopping rules focusing on high-
dimensional practically relevant settings. The statistical methodology developed
here will provide scientists with sophisticated output analysis techniques,
leading to greater confidence and reliability for their computational results.