* 1310704
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Agnieszka Szymanska, Szymanska               Agnieszka      A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Agnieszka Szymanska of the Center for Biomedical Signal
Processing and Computation, University of California, Irvine to conduct a
research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the Laboratory of
Chemical Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Tokyo in Tokyo, Japan. The project title is "An Algorithm for Neuron
Characterization In Vivo." The host scientist is Dr. Yuji Ikegaya, Associate
Professor, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tokyo,
Japan.

While many techniques exist to study the functional organization of neurons, few
can use extracellular action potentials (EAPs) to extract crucial neuron
parameters such as the location, size, dendritic tree shape, and type of neurons
being studied. This study develops a novel framework to monitor neural activity
via both extracellular recording and functional multi-neuron calcium imaging
(fMCI). Extracellular recording uses micro-sensors placed in neural tissue to
detect action potentials from nearby neurons, whereas calcium imaging detects
the flow of calcium ions into a cell, causing the cell to effectively light up
during an action potential. Extracellular recordings from rat brain slices are
analyzed using a new statistical signal processing algorithm to extract the
location, size, and type of multiple neurons, while fMCI data provides
confirmation of the results. Because extracellular recording is one of the only
ways to study neural activity in live animals (in vivo) where direct imaging
cannot be performed, the algorithm being tested here can ultimately improve
studies of neuronal migration, plasticity, and brain computer interfacing. These
kinds of studies can then lead to a better understanding of brain development,
healing, and diseases such as dementia.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, once tested, the analysis algorithm developed
in this study will be freely disseminated as a software package to the
neuroscience community at large. This will vastly improve in vivo studies of
neural functionality, and therefore have long lasting impact on the scientific
community. Neuron activity movies made during the study will also be presented
in an outreach program to teach local elementary and high school students about
neural network dynamics in an engaging way.