* 1310294
* Complex Experiments and High-Input Simulators:  Challenges in Design, Prediction and Sensitivity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Thomas Santner, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2017
* USD 100,000.00

The investigators study five problem areas. (1) A primary objective is to
provide designs that have high predictive efficiency over a wide class of
objective functions for simulator-only and simulator+physical experiments.
Experimental designs will be constructed based on a new Bayesian prediction
criterion. (2) The researchers will formulate regularization priors for use with
simulators that require large numbers of inputs and are sampled sparsely. In
particular, regularization priors will be developed for regression coefficients
in the mean structure for non-stationary GP models as well as new priors to
regularize the parameters controlling the correlation function. (3) Batch
sequential design and analysis methodology will be developed to determine
settings of control variables for minimizing the mean and variability of the
response in the presence of non-controllable environmental variables. (4) The
investigators will develop methods for determining the sensitivity of simulator
outputs to inputs in mixed quantitative-qualitative variable settings, including
non-rectangular input applications. (5) Methodology will be devised for
constructing space-filling designs for computer codes with high-dimensional,
non-rectangular regions whose boundaries can only be determined numerically. For
example, computational models of long-scale temporal phenomena such as climate
and galaxy formation models, have inputs regions are only partially known a
priori.

The complex physical and biological processes required to provide advances in
many engineering and scientific fields are increasingly studied using
deterministic computer simulators coded from physics- or biology-based
mathematical models. In many such applications, the data from related physical
experiments are also available. The goals in such studies range from optimizing
system performance in a given environment to designing systems that perform well
in a wide variety of environments. The investigators are conducting research on
efficient methods for determining input combinations at which to run complex
simulator codes and associated physical experiments. They are also developing
methods to extract the maximum information about the relevant engineering and
scientific questions from such combined experiments. Techniques and results
developed by the investigators are used in the specific collaborative projects
in which the investigators participate. These include the following
applications: (a) Tissue engineering where stress-strain simulators form part of
the process of designing specialty tissues such as meniscal substitutes which
are meant to perform well in a patient population; (b) Design of coating systems
to extend the life of machine tools in tribological and wear applications; (c)
Decreasing the shrinkage in injection molding applications; (d) Prediction of
climate and weather based on detailed circulation computer models of the
atmosphere.