* 1310962
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Linking genomics, oceanography and ecology in understanding adaptive variation in space and time in amphidromous gobies of the Hawaiian Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Margaret Ptacek, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2015
* USD 17,873.00

In marine species, movement of individuals between sites is facilitated by long
distance ocean dispersal but this may hamper the ability of populations to
evolve adaptations in response to differences in environments. In the Hawaiian
waterfall-climbing goby fish, Sicyopterus stimpsoni, island populations are
connected through oceanic larval dispersal but juveniles entering freshwater
streams on each island encounter different environmental pressures during
migration upstream. Our study uses models of ocean currents, environmental
features, land use practices, and the strength of natural selection between
streams to predict survival and distribution of adults and juveniles across the
Hawaiian Islands. We will compare these predicted patterns to measured values of
genetic and morphological traits to better understand the relative roles of
natural selection, ocean dispersal, and chance in maintaining viable populations
of this native Hawaiian fish.

Our results will identify populations most likely to persist and those most
critical to future reproductive success. Such results will aid the Hawai?i
Division of Aquatic Resources in designing plans to protect this unique and
culturally important Hawaiian fish. In addition, undergraduates at Clemson
University and in-service public school teachers, through SC Life, will be
trained in inquiry-based research and molecular and computational techniques.