* 1310847
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Lauren Wheeler, Wheeler                 Lauren         B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Lauren Wheeler of the University of Maine to conduct a
research project in Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at GNS Science in
Lower Hutt, Wellington, New Zealand. The project title is "Modeling the Effects
of Glaciation from the Last Glacial Maximum to Present on Mountain Building in
the Central South Island of New Zealand." The host scientist is Dr. Phaedra
Upton.

This project is examining the effects of glacial mass loading and unloading on
the tectonics of New Zealand's central South Island using three-dimensional
numerical modeling. The South Island is a highly-studied region, and the
tectonics and glacial-interglacial periods are well constrained by both field
observations and numerical models. These models give us the opportunity to
develop a sense of how glaciation affects mountain building (topography and
changes in strain) from the Last Glacial Maximum to present. Work of this kind
is ongoing for southeast Alaska. The size of the glacial load on the South
Island is comparable to those in Alaska. New Zealand and southeast Alaska are
both tectonically active regions and comparing the two will develop a sense of
how glaciation affects mountain building in multiple mountain ranges. Due to the
spatial variation in both New Zealand and southeast Alaska, it is not sufficient
to model these systems using a single two-dimensional cross section (as is often
done) through the mountain range to represent the mechanics. This is especially
inaccurate in a region where the mechanics are influenced by glaciation as
glaciers vary in their spatial extent and thickness. Modeling the influence of
glaciation on tectonics in three-dimensions is not only a new addition to the
scientific literature and community but more accurately represents the region.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the University of Maine School of Earth and
Climate Sciences is involved in synergistic activities with the local
communities. This experience provides the opportunity to conduct an outreach
program with local middle and high schools. The School of Earth and Climate
Sciences often incorporates research projects into undergraduate course modules.
The results and the research that stems from this project may be used as course
modules in the Geophysics and Global Tectonics courses taught at the University
of Maine.