* 1310703
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Lindsey Dougherty, Dougherty               Lindsey
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Lindsey Furman Dougherty of the University of California
Berkeley to conduct a research project in Biological Sciences during the summer
of 2013 at the Queensland Brain Institute and University of Queensland (UQ) in
Brisbane, Australia. The project title is "Mechanisms, Ultrastructure and
Behavioral Function of Flashing in Ctenoides Ales: Disco Clams.'" The host
scientist is Dr. Justin Marshall.

The ocean's euphotic zone is an environment in which light is extremely
variable, yet a wide array of organisms use visual displays that require ambient
light for reflection. The bivalve mollusk Ctenoides ales lives at depths up to
20m and often inside crevices, where ambient light is dim and wavelength-
restricted. Despite its light-limited habitat, this species evolved a reflective
mantle edge that emits vivid light, leading to its common name, disco clam. C.
ales is the only known bivalve with a behaviorally controlled photic display,
yet virtually nothing is known about its mechanism, function or life history.
Preliminary research in transmission electron microscopy, high speed video,
spectrometry, hyperspectral imaging and particle modeling have advanced
intracellular and mechanistic understanding of how the photic display is
produced, but its behavioral purpose remains unknown. During this field season,
hypotheses about the function of the flashing are being tested, including that
it acts to attract phototaxic prey, larval juveniles for settlement, or is an
aposematic warning toward predators. The study of photic displays by organisms
advances knowledge about visual systems, communication, physical optics,
photonics, structural composition and biomimetic technology.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, undergraduate students at Berkeley and at UQ
are helping with research and field studies, allowing insight into graduate-
level work and collaboration. Research results are being disseminated through
the Understanding Science website of the University of California Museum of
Paleontology. Project updates, photographs and videos are being uploaded through
a blog. As these bivalves are well known in aquariums and popular with the
public, there is substantial interest in this project. This project is also
being communicated through involvement with WIS (Women in Science) by examining
the role of women in Australian scientific communities. Finally, the results are
being communicated through community involvement in the Dinner With A Scientist
program at the Oakland Zoo; Science Nights at multiple local elementary schools;
and through volunteer efforts with the Expanding Your Horizons (EYH) Conference
which targets girls in middle school, the Surfrider Foundation and SurfAid. This
research and outreach are forging partnerships between the international
community, UQ, and Berkeley.