* 1310199
* Unconventional electrodynamics in unconventional solids
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Roland Winkler, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2018
* USD 202,415.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education to develop an effective electrodynamics for charge carriers in
graphene, Weyl semimetals, topological insulators, and related unconventional
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials have been identified for which the
breaking of continuous translational symmetry by the lattice results in
pseudspin-orbit-coupled band dynamics that is qualitatively different from the
dynamics of charge carriers in free space. Specific materials include graphene
and topological insulators. The PI will develop a general theory for the
electrodynamics of such unconventional systems that is expected to be markedly
different from ordinary electrodynamics in macroscopic media. Combining quantum
field theory and group-theoretical methods, the PI will establish a Lagrangian
description, similar to the Lagrangian of quantum electrodynamics, from which he
can derive the equations of motion for the co-operative dynamics of charges,
pseudospins, spins, and fields. New electromagnetic phenomena reflecting the
rich physics of these material systems may be discovered. The findings will
predict material behavior for a wide variety of experiments using electric and
magnetic fields as probes. The research will provide insights into how electric
charges, pseudospins, and spins interact with electric and magnetic fields. The
results of this project may eventually enable electromagnetic control of charges
and spins in devices based on unconventional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational and
outreach activities, including public lectures and involvement with the
department's Physics Olympics and Haunted Physics House.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education to develop a theoretical
description of the dynamics of electrons in unconventional materials like
graphene in electric and magnetic fields. The electrons in familiar electrical
conductors act very much like electrons in empty space; their interactions with
the atoms of the material for the most part can be modeled by adjusting their
"effective" masses up or down from the true mass of an electron in vacuum.
Similarly, the interactions of atoms and electrons in the presence of applied
electric and magnetic fields in traditional materials lead to adjustments of the
effective values of the fields. However, new materials have been discovered in
which the electrons behave qualitatively unlike electrons in vacuum; in fact,
the electrons look in some ways more like slow-moving light. Two examples of the
new types of materials are graphene and topological insulators; graphene
consists of a single atomic layer of graphite or ordinary pencil lead, while
topological insulators are materials that are electrical insulators in their
interiors but which support electrical currents on their surfaces. To replace
the nineteenth-century equations used to describe electric and magnetic
interactions in conventional matter, the PI will develop a new theory to
describe the electrons in these new materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theory of
electrodynamics in these new media is a prerequisite to the design of new
electronic devices that take advantage of their unusual properties. This award
also supports educational and outreach activities, including public lectures and
involvement with the department's Physics Olympics and Haunted Physics House.