* 1310819
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Katherine Mazzio, Mazzio                  Katherine      A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Katherine A. Mazzio of the University of Washington to conduct
a research project in the Math and Physical Sciences area during the summer of
2013 at Victoria University of Wellington in Wellington, New Zealand. The
project title is "Exciton Dissociation in Hybrid Materials for Solar Energy
Conversion." The host scientist is Justin Hodgkiss.

One of the most promising renewable resources lies in photovoltaics for
electricity generation. For many applications, however, the product output of
photovoltaics has been limited by materials scarcity and competition with the
microelectronics industry, as well as by a limited ability to control the
structure-property relationships of the materials used in photovoltaic devices.
Using a recently developed method for the in-situ functionalization of
semiconducting nanocrystals with pi-conjugated molecules during growth, the
performance of hybrid photovoltaic devices is expected to be significantly
enhanced, while allowing them to be solution processed. This project examines
the charge transfer dynamics in these new hybrid materials. Specifically, it
will investigate how varying the concentration of polythiophene ligands affects
both the loading on cadmium selenide quantum dots and the resulting charge
transfer rates for use in hybrid photovoltaic devices. This information will
result in a better understanding of the charge transfer processes in hybrid
materials, while aiding in future design aspects of optoelectronic materials,
which will in turn benefit society by resulting in improved materials for
photovoltaic devices towards zero-emission electricity generation.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the proposed research will result in the
Fellow obtaining a fundamental understanding of the electron transport phenomena
inside the active layer of these next-generation solar cells. The Fellow will
couple this experimental data with computer modeling of the charge transport
processes in order to act as a predictive tool for the rational design of future
light-harvesting systems. The results of this project will be published in peer-
reviewed journals and presented at international conferences, in addition to
informal presentations regarding the EAPSI program and the results obtained over
the course of this program within the University of Washington.