* 1310730
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Christien Laber, Laber                   Christien      P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Christien Philip Laber of Rutgers University to conduct a
research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at the University of
Tsukuba in Tsukuba, Japan. The project title is "Coccolithovirus Presence and
Active Infection of the Phytoplankton Emiliania Huxleyi in the Northwest Pacific
Ocean." The host scientist is Yoshihiro Shiraiwa.

The phytoplankton Emiliania huxleyi is a coccolithophore found in most regions
of the ocean and is known for producing large summer bloom populations in the
North Atlantic frequently terminated by a double stranded DNA virus called
coccolithovirus (EhV), "short circuiting" carbon transport to higher food web
levels and influencing the biogeochemical cycling of carbon. This host-virus
interaction has not yet been documented in the Pacific Ocean. This project uses
a set of nucleic acid and lipid based molecular tools to probe Pacific waters
for the presence, diversity, and activity of coccolithovirus off the west coast
of Japan. This includes the detection of evolutionarily similar sphingolipid
biosynthesis genes in E. huxleyi and EhV as well as viral glycosphingolipids
(vGSLs), which are reliable lipid based markers for EhV presence and activity in
natural assemblage. Nucleic acid tools are used to investigate the historical
presence and preservation of EhV in the sediment record as well. Laboratory
experiments are also being conducted to observe the interaction of cultured E.
huxleyi and EhV with viral concentrates and coccolithophores of natural
assemblage. This approach addresses whether EhVs are prominent in the western
Pacific, if the vGSL biosynthetic pathways triggered during viral infection are
similar to those used by North Atlantic EhV, if natural conditions are
sufficient for infection to progress, and the historical preservation of EhV
infection in regional sediment.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the results will increase our understanding
of EhV distribution, which will provide a platform for diversity, ecological,
and biogeochemical studies. Laber will also work with COSEE NOW at the Institute
of Marine and Coastal Science at Rutgers to translate and broadcast the study
and experience to the public.