* 1310258
* Novel Nanoporous Materials: In Silico Design
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Coray Colina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Technical Abstract

This DMR project creates a computational-based design, applied to amorphous
microporous materials that complement and dramatically enhance traditional
experimental methods. A fundamental understanding of amorphous microporous
materials is being generated that will allow new materials to be discovered for
the benefit of the general scientific community. This project involves training
a new generation of materials scientists who think differently about data. Open-
data paradigms in which students/researchers think of their data as a public
good to be eventually shared and used by others would transform the materials
research enterprise, and catalyzed through this work. The proposed research
focuses on investigate three new classes of nanoporous materials through the use
of molecular simulations, which will direct chemical synthesis and facilitate
the understanding and preparation of novel amorphous materials. Tailoring and
optimization of these materials include: 1) Polymer and organic molecules of
intrinsic microporosity (PIMs and OMIMs), which will greatly enhance their
suitability as heterogeneous catalysts, adsorbents and gas storage materials. 2)
Crosslinked polyolefin terpolymers as promising candidates for natural gas (NG)
storage, and 3) Stilbene containing alternating copolymers, semi-rigid amorphous
copolymers, as new polyelectrolytes and other functionalizations for optical
applications. Concurrent to the above goals, is the generation of large-data
sets and the extraction of critical information from that data (e.g., structure
factors to understand the intrinsic correlations between structure and
properties/behavior) to catalyze materials breakthroughs. This work, will
generate the knowledge to develop appropriate structure-property relations for
novel microporous molecular and polymeric materials, which will result in the
design, synthesis and characterization of optimized materials that will possess
technological relevance. Additionally, students will receive significant
training through close interactions with the PI and program colleagues. Students
will benefit from the interaction and immersion in a global collaborative
research environment with national and international experts that will
complement the intensive training in simulation that they receive at Penn State.
The PI plans to empower the next generation of junior researchers by the
application of open-data paradigms that include data sharing as a public good,
and thus transform the materials research enterprise.

This award is funded by the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate (Computational and Data-Driven Materials
Research).

Non-Technical Abstract

One of the principal aims of modern science is to use computational methods to
help understand and even predict the results from experimentation. Today,
exciting opportunities exist for a transformation in the way materials research
is conducted, including a data-driven revolution in materials discovery and
design.

The overarching goal of this research is to create a computational-based design,
applied to amorphous microporous materials that complement and dramatically
enhance traditional experimental methods. Here, the research includes the
improvement of knowledge transfer and facilitation of the development and
application of a vast variety of amorphous materials to industrial applications.
A fundamental understanding of amorphous microporous materials will be generated
that will allow new materials to be discovered for the benefit of the general
community. This involves training a new generation of materials scientists who
think differently about data. Open-data paradigms in which students think of
their data as a public good to be eventually shared and used by others would
transform the materials research enterprise, and catalyzed through this work.
Additionally, undergraduates and graduate students will benefit from the
interaction and immersion in a global collaborative research environment with
national and international experts that will complement the intensive training
in simulation that they receive at Penn State. In summary, the next generation
of junior researchers will be empowered by the application of open-data
paradigms that include data sharing as a public good, and thus transform the
materials research enterprise.