* 1310438
* Nonparametric Bayesian Regression for Categorical Responses: Novel Methodology for Modeling, Inference and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Athanasios Kottas, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The investigator develops flexible Bayesian mixture models and corresponding
methods for inference for a number of regression problems with ordinal
categorical responses. More specifically, methodology is developed for:
nonparametric mixture regression for binary responses; ordinal regression,
including multivariate ordinal responses and mixed ordinal-continuous responses;
dynamic modeling for ordinal regression relationships; and modeling and risk
assessment for bioassay dose-response studies with an ordinal classification.
All the methods build from nonparametric priors, including both general mixture
prior models as well as more structured forms as motivated by the application
area and inferential objectives of the model. The key research activity involves
flexible regression modeling based on either dependent nonparametric priors for
the process of response distributions indexed by covariate values or
nonparametric mixture models for the joint distribution of the response(s) and
covariates. These classes of models enable rich inference for both the
regression relationship and for the conditional response distribution. Hence,
they improve model fit and predictive performance compared to standard
parametric models, but also relative to existing Bayesian semiparametric work.
For all the modeling approaches under development, the investigator studies
relevant theoretical properties, model specification, prior elicitation, Markov
chain MonteCarlo posterior simulation techniques, and model checking and
comparison.

Regression problems with ordinal categorical responses -- involving data on
response variables recorded on an ordinal scale and on associated explanatory
variables -- are of key importance in various fields of the biomedical,
environmental and social sciences. As researchers from these fields collect more
and more data involving ordinal responses, especially over time or time and
space, the need for analyses that enhance theirunderstanding of underlying
processes grows. This inspires the need for sufficiently rich statistical models
that can accommodate general ordinal regression relationships. The primary
motivation for this research is to expand the catalog of ordinal regression
modeling tools available to such scientists, in the process expanding the
methodology in the field of Bayesian nonparametrics, a burgeoning area of
Bayesian statistics. Due to their generality, the statistical methods developed
under this research project have the potential for substantive applications in
several scientific fields. A particularly promising area of application involves
evolutionary biology problems on estimation of the form of natural selection as
it relates phenotypic traits to ordinal fitness measures, such as survival,
maturity or reproductive success. For such settings, improved estimation of the
fitness surface as well as understanding of its temporal and/or spatial
evolution can have an impact on effective decision making for the population
under study.