* 1310778
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Towards a New Gondwana: Investigating Alternative Biogeographic Hypotheses of the Southern Hemisphere Utilizing a Novel Taxon.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kelly Miller, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 19,570.00

This research seeks to establish phylogenetic relationships among members of the
important beetle family Zopheridae using DNA sequence data, and utilize this
information to test long-standing hypotheses surrounding the biogeography of the
southern hemisphere. We will sequence DNA from zopherids from around the world,
perform phylogenetic analyses, and test biogeographic hypotheses. Knowledge of
Zopheridae biogeography will complement ongoing research using other taxa such
as mammals and higher plants, and has potential to inform several scientific
disciplines outside systematics and phylogenetics, including geology and
paleoclimatology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recovered biogeographic inferences will
provide important biodiversity data for use in the management of sensitive
environments in the southern hemisphere. In an educational capacity, the PIs
will mentor at least one undergrad student as part of this project. The student
will be directly involved in the project and will gain experience in insect
systematics, thus fostering the student's desire to enter a graduate program in
science. This project will enhance the Co-PIs professional development through
strengthened multi-institution, multi-nationality collaborations with top
experts in the field and better position him to obtain a tenure-track faculty
position in insect systematics.