* 1310954
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Dana Dolan, Dolan                   Dana           A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

This action funds Dana Dolan of George Mason University to conduct an
interdisciplinary research project in the Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences area during the summer of 2013 at Australian National University (ANU)
in Canberra, ACT. The project title is "Governance for Climate Change Adaptation
in Complex, Crossboundary, Social-Ecological Systems." The host scientist is
Professor Stephen R. Dovers, Director of ANU's Fenner School of Environment and
Society.

The goal of this study is to understand the evolution of institutional
arrangements for long-term governance, in theory and in practice. Climate change
is a scientifically and socially complex challenge marked by irreducible
uncertainty, very long feedback cycles and significant variation at the local
scale. Adaptation will require coordination and collaboration across multiple
institutional boundaries and across multiple sectors. These requirements present
novel challenges to traditional, hierarchical approaches to governing as well as
to decentralized market approaches; networked governance theories may help
explain emerging decision-making structures. This study responds to calls from
the climate change research community for empirical research that analyzes
place-based adaptation and that extends existing work in the natural sciences to
incorporate social sciences through a qualitative case study of the public
policy networks in the Murray-Darling Basin (MDB) region in southeast Australia,
an ecologically rich, politically fragmented, and institutionally diverse
Social-Ecological System (SES). Furthermore, this research may provide insights
for the literature on institutional change, broadly defined. Traditional
theories such as punctuated equilibrium have provided a wealth of insight into
how institutional change occurs-or is resisted-in complex public policy areas:
governance through reaction to crises. However, the long-term crisis of climate
change threatens to produce events ("punctuations") with unacceptable
consequences in terms of human suffering. Developing alternative models of
institutional change that support proactive approaches to long-term governance
issues may help reduce these negative consequences.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Results of this study will be documented in a research
report suitable for peer-reviewed publication. Findings will also be presented
at national conferences and local seminars or workshops in both Australia and
the United States with the aim of furthering cross-national policy learning and
collaborative scholarship.