* 1310792
* Mentoring Women Faculty in Computer Science and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Erik Russell, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 548,929.00

The goal of CRA-W (Computing Research Association Committee on the Status of
Women in Computing Research) is to increase the number of women, including
minority women, who participate and succeed in computer science research at
every stage of the research pipeline. Achieving these objectives requires that
an increasing number of women in academia start and progress to the next stage.
Alas, the percentages of women in academic positions in PhD-granting Computer
Science and Engineering (CSE) departments indicate that women continue to be
severely underrepresented. The failure to capitalize on the creativity of female
researchers represents a huge opportunity cost to the U.S. economy and national
security to grow our nations leadership in technical innovation. CRA-W will (1)
develop programs to increase the number and successful promotion of women CSE
faculty to tenured and full professor and (2) conduct comparative evaluation of
participants in our programs versus non-participants. Our programs apply the
unifying framework of Social Cognitive Career Theory, which finds that interest
in and choice of a particular career path will be increased by interventions
that improve one or more of the following: (1) outcome expectations
(understanding and valuing the rewards of a particular outcome), (2) self-
efficacy (a belief that one can successfully achieve an outcome), and (3) social
supports that help one persist and overcome obstacles. Our long-term group and
individual mentoring programs aim to make participants aware of the rewards of
an academic career; to help participants develop self-efficacy through increased
knowledge, skills, and confidence; and to connect participants to the computing
research and education communities and to each other to further their success.
Participants and research mentors attend an initial group workshop, re-connect
in small mentoring groups yearly, and meet every three to four months
electronically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ADVANCE PAID project seeks to improve
equity in the discipline, through a coordinated suite of mentoring, role
modeling, community building, and professional development workshops. The
program adaptations are based on prior published research and our experiences
and evaluation of programs in our portfolio. For example, the programs use
results that show that individual faculty mentoring in other fields improve
faculty success with respect to top venue publication, grant funding success,
and promotion. In addition, the CRA Center for Evaluating the Research Pipeline
(CERP) will provide the first ever, longitudinal and national study of the
factors that lead to successful academic careers for faculty in computing. In
particular, CERP will evaluate whether our CRA-W intervention programs are
effective at increasing the participation and success of faculty women in
computing. The evaluation efforts of CERP will yield a national faculty
comparison database that will become a powerful national resource for the CSE
community and for informing the wider research community on influencing success
within academic careers.&lt;br/&gt;