* 1310726
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Richard Galvez, Galvez                  Richard        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Richard Galvez of Syracuse University to conduct a research
project in MPS during the summer of 2013 at University of Auckland in Auckland,
New Zealand. The project title is "What Happened Immediately after Cosmic
Inflation? A Novel Analysis of the Unknown Era of the Expansion of the
Universe." The host scientist is Professor Richard Easther.

Due to modern experiments such as NASA's Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe
(WMAP) and the European Space Agency's Planck, the expansion history of the
universe from the Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN) era until today is very well
understood to remarkable precision. The expansion history before BBN however is
still a mystery. If one assumes cosmic inflation to take place in the very early
universe (around a fraction of a second after the Big Bang) can experimental
results from Planck and WMAP constrain what happened during this time? And, if
so, to what extent? This is the question this project is addressing.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Upon return to Syracuse University, the Fellow will use
the research and experience gained during the EAPSI fellowship to mentor two
undergraduate students on a research project with the goal of introducing these
students to modern practices in academic research and various topics in
theoretical physics and cosmology. The Fellow will also organize an EAPSI
workshop for other graduate students across STEM fields about his experiences
and encourage others from Syracuse University to apply. The Fellow is also
giving seminars at universities in NZ to disseminate information gathered in his
project thus far. In addition, the Fellow plans to present research findings at
academic conferences in the 2013-2014 academic year as well as as a series of
seminars planned in Nicaragua.