* 1310977
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   How do species coexist under spatial variation across scales?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Yue Li, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2015
* USD 19,681.00

How does the natural world maintain its astonishing diversity, especially among
species that directly compete with each other? Theory predicts that constant
changes to the physical environment over time and space and the transition from
one scale to another (smaller to larger space, shorter to longer time) can
account for species coexistence. To date, this prediction lacks rigorous
empirical tests. The proposed project will use multi-scale field experiments and
mathematical modeling based on field data to test the hypothesis that smaller
scale environmental variation promotes broad-scale coexistence between invasive
and native desert winter annual plants in the Sonoran Desert. Researchers will
combine stable isotope analysis, aerial photographs, and field experiments to
quantify a key mechanism underlying coexistence and the maintenance of
biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a powerful model
for scientists to conduct rigorous empirical tests on species coexistence across
a broad spectrum of natural communities. Together with addressing a fundamental
question in ecology, the project will foster an understanding of the dynamic
nature of biological invasions, highlighting conditions under which an invasion
is likely to cause problem. By informing land managers of those conditions, the
project offers practical solutions to managing invasive species. The project is
a collaboration between the University of Arizona and the US Marine Corps Air
Station, Yuma, and results will be shared with military units and government
agencies that must manage invasive species. This project will also train four
undergraduate students, introducing them to the rigor and excitement of
scientific discovery.