* 1310661
* Optical Studies of Spin in 2D Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Roland Kawakami, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** Two-dimensional (2D) crystals are a fascinating new
class of materials that exhibit novel electronic, spintronic, and optical
properties. In this project, we will use optical techniques to investigate the
spin-dependent properties of two types of 2D crystals: MoS2 (and related metal
dichalcogenides) and graphene. Monolayer MoS2 is a direct gap semiconductor with
a giant spin splitting of the valence band at the K/K' valleys. Interestingly,
this is predicted to suppress most types of spin relaxation and generate long
spin lifetimes for holes. Further, the giant spin splitting makes MoS2 a
promising candidate for realizing the intrinsic spin Hall effect. Our aim is to
observe these novel properties using time-resolved Kerr microscopy to directly
measure the spin polarization and spin dynamics in MoS2. Graphene is a promising
material for spintronics due to its long spin diffusion length at room
temperature. The forefront of the field of graphene spintronics concerns the
nature of spin relaxation and induced magnetism. Nearly all studies are based on
spin transport, but this approach has its limitations such as spin relaxation
induced by ferromagnetic contacts and reliance on Hanle analysis. We will
utilize time-resolved optical techniques to overcome these limitations.
Together, these studies on MoS2 and graphene lie at the forefront of spin-
dependent physics in 2D crystals. This project will support the education of two
PhD students, who will receive excellent training for careers in industry and
academia.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Two-dimensional (2D) crystals are a remarkable
class of materials that exhibit fascinating new properties and have the
potential to revolutionize electronics beyond conventional silicon technologies.
In particular for spintronic devices, 2D crystals are exhibiting much better
performance than their three-dimensional counterparts and special spin-dependent
properties related to their 2D structure are predicted. Why does 2D perform
better, can it be further improved, and can the predicted new properties be
demonstrated? To answer such key questions, we will use powerful imaging
techniques combining ultrafast pulsed lasers and optical microscopes to directly
visualize the motion and rotation of electron spins in 2D crystals. The spin can
be thought of as a tiny magnet that is attached to an electron as is flows
through a device. In a spintronic device, the direction of an electron's
magnetic poles ("north" and "south") is used to carry information throughout the
device, and this information can be manipulated by rotating the direction of the
poles. By using lasers and optics to image the motion and rotation of these
magnetic poles (i.e. spin), we can investigate how they hold information, how
they lose information, and how the direction of the poles is related to the
electron's motion. Understanding these issues will enable the development of
advanced spintronic devices for electronics beyond silicon. This project will
support the education of two PhD students, who will receive excellent training
for careers in industry and academia.