* 1310360
* Workshop:Facets of Integrability: Random Patterns, Stochastic Processes, Hydrodynamics, Gauge Theories and Condensed Matter Systems-the Simons Ctr for Geometry&amp;Physics 1/21-27/
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2013,03/31/2014
* Alexander Abanov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 03/31/2014
* USD 8,750.00

This is a proposal for partial funding for an international workshop "Facets of
integrability: random patterns, stochastic processes, hydrodynamics,gauge
theories and condensed matter systems" at the Simons Center for Geometry and
Physics in January 21-27, 2013. The main goal of the workshop is to establish
and investigate relations between random processes and mathematical structures
known in classical and quantum integrability. The workshop will focus on various
applications of techniques of integrable non-linear systems to random matrices,
Dyson diffusion, and counting problems of various geometrical objects arising in
random processes, among other topics. The field of integrability is known for
being at the interface between mathematics and physics. The influence flows in
both directions, with mathematical techniques and ideas contributing crucially
to major advances in the theory of integrability. The workshop will bring
together mathematicians and physicists who work on ideas related to these
fields. The participants will be prominent scientists, young researchers, and
students from all over the world. The Simons Center is most suitable for hosting
the proposed workshop. It is a research center devoted to bringing
mathematicians and physicists together to further fundamental knowledge in
geometry and theoretical physics, especially knowledge at the interface of these
two disciplines. For broader impact the results presented at the workshop will
be recorded and disseminated through a web site of the Simons Center for
Geometry and Physics, which is a very natural place to host such a workshop,
being located in close proximity to Mathematics and Physics departments of Stony
Brook University and to the Yang Institute for Theoretical Physics, with a
tradition of excellence in the field of integrability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main idea of the workshop is to bring together people working in different
fields. The cross-fertilization of different fields provides a nice environment
for training graduate students and postdocs. Junior researchers will be
especially encouraged to participate using NSF support to pay for their for
travel and lodging. Supporting the travel of young researchers and graduate
students to such a conference where scientists from different scientific fields,
old and young, prominent and just beginning, are spending a week in an inspiring
and congenial environment will, as it has done so in the past, inspire many
beginning researchers, including minorities and members from the
underrepresented groups. By prompt advertising and by offering partial travel
support it will significantly increase the participation of young students and
researchers.