* 1310760
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Molecular phylogeny and Biogeography of a highly diverse genus of Andean butterflies
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Keith Willmott, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,154.00

The tropical Andes mountains have some of the highest levels of biological
diversity on the planet, including diverse groups of butterflies. This project
will use DNA sequence data to produce a hypothesis of evolutionary relationships
for species of the butterfly genus Catasticta. With more than 96 species,
Catasticta is one of the largest Andean butterfly radiations, and the phylogeny
will be used to investigate key questions about the relationships, patterns of
speciation, and distribution of these butterflies. This grant will enable DNA
sequence data to be gathered from the great majority of species and will allow
visits to important Catasticta natural history collections to compile the
necessary distribution data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide new
insights into the role of geological history and contemporary environment in
understanding the tropical Andes? exceptionally high species diversity. The
project will generate the most diverse species-level phylogeny for any
Neotropical butterfly genus, and make this available, along with distribution
maps, to researchers studying biogeography in tropical montane Lepidoptera. The
project will also significantly enhance the research experience of the co-PI,
and project results will be broadly disseminated through both scientific and
popular articles.