* 1310000
* Monitoring the Evolution of Molecular Structure in Transistors by Interfacial Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Aaron Massari, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 09/30/2016
* USD 390,379.00

Technical Description: This project uses interface-specific vibrational sum
frequency generation spectroscopy to study molecular vibrations and their
orientations at the active interface in organic field-effect transistors. An
underlying mission of this work is to spectroscopically monitor the evolution of
the interface in operational devices to gain insight into the relationships
between interfacial molecular structure and function. The activities establish
the role of casting solvents and interfacial dipoles at the dielectric interface
in enhancing the electrical performance of thin film transistors. The project
also explores the use of zirconium phosphonate self-assembled nanodielectrics on
the interfacial organic structure. In addition, the research team uses
multiplexed sum frequency spectroscopy to measure the temporal evolution of
molecular structures and carrier accumulation in the dielectric and organic
semiconductor layers during thermal annealing. The in-situ-nature of these
experiments provides a new perspective on the materials response from inside the
functioning device, with the potential to describe not only what changes, but
also what the timescales of structural change are and how these properties
relate back to the macroscopic electrical response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Description: Transistors are one of the basic building blocks of every
digital device, from cell phones to grocery store check-out scanners. During
operation, electricity moves along an interface and the arrangement of atoms or
molecules in this region determines how efficiently the charges can flow. This
project uses specialized optical measurements to determine how the molecules in
these devices are ordered at the microscopic level, and how they respond to the
chemistry of the underlying surfaces and to thermal processing treatments. The
project is interdisciplinary, producing next-generation scientists who are
skilled in materials processing, and electrical and optical characterization
techniques. In addition, the research team organizes and directs a three-day-
long rural outreach event each summer as a part of the University on the Prairie
program where they use hands-on demonstrations to make connections between the
materials properties observed by the junior high school aged participants and
the real-world technologies with which they are familiar.