* 1310958
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Testing Fundamental Constraints on Species Ranges in the Endemic Plant Mimulus bicolor
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Jeremiah Busch, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2015
* USD 19,630.00

The distribution of a species is thought to be limited by physiological
tolerances to the environment, interactions with other organisms, or genetic
constraints on adaptation. In this project the importance of these factors on
adaptation will be studied using populations sampled across the range of a
naturally endemic flowering plant (Mimulus bicolor). Plant populations will be
grown in growth chambers with varying precipitation and temperature regimes to
determine whether plant fitness is limited by physiological tolerances to
environments expected at the range edge. The role of genetic constraints on
adaptation will be inferred by studying patterns of population genetic diversity
to determine whether populations at range edges are effectively small,
inherently isolated, or experience maladaptive gene flow from populations at the
center of the species range. Understanding the mechanisms that limit the
distribution of species will increase our ability to predict how the
distribution of species will shift in the face of climate change. In addition to
answering this broad question, the research will train a graduate student and
undergraduate students to conduct experiments in controlled environments and to
use genetic markers to determine population structure and patterns of gene flow.
Each of these approaches will provide critical information on species range
limits and can be used for future management decisions regarding species range
shifts. Students will present their work at research meetings, which will
disseminate their findings to other scientists and researchers.