* 1310458
* Optimal Offshore Wind Power Generation Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Leila Parsa, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 328,322.00

Research Objectives and Approaches

The objective of this proposal is to create a design process for offshore wind
generation systems. The design process will explore a variety of advanced
technologies for the electric machinery as well as the power conversion and
electrical connection to shore power. The approach for this research project is
to apply optimal design to a notional offshore wind farm considering a myriad of
promising new technologies so as to achieve high performance, low weight and
scalability.

Intellectual Merit

The intellectual merit of this proposal comes about from development of novel
approaches to design highly efficient, compact and reliable offshore wind power
generation systems. The main components of the system should be designed
carefully and optimally. The goal of this proposal is to overcome the challenges
regarding the design of megawatt level generators, power converters and
transmission system and finally grid integration.

Broader Impacts

Offshore wind power production has taken root in Europe and is planned for
future implementation in the U.S. This specific form of energy production looks
promising in terms of the amount of wind energy that can be harvested, the
economic impact of "green" jobs, and the strength in diversifying the U.S.
energy portfolio. The proposed research would further knowledge of existing and
potential technologies of offshore wind generation and assist quicker adoption
of these technologies. The principal investigator will flow down scientific
findings from this research directly into courses she is teaching in renewable
energy which, due to the long-term social component, tend to attract minorities
and females students.