* 1310800
* High-Resolution Imaging of  Stellar Surfaces
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Anders Jorgensen, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2019
* USD 513,560.00

In astronomical imaging, the observational technique for achieving the highest
spatial resolution, capable of discerning the finest-scale structure on the sky,
is to combine the light from multiple telescopes separated by substantial
distances. As is well known, the spatial resolution achieved by such an
interferometer is roughly as good as that of a single giant telescope of
diameter equal to the individual telescope separations. Technical challenges
with interferometry are large, as the light must be brought together in
instrumentation that is extremely stable mechanically, on the scale of optical
wavelengths. A scientific target of continuing promise for optical
interferometry is the study of stars, and stellar surfaces in particular, the
subject of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a set of
upgrades to the Navy Precision Optical Interferometer (NPOI) that will
ultimately enable an increase in the number of resolution elements on the
surface of a star by a factor of 10-20 or more over existing instruments, and
will furthermore allow the production of stellar images with time resolution of
a few days. This project will implement the interferometric techniques of
baseline bootstrapping, coherent integration, and image reconstruction,
significantly enhancing the capabilities of NPOI for imaging stellar surfaces.
The science benefits will be major, and may include major impacts in other areas
of optical interferometry. No other technique could deliver the kind of science
that will be enabled by these developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research
advances, in uncovering new knowledge about stars, will no doubt improve our
understanding of our own sun and the solar activity cycle. Solar activity has
vitally important impacts on many aspect of life on earth, possibly including
the weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being provided by
NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.