* 1310750
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Do extended leaf phenology and allelopathy act synergistically to drive garlic mustard invasion?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Heather Reynolds, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 14,192.00

Introduced, invasive species are known to have negative effects on our native
ecosystems, but the mechanisms that drive invasions are not well understood. One
introduced plant now abundant in Eastern deciduous forests, garlic mustard
(Alliaria petiolata), is thought to release toxic chemicals that harm native
plant species. Furthermore, garlic mustard has a longer growing season than most
native forest plants, allowing it to take advantage of light during the fall,
winter, and spring when natives are dormant. These mechanisms may reinforce one
another if the extra light available to garlic mustard during its extended
growing season is used to increase production of chemical toxins. This project
will test this hypothesis by measuring the growth, chemical production, and
impact of garlic mustard on native species in the presence and absence of
extended light availability. Results will help to fill an important gap in our
understanding of invasion biology by showing how interactions between mechanisms
may increase the invasiveness of introduced species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invasive plant species threaten native biodiversity
throughout the United States, and impose significant economic costs
(approximately $137 billion/year). For example, forest invaders such as garlic
mustard may inhibit forest regeneration and cause long-term reductions in timber
production, recreation, and other services that forests provide. Understanding
the mechanisms that drive invasion will facilitate more effective mitigation and
prevention, helping to reduce the environmental, economic, and social costs
associated with plant invasions. This project will also promote the scientific
and ecological literacy of undergraduate and high school students participating
in the research, and of members of the public reached through a public lecture
and a nature center exhibit on the threats of invasive species and the steps
that can be taken to protect the biodiversity and ecosystem services provided by
our native forests.