* 1310222
* Super-resolution imaging of energy transport in supramolecular and macromolecular materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* David Vanden Bout, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program supports Professor
David A. Vanden Bout of the University of Texas at Austin to develop strategies
to study the fundamental nature of energy transport in supramolecular and
macromolecular organic systems such as tubular molecular aggregates, single
conjugated polymers, and polymer aggregates. The research program investigates
the properties of these materials for energy transport applications by combining
a number of super-resolution imaging techniques. A goal is to directly probe
energy transport in individual nanoscale systems, coupling both temperature and
electric field dependence measurements to examine how disorder and electronic
coupling affect energy migration. By studying both polymer systems as well as
self-assembled supramolecular systems, the results will help to separate the
effects of intra- and intermolecular interactions in energy transfer
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By studying how energy can be collected and moved
in organic materials, this research will help to formulate new materials for
light harvesting and solar energy. The research will use methods that directly
probe the migration of energy in individual systems to overcome the inherent
complexities of the bulk materials. The research project will also seek to
increase the number and diversity of students pursuing chemical research via the
inclusion of undergraduate students in the research program.