* 1310402
* RUI: Equilibrium Studies of Solution-Phase Self-Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Douglas Vander Griend, Calvin University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 209,473.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science
and Engineering Program, Douglas Vander Griend of Calvin College will study the
step-by-step thermodynamic processes that lead to solution-phase self-assembly
of supramolecular structures. To characterize such ensembles of molecules,
equilibrium-restricted factor analysis (ERFA), a powerful mathematical
deconvolution technique, is used on composite data. Specifically, raw absorbance
data from a UV-Vis spectrophotometric titration can be modeled in order to
ascertain 1) the number of distinct chemical species in solution, 2) the
spectroscopic signature of each, and 3) the equilibrium constants for the
reactions between them. In all, three supramolecular systems will be studied
using this technique. Obtaining such detailed information about a system without
having to chemically isolate any of the components will unlock the key design
elements for various types of synergistic molecular organization. The broader
impacts involve training undergraduate students, networking with collaborators
and other researchers around the world to share knowledge about various forms of
factor analysis, and making Sivvu?, the software program for ERFA, available
through the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether it is inside our bodies, as
part of nanoscale machines, or as effective chemical sensors, molecules do some
of their best work as ensembles; however, characterizing groups of various types
of molecules and how they cooperate with each other is no straightforward task.
Sometimes each component can be isolated and studied, but usually this method is
unhelpful for sorting out how the components interact. This research project
seeks to address this challenge by collecting data on a system as a whole, and
then using powerful mathematical techniques to model the different molecules
according to precise chemical laws. The specific focus is to probe how
biomolecules rearrange themselves in solution and how smaller molecules join
together to encapsulate target molecules. This research should help scientists
understand how molecules specifically interact with each other in larger groups,
and could lead to ways to design systems to perform useful technological
functions.