* 1310196
* Nanowhisker filled solid polymer electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Janna Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 480,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Polymer electrolytes are safer, cleaner, and more flexible than liquid
electrolytes currently used in Li batteries. They are an attractive possibility
for use with Li metal electrodes because they are stiffer than liquid
electrolytes. For this purpose, PEO-based electrolytes are not stiff enough to
prevent dendrite formation, which limits use of Li metal. They also do not have
high enough conductivity to be practical. Unfortunately, stiffness and
conductivity are inversely related because Li motion is coupled to polymer
motion, and any attempt to improve conductivity through faster polymer motion
results in decreased stiffness. This project is based on the idea that tunnel-
like polymer/salt structures promote fast Li motion, recently demonstrated using
single-crystal electrolytes. It will harness this motion with a set of high
aspect ratio nanofillers based on cellulose nanowhiskers, which are hypothesized
to promote the tunnel structures. These fillers offer controllable surface
chemistry, degree of functionalization and aspect ratio, thus forming an ideal
model system. Building on prior work, particular attention will be paid to the
eutectic composition, at which improved electrical conductivity and mechanical
properties are established in metal alloys. At this composition, the analogous
metal alloys form large-scale structures with the two crystal phases in
alternating lamellae. The formation of such structures for polymer electrolytes
has not been investigated. The project will use cyclic thermal treatments as a
means to produce similar patterns in polymer/salt eutectics, which will extend
the tunnel-like structures further from the filler surface. The ideal
electrolyte would have fillers, and thus Li conduction pathways, aligned along
the direction normal to the electrodes. It is established that cellulose
nanowhiskers can be aligned using magnetic fields, electric fields, and shear,
and the project will investigate all three for effectiveness at alignment
without disrupting polymer/salt pattering extending from the filler surface. The
project will promote understanding of the roles of surface chemistry and aspect
ratio on interaction of nanoscale fillers with polymer/salt systems, the factors
controlling polymer eutectic structures, and the best ways to control filler
alignment in polymer/salt mixtures.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Polymer electrolytes are safer, cleaner, and more flexible than liquid
electrolytes currently used in the Li batteries in cell phones and laptop
computers. They are an attractive possibility for use in vehicles, where Li ion
battery technology is already used. Polymer electrolytes are attractive for this
application because they allow technical advancements that extend the charge
lifetime from 100 to 400 miles per charge. Polymer electrolytes are not
currently feasible with these technical advancements, nor can they attain power
discharge sufficient for vehicle applications. These two required improvements
are currently mutually exclusive: attempts to enable longer charge lifetime will
reduce power and vice versa. The science in this project will decouple the
objectives of long lifetime and high power. It is based on unique features of
polymer/Li salt mixtures that occur near inorganic surfaces. It will use very
small fillers, which provide more surface area, and alter the surface chemistry
and filler alignment to obtain optimal results. The results of this work will
allow scientists to work on increasing power and lifetime independently, thus
promoting advancement of the alternative energy technology of Li ion batteries.
The U.S. is a world leader in scientific research, yet struggles to fill jobs in
the sciences, technology, engineering and mathematics. The United InnoWorks
Academy is a national organization that seeks to narrow this disconnect by
introducing STEM concepts in a fun way to kids in the critical period where they
are deciding what they like and what they are good at. The program is
specifically designed towards students who, at age 11, may have already decided
that they are not good at math and science. InnoWorks is a student-run
organization in which professors, graduate students and undergraduate students
raise funds, develop curriculum, and prepare and run summer camps. This project
will start a Penn State Chapter, thus showing kids that science is fun.