* 1310878
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Connecting mechanisms of variance in reproductive success to consequences of trait divergence among Tribolium species
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Scott Pitnick, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,204.00

Traits that influence reproductive success can be both remarkably elaborate and
differ greatly between related species. Variation in such traits not only
influences an individual?s success in populations, but can also help form new
species when groups differ in characteristics important to choosing a mate.
Measuring reproductive success becomes more complex when animals mate with
multiple individuals within a single breeding cycle, a common occurrence.
Reproductive success, a major influence on trait evolution, is then shaped not
only by success in achieving matings, but also by competitively fertilizing
eggs, and producing high quality offspring. Using lines of flour beetles whose
males? produce sperm with red or green fluorescent tagged heads, this research
will evaluate the outcome of these different selective episodes and identify
their contribution to reproductive success. The use of the fluorescent sperm
lines also enables identification of mechanisms underlying differences in
competitive fertilization success within populations, as well as differences in
fertilization capability in hybrid versus same species matings. Finally, this
research will explore how repeated matings influence offspring production in
this highly promiscuous species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because flour beetles are
economically significant stored grain pests, insight to their reproductive
system can inform management efforts. Additionally, the project will include
involvement of multiple undergraduate researchers and outreach to the Syracuse
City School District.