* 1310687
* Physics of virus assembly: energetics and dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Roya Zandi, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2017
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education at the interface of materials science, soft matter physics and
biology. The objective of the proposed research is to elucidate the role of RNA
in the formation of virus particles. The PI proposes to explore the impact of
RNA on the assembly of virus particles focusing on its branching structure and
configurations inside capsids. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to
investigate the role of RNA in the formation of spherical capsids with
icosahedral symmetry and HIV capsids with conical structures. This will be
achieved by using a combination of field theoretical methods developed for
branched polymers and the Poisson-Boltzmann approximation for electrostatic
interactions. The analytical theory will be augmented by Monte Carlo and
Brownian dynamics simulations. This methodology will be modified to study
kinetics of formation of immature HIV particles, membrane deformation dynamics
and capsid protein transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the formation
of viral shells could influence progress in emerging areas of nanoscience,
nanotechnology, and gene therapy. In particular, this research could contribute
to alternative antiviral strategies based on direct interference with the
assembly of infectious viral particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
contribute to the education and training of undergraduate, graduate and
postgraduate students in a multidisciplinary environment providing them with
expertise in soft condensed matter and biological physics. The PI will organize
an outreach program for the middle school minority students in Riverside that is
aimed to increase participation of underrepresented groups in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education at the interface of materials science, soft matter physics and
biology. In its simplest form, a virus is composed of a protein shell called the
capsid that encloses the viral genome. Under the appropriate conditions, the
capsid proteins assemble spontaneously around its genome. It is now widely
accepted that RNA has an important role in the stability of viral particles. The
PI will investigate the role of RNA in the assembly of spherical, cylindrical
and conical viral shells. In particular, she aims to explain the spontaneous
formation of conical structures, a distinguished feature of HIV capsids. The
main question that will be addressed: Does the interaction with genome
contribute to the stability of HIV conical
structure?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the formation of viral shells
could influence progress in emerging areas of nanoscience, nanotechnology, and
gene therapy. In particular, this research could result in alternative antiviral
strategies based on direct interference with the assembly of infectious viral
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will contribute to the education and
training of undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate students in a
multidisciplinary environment providing them with expertise in soft condensed
matter and biological physics. The PI will organize an outreach program for the
middle school minority students in Riverside that is aimed to increase
participation of underrepresented groups in science and technology.