* 1310711
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Benjamin VanderJagt, VanderJagt              Benjamin       J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action is funding Ben Vander Jagt of The Ohio State University to conduct a
research project in Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at the University of
Tasmania in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia. The project title is "Estimating Snow
Depth Remotely Using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle." The host scientist is Dr. Arko
Lucieer, Senior Lecturer in Remote Sensing and GIS at the University of
Tasmania.

This Fellowship is working on accurately estimating spatially continuous snow
depth fields, using a combined Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) and
photographic based approach on-board an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV). By
measuring a geographic area once before the onset of the snow season and once
again during the snow season, the Fellow can effectively determine both the
amount and distribution of the snow contained within that area. It is the first
time that a study of such nature has been performed, and is an excellent example
of the novel scientific research that can be achieved using UAVs. Additionally,
because a large percentage of the world's population depends on snow as a source
of freshwater, being able to accurately measure and quantify snow accumulation
is an important objective that has both scientific and civil merit. By providing
resource managers with better information to facilitate effective water
management, conflict between individuals as well as governmental organizations
can be mitigated.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this Fellowship also provides an exciting
opportunity to promote earth science and engineering within the general
population, specifically secondary educational institutions. The Fellow plans to
demonstrate the scientific capabilities of UAVs to local high schools in order
to captivate and encourage students to pursue opportunities in the fields of
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM). The Fellow will make all data
collected during the study freely available to the public, as well as any
scientific publications which are authored as a result of the Fellowship.
Lastly, attending the host country supplies the Fellow with a rich introduction
to the science policy and legislation associated with the scientific and
commercial use of UAVs, and provides an excellent cultural and scientific
learning environment for conducting advanced research.