* 1310297
* All-Electrochemical Synthesis of Nanoporous Metal Based Catalysts for Energy Applications and Environmental Pollution Remedy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Nikolay Dimitrov, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2018
* USD 313,000.00

The NSF Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Nikolay
Dimitrov at the State University of New York at Binghamton to design and develop
an all-electrochemical synthetic approach that enables the production of thin
and continuous nanoporous catalysts with tunable thickness and interconnected
porosity. The synthetic protocols include electrodeposition of continuous
single-phase alloy films followed by selective oxidative removal of the less-
noble component (de-alloying). The de-alloying process completes the fabrication
of nanoporous metals (NPMs) with thicknesses of less than 20 nm. The synthetic
method results in reliable composition control and high processing efficiency.
During different stages of the fabrication, the catalyst surface area, structure
and composition are confirmed by electrochemical methods, and also by STM/AFM,
SEM, and EDS. The NPMs are then either used directly as catalysts or are
electrochemically functionalized with a sub-nanometer thick layer of
catalytically active metals or alloys. The coating is made by state-of-the art
electrochemical approaches, ensuring complete and uniform coverage over the NPM
matrix. The catalysts are assessed for activity and durability in established
lab tests for the oxygen reduction reaction, organic fuel oxidation, and/or
nitrate electro-reduction. The best catalysts are then assessed in a semi-
industrial environment. Qualified undergraduates from underrepresented groups
are offered summer research activities in the investigator?s research group. The
NSF Chemical Catalysis Program supports the efforts of Professor Nikolay
Dimitrov at the State University of New York at Binghamton to introduce an all-
electrochemical synthetic approach for the fabrication of a new class of
catalytically active materials based on nanoporous metals as an alternative to
the most established nanoparticle catalysts for energy and environmental
applications. Chemical methods of synthesis are sometimes problematic as they
can produce by-products and inhibitors to catalytic activity, that must be
removed by the use of additional chemicals and costly procedures. One advantage
of the electrochemical fabrication of catalysts is that it introduces a higher
level of control and environmentally friendly routines. Such approaches rely on
metal(s) reduction performed by applying voltage or current so that further
treatment and/or removal of unwanted chemicals or contaminants is not needed.
The catalysts designed and fabricated in this research will be used for
industrially-important catalytic reactions related to fuel cell applications and
environmental remediation. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
in advanced materials processing, along with analytical and characterizational
methods at the interface between chemistry and materials science.