* 1310305
* LEAD-it-Yourself!
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Eve Riskin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 839,653.00

From 2007 to 2009, the University of Washington?s ADVANCE Center for
Institutional Change (UW ADVANCE) promoted the advancement of women and other
underrepresented faculty in STEM departments across the nation by annually
creating and delivering in-person Leadership Excellence for Academic Diversity
(LEAD) workshops. The success of this initiative has prompted many more
institutions in the U.S. to request LEAD workshops; however, it is not
financially feasible, sustainable, or desirable for UW ADVANCE to continue to
curate and offer in-person LEAD workshops. To meet the national demand for LEAD
workshops, UW ADVANCE will create LEAD-it-Yourself! (LiY!), an online open
source toolkit of planning and instructional materials to enable institutions to
run their own local or regional LEAD-inspired workshops. LiY! will contribute to
ADVANCE goals by disseminating LEAD planning and instructional materials to STEM
departments across the nation. The online open source LiY! toolkit will provide
UW ADVANCE leadership development content and best practices, customizable event
planning guides, content guides (e.g., speakers suggestions, workshop topic
ideas, leadership briefs with key tips and best practices, and sample
presentations), and communication and evaluation templates that each institution
can use as models. LiY!?s sustainability will be ensured by a leadership
community that uses the online toolkit to engage in ongoing sharing, commenting,
adapting, and rating of content and through an extensive iterative evaluation
process.

The goal of the LiY! project is to disseminate UW ADVANCE LEAD content to a
widely dispersed community of leaders in higher education so as to support
independently-run academic diversity leadership development workshops across the
country. We will create a website to host the online open source LEAD planning
and instructional materials, and we will evaluate both the materials and the
website in diverse institutional contexts. We will engage a diverse group of
seven institutions in iterative evaluations to ensure that (1) the LiY! toolkit
enables institutions to independently run fully customizable and successful
leadership development workshops; and (2) the LiY! website supports usable and
sustainable open source content dissemination. Pilot institutions will receive
small amounts of seed funding for participating in the iterative evaluations.

LiY! will empower department chairs and faculty across the nation with
rigorously evaluated and customizable materials for promoting the advancement of
women and other underrepresented faculty in STEM. LiY! will encourage a
community of leadership among geographically dispersed institutions through
online dissemination and sharing.