* 1310745
* Dissertation Research:  Assessing the role of rapid evolution in trait-mediated predator effects on communities and ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Nelson Hairston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,081.00

Predators alter ecosystems both by reducing the abundance of prey and by
inducing change in species traits that influence ecosystem function. These
trait-mediated predator effects on ecosystems depend on the evolution of both
prey traits and the responsiveness of those traits to predation risk. The
evolutionary history of predator and prey thus underlies the influence of
predators on communities and ecosystems. The PIs will introduce predator cues to
experimental streams containing Trinidadian guppies (Poecilia reticulata) from
populations that have been isolated from predators for zero to thousands of
years. Measurements of guppy behavior, metabolism, and nutrient processing will
assess the influence of predators on guppy traits and the dependence of predator
effects on the evolutionary history of predator and prey. Corresponding measures
of invertebrate and algal communities, primary productivity, and nutrient
cycling will assess how induced trait change translates into ecologically
meaningful differences in stream communities and ecosystem processes.

Human-driven top-predator loss is a global threat to biodiversity and ecosystem
services. Understanding the mechanisms by which predators structure natural
systems is necessary to predict biodiversity and ecosystem services into an
uncertain future. Recent evidence indicates that evolution in contemporary time
can greatly affect the outcome of ecological processes, and the PIs will assess
how rapid evolution by prey mediates the influence of predators on natural
systems. One PhD student will be trained in conducting this research, and the
PIs will link this research to ongoing outreach with high school biology
students, using hands-on research projects to teach principles of biology.