* 1310908
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Developmental mechanisms organizing affiliative behavior and pair bonding
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Nicole Baran, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,274.00

Long-term pairing (selective affiliation) between males and females is rare in
mammals, but is a very common reproductive arrangement in birds. Selective
affiliation begins with parents and family early in development and switches to
the opposite-sex pair partner as the individual reaches adulthood. Using a
common laboratory species that forms lifelong close cooperative pair
relationships, the zebra finch, this project investigates the development of
such selective affiliative behavior and its neural and hormonal mechanisms. The
goal of the research is to test the hypothesis that the brain nonapeptide
arginine vasotocin (AVT, avian homolog of vasopressin) plays an important role
in the organization of affiliative behavior at two critical periods in
development in the zebra finch: 1) early in life prior to leaving the nest and
2) during the transition from juvenile to adult life. This research aims to
establish a causal link between changes in the nervous system and changes in
affiliative behavior by using an advanced technique that measures the expression
of a hormone receptor gene and neural activity in the same neurons in the brain.
The research will provide new information on the mechanisms of selective
affiliation in birds, which can then be compared to the mechanisms operating in
socially monogamous mammals. Thus, this study has the potential to increase
understanding of how brains and hormones produce close relationships in all
animals, including humans. This research project will contribute to the training
of undergraduates, including women and underrepresented minorities, who will be
working in the laboratory. Additionally, the results from this work will be
promptly published in journals accessed by a broad audience of researchers and
presented at national meetings. The results will be disseminated to the public
through a website and outreach programs for middle school girls.

All recordings and data in digital form will be archived at Cornell University
using the archiving services of the CU Library (including eCommons) or other
services that are currently under development under the leadership of the
Research Data Management Service Group (http://data.research.cornell.edu/).