* 1310774
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Evan Thomas, Thomas                  Evan           G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,304.00

This action funds Evan Thomas of Virginia Tech to conduct a research project in
Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at the University of Electro-
Communications in Ch√¥fu, Tokyo. The project title is "Dynamics of Ionospheric
Plasma Irregularities as Measured by Global Positioning System (GPS) Receivers
and the Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN)." The host scientist is Dr.
Keisuke Hosokawa.

Many critical technologies relied upon by both commercial and military users
around the world are directly impacted by events occurring in the charged
component of Earth's upper atmosphere, known as the ionosphere. Strong
geomagnetic storms are responsible for causing ionospheric clutter in over-the-
horizon radar systems; degradation of GPS signals (scintillations); and induced
electrical currents in power distribution networks. This project analyzes
simultaneous ionospheric total electron content (TEC) observations of plasma
structures with data collected from SuperDARN space weather radars for two main
purposes. The first objective is to examine the extent to which small-scale
plasma irregularities occur in the gradients of large-scale ionospheric features
such as subauroral polarization stream (SAPS), storm enhanced density (SED), and
tongue of ionization (TOI). The second objective is to gain a better
understanding of the methods used to study travelling ionospheric disturbances
(TIDs) with the dense networks of instrumentation in Japan and apply them to the
similarly well-covered North American sector.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this project plays an important role in
forging new collaborative research activities between the Japanese and American
space science communities as we continue to expand the global mapping
capabilities of GPS networks and SuperDARN. The scientific findings achieved as
a result of this project will be presented at scientific meetings and then
submitted for publication to appropriate peer-reviewed journals. Upon return to
the United States, a presentation will be made to the students and faculty of
the Space@VT department describing the Fellow's experiences in the program.