* 1310074
* Hemocompatibility of Nitinol Thin Films with TiO surface
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Daniel Levi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2017
* USD 365,000.00

This award from the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research
is to investigators in the School of Engineering and Applied Science working
with investigators in the School of Medicine at University of California, Los
Angeles. This award is cofunded by the Materials Surface Engineering program in
the Division of Civil, Mechanical &amp; Manufacturing Innovation. The major aim
of this research is to overcome the classic biological problems encountered with
current vascular graft materials such as expandable polytetrafluoroethylene
based stents. The scientific goal of this project is in developing a fundamental
understanding of the biological responses to thin film Nitinol (TFN) based
materials. The TFN contains both a biomimicking Titanium Oxide (TiO) surface and
an intelligently designed micro porosity pattern. The investigators hypothesized
that a negatively charged TiO surface better mimics the charge structure of the
native vascular system as compared to existing graft materials, and thus
reducing thrombosis while promoting re-endothelialization. This biomimicking
process is further enhanced with intelligently designed micro-pores that promote
direct cellular communication between the neointima forming on the lumen side of
the device and the underlying native vessel while preventing neointimal
hyperplasia. The proposed research represents an interdisciplinary collaboration
addressing a significant limitation of covered stents and other vascular graft
materials available today. The program includes educational activities to
inspire students' (from K-12 to graduate level) interest in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides a potential new materials
approach to treat a wide range of vascular diseases including peripheral
arterial disease, which affects over 10 million Americans. Recently, the use of
expandable polytetrafluoroethylene covered stents for treating peripheral
arterial disease has increased, but still has a 35% failure rate within 1 year
suggesting significant shortcomings with this type of graft material. Three of
the primary failure mechanisms are graft thrombosis, edge stenosis and lack of
re-endothelialization. To overcome these problems, the researches of this
project will use biomimicry and intelligent design to develop a new
hemocompatible material. This research project will provide opportunities for a
wide range of underrepresented students from K-12 to graduate levels. The K-12
students are encouraged to consider science and engineering studies during
outreach presentations at local schools twice a year. The investigators of this
project will participate with the Center for Excellence in Engineering and
Diversity program at UCLA to provide a diverse group (4-6) of undergraduate
students in conducting research on this project for one quarter. Additionally,
this project will use a peer mentoring process in a collaborative environment to
educate undergraduates on new cutting-edge technologies while encouraging them
to consider graduate studies.