* 1310863
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Tracking Timing of Migration and Diversification Across North and South America in Agalinis (Orobanchaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Douglas Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2015
* USD 13,109.00

The underlying evolutionary history, or phylogeny, of organisms from diverse
biomes provide a framework for understanding where these lineages originated
geographically, how they have subsequently diversified, and how these biomes
were assembled in the past. This project explores evolutionary relationships in
Agalinis (Orobanchaceae), a flowering plant genus of approximately 70 species
with a New Word distribution and with South American centers of diversity in two
recognized biodiversity hotspots: the Andes and the Cerrado of Brazil. Agalinis
is an ideal clade for investigating historical biogeography and diversification
between the two continents and between the Andes and Cerrado, as well as
patterns of morphological evolution following a rapid radiation into South
America. In addition to using standard phylogenetic and divergence time
estimation approaches, this research will also employ a newly developed multi-
species coalescent approach for estimation of the species tree and divergence
times within the South American clade of Agalinis. Our goals are to: 1) assemble
the first broadly-sampled phylogeny of Agalinis, 2) estimate the species tree
and divergence times, using both standard phylogenetic and new coalescent
methods for the South American clade, 3) investigate migration and
diversification between North and South America and between the Andes and the
Cerrado within South America, with efforts to correlate potential shifts in
diversification with geological and paleoclimatic reconstructions, and 4)
investigate morphological character evolution.&lt;br/&gt; The utility of this
research extends beyond the systematics of Agalinis and will be a valuable
contribution not only to studies of diversification and character evolution of
lineages in South America, but also to comparative phylogenetic research in the
Neotropics. This project relies extensively on established international
collaborations, particularly in Brazil. The results of the research will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, presentations at national
conferences, and through the my-plant.org web portal. Photos of plants in the
field have already been deposited with the Parasitic Plant Collection, a website
which provides information to researchers and the public. The co-PI is
supervising an undergraduate student on a small project overlapping with the
research outlined here, and will mentor a Brazilian undergraduate in a lab
exchange from USP in 2013. Additionally, the co-PI will continue her involvement
with the NSF-supported Planting Science online high school mentoring program,
furthering the educational impact of the proposed research.