* 1310127
* Adaptive designs: Sequential tests of multiple hypotheses
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jay Bartroff, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2017
* USD 150,000.00

The investigator will develop adaptive designs for the analysis of multiple
sequential data streams, about which it is desired to test a set of statistical
hypotheses. The designs will require minimal knowledge (none in some cases) of
the dependence between these data streams -- since such dependence is often
strong but difficult or impossible to model in practice -- and will provide
sequential multiple hypothesis testing procedures which reach conclusions about
each individual stream and hypothesis individually, as well as the set of
hypotheses as a whole by controlling overall error rates, while being adaptively
efficient by "dropping" a data stream once no additional information is needed
to reach a confident conclusion. This will be done for the two most widely-used
multiple testing error metrics, false-discovery rate and familywise error rate.
For these two metrics, the investigator will: (1) develop sequential multiple
testing procedures and a unified theory for existing procedures; (2) assess
their performance and optimality through analysis and extensive numerical
simulations; (3) find expressions or approximations for their operating
characteristics including achieved error rates and expected total and maximum
sample size; (4) apply the procedures to real data in genetics, genomics, and
multi-arm biomedical trials and modify the procedures to aid practical
implementation in these areas; and (5) develop free software packages to
facilitate applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide new
statistical methods to handle the analysis of multiple data streams arriving
sequentially over time in a coherent fashion. The need to handle this type of
data arises in a plethora of real-world situations including terrorist threat
detection, quality control, finance, biomedical clinical trials for new
treatments, disease monitoring in human and animal populations, genetics, and
genomics. Despite this, there are few existing statistical procedures that one
can use except in some special cases. The procedures developed in this project
will therefore be widely applicable by scientists and workers in these areas.
Methodologically, the work will be a breakthrough in a fundamental yet largely
unexplored area of statistics, with many benefits and broader impacts to
society.