* 1310079
* Antihydrogen and Antiproton Studies
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Gerald Gabrielse, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 01/31/2019
* USD 4,458,000.00

The antihydrogen atom, a bound state of a positron and an antiproton, is the
simplest atom made entirely of antimatter. This unusual atom has been produced
and suspended within magnetic fields that keep the antimatter atoms suspended at
a central location. The intellectual merit of precise comparisons of the
properties of the antihydrogen atoms and their matter counterpart arises from
the possibility of testing the prediction of the most fundamental physics
theory, namely that matter and antimatter particles are "exactly opposite", with
charges of opposite sign and masses that are identical, and that antimatter
atoms and matter atoms have precisely the same properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There are good reasons to believe that the most
fundamental physics theory is not a complete description. Discovering a
difference between the structure of antimatter and matter atoms would thus lead
to an improved theory of fundamental physics, the consequences of which are
potentially important for science and future technology. Moreover, this research
is the training ground for some of the most gifted science students and
postdocs, preparing them for the successful careers in science and technology
that are needed for a technological society to thrive. Methods developed for
such fundamental research typically find their way into more common
applications. Finally, many lectures on this science are used to educate
students, professional scientists, and the general public.