* 1310657
* Magnetic Particle Microscopy of Living Organisms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* James Hutchison, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 519,994.00

The goal of this project is to develop a new three-dimensional imaging
technique, using magnetic nanoparticle tracers, to observe and study biological
processes at the cellular and sub-cellular level in live organisms, tissue and
cell cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Advances in
optical microscopy and imaging have transformed biology. However, the
penetration depth of optical microscopy is limited due to the scattering and
absorption of light within tissue. Thus, interrogating tissue and 3D cell
cultures beyond (0.5 to 0.8) mm with high resolution and minimal photodamage
from the required high-intensity illumination has been challenging. Magnetic
fields, in contrast, penetrate biological samples without scattering or harm to
the cells, providing the opportunity for a new imaging modality from magnetic
nanoparticle microscopy as proposed here. Cells and cellular organelles may be
labeled with magnetic nanoparticle tracers, which can then be imaged with high
contrast and resolution. Magnetic nanoparticle microscopy is based on the
principles of magnetic particle imaging (MPI). Briefly, a magnetic field
distribution is established such that tracer particles everywhere within the
sample except a small field free point are magnetically saturated. As a result,
when an ac excitation field is applied, a response is elicited only from
nanoparticles within the field free point. A 3D image of the nanoparticle
concentration is constructed by scanning the field free point within the sample
to spatially select the nanoparticles and measure their response inductively.
Research on MPI has focused on the development of millimeter-scale resolution
scanners with a field of view encompassing the whole human or small animal body.
The proposed research seeks instead to scale magnetic particle imaging for sub
cellular resolution. The experimental goal is to demonstrate 25 Âµm in a relevant
biological specimen. A magnet field assembly will be implemented to provide the
high field gradient needed for nearly two orders of magnitude finer resolution.
The system hardware will be designed with low noise electronics to ensure
maximal signal-to-noise ratio. Further, nanoparticle tracers of custom size and
biocompatible coatings will be precision engineered with to meet the imaging
requirements. A modular synthetic approach will allow the core and biocompatible
coatings to be independently and systematically tailored, with exquisite
control. Imaging capabilities will be demonstrated in embryonic zebrafish and
verified via concurrent optical microscopy. Experiments proposed to qualify
magnetic nanoparticle imaging will also advance ongoing research in identifying
physical and chemical properties of nanoparticles that influence their uptake
and thereby provide insight to their toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: &lt;br/&gt;This project forges an interdisciplinary and inter-
institutional collaboration, bridging engineering, chemistry and biology, to
meet the need for an imaging technology to explore new scientific frontiers in
microbiology and medicine. The successful demonstration of cellular and sub
cellular resolution will establish a new means of microscopy, using magnetic
nanoparticle tracers, to investigate cell behavior in optically opaque, living
tissue. Beyond fundamental biology, this effort will advance synthesis
techniques for precisely engineered nanoparticles and bring new insight to
nanoparticle interactions with living systems. Further, it will lay the
foundation for applications envisioned in medical imaging of clinical skin and
breast cancer screening. The PIs will involve 2 graduate and 4 undergraduate
students in research. The participating students will gain a
well&lt;br/&gt;-rounded technical education acquiring not only expertise in
their respective areas of specialization but also knowledge of methods and
materials in complementary areas of research. Suitable sub-topics within the
project will be integrated in to cross disciplinary and discipline-specific
courses taught by the PIs. The research findings will be published in relevant
high-impact journals and presented at regional, national and international
technical meetings. In addition, as discussed in the data management plan, final
data will be archived and made available to the public. The PIs will serve K-12
education by developing grade-level appropriate instruction materials in
collaboration with elementary, middle and high school science teachers. The PIs
will also participate in Science Pubs, an informal science education program to
engage the public in discussion on the synthesis, applications and implications
of nanoparticles in medicine and biology.