* 1310874
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenetic patterns and processes of repeated morphological evolution in turtles
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Fredric Janzen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,240.00

Modern biology was founded on Charles Darwin?s principle of ?descent with
modification?. Closely related species share similarities in size, shape, and
form of their body plans. However, in some cases, distantly related species also
share similar traits. This exception to Darwin?s rule has puzzled biologists and
raises the question: to what extent is evolution repeatable and predictable?
This project will address this fundamental question by examining an interesting
pattern of repeated evolution in turtles. Some distantly related turtle species
feature similar anatomical modifications that allow them to close their shells
when attacked by predators. The project will employ leading-edge molecular
biology techniques to determine whether this pattern requires similar changes in
genes that control embryonic development of bone tissues in these species.

Turtles are of high cultural and economic importance to societies worldwide.
Yet, they are one of the most imperiled animals on the planet. This
multidisciplinary project will train underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
students to improve knowledge and raise public awareness about turtle diversity
and conservation. This knowledge may also contribute to improving human bone
health. Research materials will be available to the public through museums and
online databases. Results will be disseminated broadly to K-16 and public
audiences.