* 1310283
* Scalable Data Coupling Abstraction for Data-Intensive Simulation Workflows
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Manish Parashar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 04/30/2017
* USD 559,283.00

A Scalable Data Management Abstraction for Large-scale Coupled Simulation
Workflows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coupled scientific simulation workflows,
integrating multiple physics and scales and running at very large scales on
high-end resources, have the potential for achieving unprecedented levels of
accuracy and providing dramatic insights into complex phenomena. However, the
coupled component of these simulation workflows need to interact and exchange
significant amounts of data at runtime, and the data often has to be transformed
as it flows from source to destination. As the volumes and generation rates of
this data grow, the costs (latencies and energy) associated with extracting this
data and transporting it for coupling, transformation and analysis have become
the dominating overheads and are dictating the level of performance and
productivity that can be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to address these challenges and to develop conceptual solutions as well as a
software framework that can enable the large-scale data-intensive simulations.
Our approach is based on the premise that given the large data volumes and
associated costs, data will have to be largely processed online, ?in-situ? and
?in-transit? while it is staged using resources within the computational
platform, and the programming and runtime system must provide abstractions and
mechanisms that facilitate such data processing. Our effort is organized around
three key research thrusts: (1) Programming abstractions for in-situ/in-transit
data management; (2) Design and implementation of a scalable data staging
substrate; and (3) Data-centric mapping and
scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data and compute intensive simulations are
becoming increasingly critical to a wide range of science and engineering
domains, and as a result, this research has the potential to drive research and
innovations in these domains. The developed framework and benchmarks also
provide computer scientists with a substrate to experiment with and explore
data-centric research. The development of human resources, including the
training of students, researchers and software professions, as well as outreach
to minorities and underrepresented group, is integral to all aspects of this
effort.