* 1310839
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Reticulation and chromosomal evolution in Amaryllidaceae tribe Hippeastreae
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Pamela Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2015
* USD 18,979.00

This project seeks to examine reticulate evolution in a chromosomally diverse
group of Neotropical flowering plants, the Amaryllidaceae (amaryllis family).
The generic classification of Amaryllidaceae tribe Hippeastreae, which includes
10-12 genera and ~180 species, including amaryllis, rain lilies, and other
ornamentals, remains controversial, despite the horticultural importance of
these plants. This group of monocots is putatively descended from an ancient
hybridization event, and additional, more recent hybridizations have confounded
evolutionary relationships. The main goals are to: 1) assess the extent and
nature of reticulate evolution in Hippeastreae; and 2) explore patterns of
chromosome evolution in a phylogenetic context. The underlying evolutionary
history, or phylogeny, of the group will be investigated with DNA sequences of
multiple nuclear genes obtained by next-generation sequencing techniques.
Reticulate evolution will be addressed through methods that consider gene tree
heterogeneity and network representations of the phylogeny. Chromosomal
evolution will be assessed through modeling of chromosome number variation and
mapping of cytological characters, including genetic, structural, and numerical
differences, onto evolutionary trees. This project will provide general insights
into reticulation in plant evolution at different temporal scales and ploidy
levels (genome duplication) through an integrative molecular
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide the co-PI with
significant training opportunities in diverse molecular and cytogenetic
techniques, which he will apply as a teacher and researcher in his home country,
Chile. Hence, he will contribute to the development of systematics research
programs in Chile, where this field currently lacks sufficient expertise. This
project will result in a revised classification of Hippeastreae, which will
benefit other scientists and horticulturists working with these plants. This
classification will be integrated into eMonocot, a global online resource for
monocot taxonomy.