* 1310494
* SusChEM-Collaborative Research: The Role of Surface Energy on Texture Development in Rare-Earth-Free Auxetic and Magnetostrictive Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Ruqian Wu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 07/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs advance understanding of
the mechanisms that lead to grain-boundary mobility differences, texture
development and abnormal growth of grains with a preferred texture/grain
orientation in polycrystalline metals. They will use this understanding to
develop low cost yet high-performance polycrystalline auxetic and/or
magnetostrictive materials that are single-crystal-like. Their approach for this
research will combine multiple-scale computational simulations, theoretical
models and synergistically integrated insights gained from quantitative
experimental studies of recrystallization, grain growth and texture development
in rolled sheets of Fe-Ga (Galfenol) and Fe-Al (Alfenol) based binary and
ternary alloys. Experiments will be used to explore relationships between anneal
protocols and surface energy, grain mobility and texture development. Their
hypothesis is that surface energy differences are the dominant driving force
underlying the ability to selectively develop a grain structure and texture that
is single-crystal-like. This hypothesis will be investigated by creating
thermodynamic models of grain growth and texture development. In parallel,
first-principle-based computational simulations and experimental studies of
Galfenol and Alfenol will be conducted to aid in model formulation and
validation, and to identify binary and ternary iron alloys with properties that
should impart high auxeticity and/or magnetostriction in materials for which
surface energy can be used to promote anisotropy development. This research is
aligned with the SusChEM initiative through developing methods for processing
magnetostrictive alloys that allow earth-abundant, inexpensive and benign
chemicals, e.g. Al, Co, Ga, Mn and Sn, to be used as a replacement for expensive
critical materials, the rare-earth elements such as Tb and Dy that comprise
~33at.% of Terfenol-D. The PIs will introduce a method for determining the
surface energy of metal grains with a specific crystallographic orientation by
tracking the contact angle of a drop of liquid gallium on grain surfaces of
known orientation. This method overcomes shortcomings of existing methods, such
as water-drop methods, that work for glass and polymeric surfaces with low
surface energy and high-temperature destructive and/or creep-based methods that
work for amorphous solids and samples for which isotropy is a reasonable
approximation (e.g. highly polygranular samples).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to the understanding
needed to achieve the performance capabilities of costly single-crystal alloys
in low-cost polycrystalline alloys. Models of atomic structure and energy-based
models of crystal growth processes will be used to gain insights into how to
control and target the selective growth of desired crystals at the expense of
crystals with less favorable mechanical and/or magnetostrictive properties. The
iron-aluminum and iron-gallium alloys that are one focus of this project have
been targeted because of preliminary results that suggest they are good
candidates for a sustainable alternative to magnetostrictive alloys used in
industrial and defense applications that contain rare-earth elements like
Terbium and Dysprosium. This research aligns well with the need for advances in
the development of sustainable materials, as it focuses on methods for
processing magnetostrictive alloys that allow earth-abundant, inexpensive and
benign chemicals to be used as a replacement for expensive critical materials,
the rare-earth elements that are both significantly more costly and
significantly less abundant in the Earth's crust. The iron-aluminum and iron-
gallium alloys to be studied are highly-auxetic, a mechanical property that is
generally found in polymers but rarely in metals. The potential for high
industrial impact of a structural auxetic alloy exists, as studies of non-
structural auxetics (i.e. polymers) indicate that auxeticity can be used to
enhance resistance to fracture and indentation. This research project will also
support the training of postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in
modeling and processing anisotropic, rare-earth-free, single-crystal-like
materials as well as in developing a new method for the measurement of surface
energies of anisotropic solids. Students will disseminate research results in
journal publications, conference papers and presentations. The team will mentor
underrepresented (minority and women) high-school, undergraduate and graduate
students under this project. The PIs will both continue to engage in on-going
outreach to K-12 students.