* 1310012
* Connections between redox chemistry and catalysis in multiheme peroxidases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Sean Elliott, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Sean Elliott of Boston University to study the protein
dynamics and regulatory mechanisms of bacterial enzymes that detoxify hydrogen
peroxide. A multi-disciplinary approach making use of protein electrochemistry,
biochemistry and crystallography will be used to examine the molecular
determinants that govern how a redox enzyme turns on or shuts down reactivity
through pairing redox- and spin state- changes of heme cofactors to
conformational changes in protein structure. Such studies can provide a
molecular level understanding of redox-based mechanisms of the regulation of
catalysis. Enzymes are masters of transforming one molecule into another. In
this way, bacterial enzymes called cytochrome c peroxidases (bCCPs) detoxify the
reactive molecule hydrogen peroxide and transform it into harmless water.
Enzymes such as bCCP often also master their own regulation, where they are
turned either on or off. Understanding how enzymes regulate their own activity
is a critical aspect of understanding how they can act as catalysts. Here, a
wide range of biochemical, structural, spectroscopic, and electrochemical
approaches will be brought to bear to understand the reactivity of "activatable"
bCCP and elucidate the principles of what turns on (and off) their activity. The
graduate and undergraduate students involved in these efforts will receive a
multi-disciplinary training. This project will be integrated with continued
mentoring efforts as students and the PI will develop and participate as leaders
in an ongoing series of workshops in bioinorganic chemistry.