* 1310727
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kimberly Bowen, Bowen                   Kimberly       S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Kimberly Suzanne Bowen of the University of Utah to conduct a
research project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at Kyoto University Kokoro Research Center in Kyoto, Japan. The
project title is "Social Support and Health: Examining Cultural Pathways of
Belonging Social Support and Giving Social Support to Mental and Physical Well-
Being." The host scientist is Yukiko Uchida, Ph.D.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project includes examining individual and
cultural similarities and differences in the psychological pathways linking
interpersonal social support to individual well-being. It compares the
effectiveness of different types of social support in increasing or reducing
well-being as a function of affirming or threatening culturally-relevant self-
concepts, such as the self as efficacious, independent, and accomplished (in
independent cultures) or the self as socially connected and harmonious (in
interdependent cultures). It also examines whether findings in the United States
that giving and receiving support similarly affect well-being are replicable in
other cultural settings. To address this, participants from the United States
and Japan are completing daily measures of social support, self-esteem, social
connectedness, mental well-being, and physical health over three weeks of daily
life. Additionally, greater understanding of these cultural processes have
implications for improved intervention design in international disaster relief
and educational diversity.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. It meets the NSF goal to
educate for international collaborations early in the career of its scientists,
engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific
workforce. Findings will be disseminated through guest presentations at both
Japanese and American universities, poster presentations at conferences, as well
as teaching guest lectures in undergraduate courses on cultural psychology and
social support.