* 1310725
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jonathan Reeder, Reeder                  Jonathan       T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

This action funds Jonathan Thomas Reeder of The University of Texas at Dallas to
conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at The
Someya-Sekitani Organic Transistor Lab at the University of Tokyo in Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. The project title is "3D Organic Electronics Enabled by Shape
Memory Polymer Substrates." The host scientist is Takao Someya.

Flexible electronics that can retain electrical properties through various
deformations and can be interfaced with curvilinear surfaces inside the body are
enabling biosensors that can read body signals on the chronic time scale by
providing enhanced device-tissue interfaces. Flexible transistors based on a
high-performance air-stable organic semiconductor were fabricated on a shape
memory polymer (SMP) substrate. SMPs are a class of stiffness-changing smart
materials that can recover an imparted strain, facilitated by a drop in modulus
when heated. This smart polymer substrate and attached thin-film electronics can
conform or be adjusted into various shapes by heating the substrate above its
glass transition temperature, which is the temperature where the polymer becomes
rubbery. Results show that by synthesizing an SMP substrate with a transition
temperature near body temperature, organic transistor devices can be fabricated
that soften and conform to 3D geometries when exposed to body conditions. This
will enable future biomedical devices that are compliant to surrounding tissue
and stationary after implantation. The softening nature of the SMP also ensures
a reduction in the body?s immune response to the implanted device due to a
reduction in the mismatch of stiffness between the implant and body tissue.
These air-stable organic electronics have low power requirements and have
sufficient electrical properties required to build biosensors or tissue
stimulators. SMPs with 3D recovery states which are activated by body conditions
are also enabling deployable biosensors that can actively grab or wrap around
complex 3D geometries such as nerves, blood vessels, or neural tissue.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. This EAPSI fellowship will strengthen an existing
collaboration between the University of Tokyo and the University of Texas at
Dallas and will facilitate future exchange of researchers and students. Research
that will be performed over the summer will be presented at international
conferences during the subsequent year, and the broad scope of the proposed
research will yield dissemination of results to a broad audience of materials
scientists, electrical, mechanical, and biomedical engineers.