* 1310757
* Improving Retention and Facilitating Career Reentry for Women Scientists with a Consortium of Universities
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Frances Rosenbluth, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 374,096.00

This project uses a several-pronged approach, focusing on the postdoctoral
community where attrition is both substantial and gendered, in order to assess
ways to increase the retention of women scientists in the academic work force.
First, better information about why postdocs drop out will help us target
policies more effectively. In most research universities, postdocs do not come
under the watchful eyes of deans and provosts because they are neither graduate
students nor faculty. Given the importance of postdoctoral training for
scientific careers, this neglect has become a structural problem for women who
are dropping out at a fast clip. Second, we will develop MentorSTEM into an
effective and feasible way for universities to provide systematic mentoring to
postdocs, beginning with women postdocs. Our experimental design allows us to
?learn by doing,? to improve mentoring content and delivery based on regular and
repeated evaluation of the scholarly success and morale of those being mentored.
A variety of mentoring types will be used and tested for effectiveness at
retaining the postdocs in the academic work force. Over the course of this
program, we will develop and test a variety of ways to support these postdocs,
as well as those who are mentoring them, to achieve scholarly
excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the longer run, we gain from this project
ways to improve both the quality of life and the quality of scholarship for the
entire scientific community. Our commitment to diversity rests on the conviction
that knowledge flourishes best when there are no barriers to entry. We are eager
to build an environment in which all members of the academic community can grow
and flourish as scholars, and in which men and women alike can balance family
and career. Failure to remove obstacles to success, now unevenly in the paths of
women and minority scholars, places an unacceptable tax on the possibilities for
scientific excellence.&lt;br/&gt;