* 1310090
* Three Dimensional, Passivated-Electrode, Insulator-Based Dielectrophoresis (3D-PiDEP)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Amy Pruden, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2017
* USD 353,091.00

Research Objective: The aim of this research is to develop new dielectrophoretic
(DEP) chips comprising three-dimensional insulating structures and passivated
electrodes for low-cost, high-throughput, and selective isolation and enrichment
of different pathogens in water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: We
will combine advanced 3D silicon micromachining technologies, soft lithography,
and DEP techniques to develop three-dimensional passivated-electrode insulator-
based dielectrophoresis (3D-£kDEP) chips for pathogen enrichment. The 3D-£kDEP
chip, which consists of several zones with arrays of three-dimensional
microstructures on a PDMS-glass platform, alleviates the shortcomings of the
current electrode-based DEP and insulator-based DEP mechanisms by utilizing 3D
insulator structures for generating strong electric field gradients and using
passivated electrodes to apply the required AC voltage for selective
isolation/trapping of bioparticles including pathogens. The 3D-£kDEP chips can
be used to characterize the DEP properties and selectively trap Methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Escherichia coli (SMS-3-5) as model
Gram positive and negative bacteria. 3D-£kDEP devices will be validated by
benchmarking the results obtained against quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) which works by quantifying a target gene copy known to be specific to the
pathogen of interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research leads
into the development of a new DEP method with high flexibility in design and
operation while providing scalable throughput for separation and enrichment of
particles in biological fluids. The research also promotes teaching and learning
at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. This includes: 1) REU
opportunities for undergraduates, 2) recruiting of graduate students into a
highly interdisciplinary research program, 3) lab tours and lecture presentation
for high school students participating in VT Pre-College Initiative and College
outreach activities, 4) incorporation of the project results in the courses
taught by the PIs in different departments, and 5) joint seminars by the PIs.
Additionally, the outcome of this research will be widely disseminated to the
engineering and scientific communities in peer-reviewed journals and in
presentation at multidisciplinary conferences.