* 1310990
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Christopher Ortega, Ortega                  Christopher    M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Christopher Ortega of the University of Houston to conduct a
research project in materials science during the summer of 2013 at Yunnan
University in Kunming, Yunnan. The project title is "The Synthesis and
Characterization of a Nanostructured Composite Photoanode used for Solar
Assisted Hydrogen Generation." The host scientist is Dr. Zhu Liu.

This project works toward the synthesis of a composite photoanode consisting of
a nano-mesoporous Tungsten Trioxide film, that is electrochemically coated with
hematite. The nanoporous Tungsten Trioxide film provides a scaffold for the
hematite resulting in a nanoporous network, with an increased surface area that
allows for higher efficiency in hydrogen generation. Precise electrochemical
pulse deposition is used to coat the nanoporous network of the WO3 film with a
highly uniform hematite film. The use of a composite structure, alongside a
nanoporous structure allows for a highly efficient photoanode, capable of
generating hydrogen when exposed to solar light. This research is novel clean
energy research topic since hydrogen is the required fuel for fuel cells, but
the majority of hydrogen is currently generated using fossil fuels, making
hydrogen fuel cells a non-fully clean energy process. By developing a renewable
method of generating hydrogen, it is possible to have a completely renewable
energy generation process.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this project allows for both Dr. Zhu Liu and
the Fellow to disseminate the results of the research at conferences and
workshops in the United States and the host country. This ensures that the
research impacts a wider audience in the countries that have the highest need
for clean energy. The research conducted will also be shared with the Fellow's
home university, through seminars and department presentations showing the
benefits of international collaboration, international culture exchange, and the
value of clean energy fuel synthesis.