* 1310363
* New Frameworks of SSNMR for Biomolecules and Nano-assembled Systems for Sensitivity, Reaction, and Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Yoshitaka Ishii, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/28/2017
* USD 460,000.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is an indispensable tool for
determining the structure of molecules. In this project, supported by the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof.
Yoshitaka Ishii of the University of Illinois at Chicago and his research group
will establish a new framework of next-generation NMR spectroscopy for
biomoleculces and materials in solids, which is generally called solid-state NMR
(SSNMR). The proposed work would aim to increase the speeds of the data
collection 50-6000 fold over a traditional method by integrating advanced
methods such as 1H detection, novel isotope labeling, and paramagnetic doping
into a non-traditional SSNMR approach using an ultra high magnetic field and
very fast magic angle spinning. The second component of the research involves
SSNMR analysis of peptides and proteins during solid-phase peptide synthesis,
which reveals the structural changes of the protein during the reactions. The
third component is to examine graphene/graphite based nano materials, in
particular, chemical reactions of graphene oxide and graphite oxide and the
interactions of H2O with porous grapheme-based systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ishii's research will advance NMR technology applications
to a broader range of insoluble proteins and non-crystalline materials, which
cannot be analyzed by other tools such as x-ray crystallography. Advances in the
Ishii group research will likely have impacts in the many venues of NMR based
technology, including nanomaterials analysis and peptide science. Professor
Ishii will integrate his research into his educational activities by
establishing a new graduate course on solid-state NMR with hands-on experiments.
Professor Ishii will also incorporate a demo of a simple magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) experiment into molecular diffusion experiments with NMR field
gradient in undergraduate labs in order to discuss the connection of NMR with
the MRI technology used for medical diagnostics. Finally, Professor Ishii will
recruit undergraduate researchers through Summer Research Opportunities for
Undergraduates Program (SROP) at the University of Illinois at Chicago, which
emphasizes the diversity in research-based undergraduate education.