* 1310895
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* William Hilton, Hilton                  William        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds William Hilton of Drexel University to conduct a research
project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the HuboLab in Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in Daejeon. The project title is
"Enabling a Humanoid Robot to Play Piano Through Improved Hands." The host
scientist is Jun Oh.

The aim of this research project is to integrate a pair of robotic hands capable
of playing a standard piano into the design of the next generation Hubo humanoid
developed at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). The
Fellow works in Dr. Youngmoo Kim's Music Entertainment Technology lab (MET-lab)
at Drexel University, where a goal is to enable humanoid robots to play in music
ensembles with human performers. Hubo's current hands are optimal for gripping
large objects, because they have underactuated fingers that passively curl
around an object. However, because they are underactuated, they do not have the
precision control needed to play most musical instruments. The Fellow is leading
a team at MET-lab to develop a new set of inexpensive dexterous hands that will
have 15 degrees of freedom, allowing Hubo to play piano. At HuboLab, the Fellow
is continuing to develop the hands and is working with the Korean counterparts
to connect them to Hubo's electrical, mechanical, and software systems. Although
the specific motivation for the current project is music, the applications of
dexterous hands are many, and improved hands will enable many advanced
applications of humanoids involving fine manipulation.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the new hands have the potential to be
adopted widely and used by many researchers, including those at the more than
half a dozen universities in the U.S. with their own Hubo. Videos and demos of
Hubo playing piano will engage the general public, stimulate discussion about
the fusion of science and art, and encourage children to pursue fields in
science and engineering. The Fellow plans to give talks and presentations about
the experience in Korea to fellow students at Drexel, his alma mater the
University of Cincinnati, and to neighboring high schools in the Philadelphia
area.