* 1310551
* Optimal Joint Spectrum Allocation and Scheduling for Cognitive Radio Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Xiaohua Xu, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 03/31/2015
* USD 244,808.00

Objective:

The objective of this project is to significantly improve spectrum utilization
through conducting optimal or near-optimal joint spectrum allocation and
scheduling in cognitive radio networks. The PIs address critical and practical
challenges for spectrum allocation and scheduling in cognitive radio networks,
in particular multi-hop cognitive radio networks, such as dynamic traffic
demands and pattern, unpredictable primary user activity, wireless interference,
and coexistence. A test-bed will be set up to extensively evaluate the designed
algorithms and protocols.

Intellectual merit:

The intellectual merits of this project are: 1) this project develops creative
models and algorithms in the framework of restless multi-armed bandit to address
the critical challenges for spectrum allocation and scheduling in cognitive
radio networks; 2) the proposed methodology is novel in that it intelligently
combines the networked multi-armed bandit modeling, graph theory, and
communication scheduling theories; 3) this project significantly advances the
fundamental knowledge and understanding of cognitive radio networks; and 4) the
developed algorithms, models, and protocols significantly improves spectrum
utilization in future wireless communication systems.

Broader impacts:

This project significantly improves the design, deployment, and operation of
future wireless communication systems. The proposed algorithms, protocols, and
models enable future wireless systems to share spectrum much more efficiently
than today's systems, which will result in significant economical, societal, and
public safety impacts. In addition, the proposed research is integrated into
education and training for both undergraduate and graduate students. This
project also significantly broadens the participation of underrepresented
minority groups, e.g., the Native Americans in South Dakota.