* 1310585
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Emily McCarthy, McCarthy                Emily          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Emily Ruth McCarthy of William Marsh Rice University to
conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Hongik
Univeristy in Seoul, South Korea. The project title is "Improving the Seismic
Reliability of Bridges with Innovative Shape Memory Alloy Devices." The host
scientist is Dr. Eunsoo Choi.

Within transportation networks bridges are recognized as the most vulnerable
links during earthquakes, with associated damage resulting in high repair costs
and socio-economic disruption to the affected region. Through the use of
innovative shape memory alloy devices, which can be strategically placed within
an analytical bridge model, improvements in bridge reliability (i.e. the
probability of survival) can be demonstrated for representative seismic events.
Many existing methods for enhancing bridges' seismic resistance focus on
developing components that activate in a single directional of motion while the
device presented in this work aims to exploit the material's superelasticity
effect to limit detrimental effects due to multi-directional displacements. The
superelasticity effect most notably describes the material's ability to recover
large deformations after application and removal of stress. Improved bridge
reliability translates into increased public safety and long term reduction of
related repair costs. Through fragility analysis, which describes the
probability of failure of a system or component given a set intensity measure,
the effectiveness of the proposed device to improve reliability is demonstrated.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the specific benefits of pursuing this
research topic relate to improving public safety during seismic events and
reducing post-event repair costs related to bridge damage. Additionally
emergency responders requiring immediate connectivity between regions need
functioning bridges and this maintenance of functionality can be facilitated
through the incorporation of shape memory alloy devices in the system.