* 1310921
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Melinda Yang, Yang                    Melinda        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Melinda A. Yang of University of California Berkeley to
conduct a research project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at
the Ancient DNA Laboratory of Jilin University in Changchun, Jilin Province,
China. The project title is "Determining the Genetic Relationship among Early
Bronze Age Peoples in the Central Plains of China." The host scientist is
Professor Hui Zhou.

This study applies a population genetic approach to analyze ancient population
structure in geographically restricted regions and explore changes through time
from ancient populations to the present day. The research focuses on human
populations of the Shang (~1600-1027 BC) and Zhou (1027-771 BC) dynasties from
the Central Plains of Early Bronze Age China. It compares ancient genetic
material from Shang and Zhou bone specimens to each other and to modern East
Asian samples to test the hypotheses that the Shang and Zhou are biologically
distinct and that these ancient populations fall within the genetic diversity of
present day East Asians. Ancient DNA is being extracted at Jilin University.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the EAPSI fellowship will strengthen academic
ties between UC Berkeley, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, and Jilin
University. The research conducted under the fellowship is directly relevant to
the history of China. The research will be communicated to Chinese populations
near Jilin University and in the Bay Area of the United States. The results will
be developed into a lesson to for grade K-5 students in the Bay Area Scientists
in School program, of which the Fellow is an active member. The research will
also be shared with scientists in archaeology and biology at conferences such as
the International Symposium of Biomolecular Archaeology and the Society for
Molecular Biology and Evolution.