* 1310836
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Scott Seyfarth, Seyfarth                Scott          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Scott Seyfarth of the University of California, San Diego to
conduct a research project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area
during the summer of 2013 at the University of Canterbury in Christchurch, New
Zealand. The project title is "Usage-Based Factors for Vowel Change in New
Zealand English." The host scientist is Elizabeth Hume.

This project uses data from a large historical speech corpus hosted at the
University of Canterbury to study causes for vowel change in New Zealand
English. The corpus is being evaluated for the contribution of usage variables,
such as word predictability, the probabilities of different vowel types, and the
salience of near-homophones, to vowel centralization and the front vowel shift
in New Zealand English. These factors have been shown to influence vowel
articulation in everyday speech, and so the goal is to assess whether they may
also have influenced the long-term vowel changes in progress, or whether the
changes are better accounted for by sociolinguistic analysis. The project
contributes to scholarship on vowel system typology, phonetic category
maintenance, and the phonetics and phonology of New Zealand English over the
last century.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this research promotes the exchange of work
being done on the sound systems of global Englishes, including among the multi-
disciplinary, international linguistics and cognition researchers at the New
Zealand Institute of Language, Brain, and Behavior. The results of the research
will contribute to the Origins of New Zealand English Project at the Institute,
and will be shared with the wider linguistics community.