* 1310475
* SusChEM: Dendrimer-like Biopolymer: A New Material Platform to Deliver Active Ingredients
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Ganesan Narsimhan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 420,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1310475 PI: Yao, Yuan ORG: Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: SusChEM: Dendrimer-like Biopolymer: A New
Material Platform to Deliver Active Ingredients&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
Delivery of active ingredients (AIs) has been a critical technology arena
spanning from food and agricultural applications to pharmaceutical innovations.
Synthetic carriers have gained enormous attention thanks to the means developed
to control their structure and functionalities. In contrast, the structural
regularity of abundant and sustainable biobased materials has been difficult to
achieve, leading to their scarcity as well-fabricated carriers. To address this
challenge, the PI and his co-workers have been consistently exploring biobased
materials for AI delivery. As a result, dendrimer-like biopolymer (DLB) from
plants has been identified as a potential material for AI protection and
delivery. The goal of this project is to explore DLB as a platform for
generating functional biobased materials, with a focus on their capability to
improve the solubility of poorly water-soluble AIs. The specific aims are to:
(1) prepare DLB nanoparticles with various particle sizes and chemical
properties and examine their cytotoxicity, (2) evaluate the impact of DLB
structure on the solubility and stability of model AI molecules, and (3) assess
in vitro digestibility of DLB-AI complexes and examine Caco-2 cell monolayer
permeability of model AI molecules as affected by DLB structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: When abundant and sustainable biobased
materials meet with cutting-edge technologies, their values grow enormously.
Envision that millions of pounds of biomaterials are harvested from endless crop
fields and custom-engineered to improve drug formulation and delivery, enhance
food safety and nutrition, and advance agricultural practices. That is what this
SusChEM project will help to achieve. At Purdue University, the project team is
committed to sustainable materials research that promotes key areas in health
systems through: (1) basic research activities in nano and biobased materials,
(2) partnership with the pharmaceutical industry, and (3) interdisciplinary
educational activities. Supported by this project, the PIs will create and
disseminate new knowledge and technologies under the general theme of
sustainable materials for health. The project will help students and industry
professionals to better understand or utilize materials science in their
learning, research, and technology development.