* 1310138
* Optical Spectroscopy and Control of Many-Body Dynamics in Semiconductors in High Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Junichiro Kono, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2017
* USD 560,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project will probe and control non-
equilibrium many-body dynamics in three prototypical low-dimensional
semiconductors - quantum wells, graphene, and carbon nanotubes - using ultrafast
optical spectroscopy in high magnetic fields. The optics facilities at the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) in Tallahassee, Florida, as well
as the newly implemented mini-coil pulsed magnet system in the PI's laboratory
at Rice University will be utilized. Various ultrafast optical and
microspectroscopy techniques in magnetic fields will be employed to provide new
insight into the states and dynamics of interacting and confined electrons in
solids. Clarifying and answering the above-stated issues and questions will not
only advance our understanding of carrier interactions in solids but also open
up possibilities for new devices utilizing many-body effects. This project will
train undergraduate and graduate students in cutting-edge techniques to produce
the next generation of experts in optical spectroscopy, condensed matter
physics, and nanoscienec. Furthermore, through the unique linkage with the PI's
Partnerships for International Research and Education grant from the NSF, this
project will provide an opportunity for alumni of the NanoJapan: Summer
Nanotechnology Research Program for Undergraduates to further their research
experience with a summer internship at the NHMFL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-
Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Modern crystal growth and nanofabrication
technologies allow one to create artificial nanostructures with tailored
properties. These structures provide an ideal laboratory in which to study
fundamental physics problems in a highly controllable manner. This project will
investigate how individual electrons communicate with each other and behave
cooperatively in three prototypical nanostructures: semiconductor quantum wells,
graphene, and carbon nanotubes. Short and intense laser pulses combined with
high magnetic fields will be used; a high magnetic field provides a convenient
knob for controlling electron dynamics through the magnetic quantization of the
orbital and spin motions of electrons. Facilities at the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory (NHMFL) in Tallahassee, Florida, as well as a pulsed high-field
magnet system in the PI's laboratory at Rice University will be utilized.
Specific questions to be addressed include: i) How do independent electron-hole
pairs develop macroscopic coherence?; ii) How does a collective nature manifest
itself in the quantum coherent dynamics of a two-dimensional electron gas?; and
iii) How stable are one-dimensional excitons at quantum degenerate densities?
Answering these questions will not only advance our understanding of carrier
interactions in solids but also open up possibilities for new devices utilizing
many-body effects. We will also train undergraduate and graduate students in
cutting-edge techniques to produce the next generation of experts in optical
spectroscopy, condensed matter physics, and nanoscience.