* 1310433
* Computationally-Driven Rational Control of Glass Formation in Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* David Simmons, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 265,476.00

Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research employing
coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations to establish fundamental design
principles enabling control of block copolymer glass formation behavior. Results
over several decades emphasize that the glass transition in block copolymers is
subject to large nanoconfinement effects due to the characteristic presence of
phase-separated domains with nanometer size-scales. As in polymer thin films, it
is expected that these effects are accompanied by changes in mechanical and
transport properties. A fundamental understanding of nanoconfinement effects on
the dynamics and glass formation behavior of block copolymers could thus form
the basis for a new transformative approach to rationally tuning the performance
of these materials in applications ranging from drug release to membrane
separations. &lt;br/&gt;Presently, the use of nanoconfinement effects to
engineer block copolymer glass formation is hampered by the lack of a firm
understanding of the molecular mechanisms determining their magnitude and
direction. This work will explore the hypothesis that nanoconfinement effects on
the glass transition emerge from a two part mechanism: first, mobility at the
interface is altered by close proximity to a more or less restrictive
environment; second, these mobility changes propagate into the material via
cooperative segmental rearrangements that are characteristic of dynamics in many
glass-forming materials. By employing simulations of bead-spring block
copolymers, this research will accomplish three goals: &lt;br/&gt;1)Determine a
clear mechanism for glass transition confinement effects by correlating them
with the extent and nature of cooperative motion in a range of block
copolymers;&lt;br/&gt;2)Quantify the dependence of glass transition
nanoconfinement effects on relative block Tg, block miscibility, and fragility
of glass formation of each block;&lt;br/&gt;3)Establish a new method for
rational control of block copolymer glass formation behavior: the insertion of a
short intermediate block that tunes Tg confinement effects.&lt;br/&gt;Since
glass transition nanoconfinement effects are observed in a broad range of
systems, the new insights into the mechanistic origin of these effects obtained
through this work will inform the design of nanostructured polymeric systems
generally, with an impact on applications ranging from membranes to barrier
films to polymeric nanostructures employed in microelectronics. &lt;br/&gt;This
research will be integrated with a new summer internship program pairing
underprivileged high-school students with outstanding undergraduate students
from similarly challenged backgrounds. By targeting low-income students for paid
internships in the PI's group, this program will overcome the barrier to entry
of underprivileged youth into stem careers presented by their inability to
afford unpaid internships. By selecting successful undergraduate students from
similarly underprivileged backgrounds, this program will provide a high school
student facing considerable challenges with a key role model towards a STEM
career, while providing outstanding undergraduates from underrepresented
backgrounds with key experience in research leadership and enhanced engagement
in the STEM educational process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research and
education focused on establishing principles guiding the rational design of
"nanostructured block copolymers" with targeted mechanical, transport, and glass
formation properties. Unlike simpler, "homogenous" materials, block copolymers'
properties intrinsically reflect the fact that their internal structure is
comprised of separate domains that are often nanometers to tens of nanometers in
size. While each of these domains, on its own, is chemically similar to a simple
homopolymer (such as polystyrene), the domains' engineering properties are
strongly altered by their mutual contact at the nanoscale. Because block
copolymers are a key class of advanced materials for next-generation
technologies addressing applications such as water and air purification,
understanding and controlling these changes is essential. By performing
molecular dynamics computer simulations of model block copolymers, this work
will clearly establish the fundamental mechanisms controlling these effects at a
molecular scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be integrated with a
new summer internship program pairing underprivileged high-school students with
outstanding undergraduate students from similarly challenged backgrounds. By
targeting low-income students for paid internships in the PI's group, this
program will overcome the barrier to entry of underprivileged youth into stem
careers presented by their inability to afford unpaid internships. By selecting
successful undergraduate students from similarly underprivileged backgrounds,
this program will provide a high school student facing considerable challenges
with a key role model towards a STEM career, while providing outstanding
undergraduates from underrepresented backgrounds with key experience in research
leadership and enhanced engagement in the STEM educational process.