* 1310260
* Design of Novel Large-Pore Nanoporous Materials through Understanding of Micelle Templating Process
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Shuiqin Zhou, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 449,817.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Recently, predictive pathways have been developed to
materials with high surface areas and well-defined nanoscale pores, either
arranged in periodic arrays or existing in individual nanoparticles. These novel
materials are attractive in catalysis, separations, environmental cleanup,
controlled drug delivery, electronics and development of sensors. Some of the
most powerful synthetic approaches involve surfactant aggregates known as
micelles, which are usually spherical or cylindrical in shape, as templates for
nanoscale pores in periodic materials or in hollow nanospheres or nanotubes.
However, the pathways to different kinds of micelle-templated nano-porous
materials evolved separately with little synergy. The project is intended to
bridge the divide between the micelle-templated periodic nanostructures and the
nanoparticles, so that the knowledge about each of these structures can readily
be used to understand other known structures and design new ones. The design
features considered include the pore shape, pore diameter and size of the
entrances to pores. The project is primarily focused on pores of size from 10 to
40 nanometers, which are important in immobilization of biomolecules (for
instance in enzymatic catalysis), adsorption of large and small molecules, and
heterogeneous catalysis. Convenient methods for the synthesis of materials with
pores at this length scale are developed to facilitate their applications and
gain fundamental insight into nanoscale materials
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The project is focused on two
families of closely related micelle-templated materials: ordered (periodic)
mesoporous materials and single-micelle-templated nanoparticles (nanospheres or
nanotubes). A predictive pathway to single-micelle-templated nanoparticles was
recently proposed which involves the lowering of the ratio of the framework
precursor to surfactant under conditions known to afford ordered mesoporous
materials. This new approach is the beginning of a unified conceptual framework
for understanding of the formation of these two kinds of nanomaterials governed
by the structure of micellar objects occurring at early stages of the synthesis
and their ability to cross-link. The current project is intended to bridge the
divide between the ordered mesoporous materials and single-micelle-templated
nanoparticles. The objective is being achieved through an in-depth study of the
formation and structural tailoring of large-pore ordered mesoporous materials,
as well as the related nanospheres and nanotubes, templated by Pluronic block
copolymer surfactants. The relatively large size of pores (14-40 nm) in these
materials provides enhanced opportunities for the structure visualization
(including the porosity on the shells of nanoparticles) by transmission electron
microscopy, and is readily probed by gas adsorption porosimetry and small-angle
X-ray scattering. Laser light scattering is being used to gain profound insight
into micellar structures present at different stages of the synthesis and this
knowledge is being correlated with the properties of the micelle-templated
porous materials. The conditions for the formation of either periodic porous
materials or individual nanoparticles are elucidated and the structural
development in the synthesis of the individual particles is followed. The
tailoring of the size of openings on the shells of the nanoparticles is being
investigated. Convenient, room-temperature syntheses of ordered mesoporous
materials and related single-micelle-templated particles are developed. The
extension of the synthesis of large-pore silicas on gyroidal porous networks is
pursued. The project is designed to involve a postdoctoral fellow, graduate
students and undergraduate students in the project's research.