* 1310749
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Energetic Regulation of Seasonal Sickness Behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Gregory Demas, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,259.00

Upon infection, animals display a collection of behaviors called "sickness
behaviors." Studies of sickness behaviors in seasonally breeding species have
shown that the magnitude of an animal's response to infection varies across
seasons. Seasonal modulation of sickness behaviors may be a mechanism to avoid
over-expending energy or missing a reproductive opportunity, but suppressing the
expression of these behaviors may put an organism at greater risk of not being
able to clear an infection. Therefore, the degree to which an organism expresses
sickness will have profound effects on its survival and reproductive success.
When comparing across studies, a clear pattern emerges in that sickness
behaviors are attenuated in the season in which an animal has the lowest energy
reserves; however, the causative nature of this relationship has not been tested
experimentally. The project's working hypothesis is that seasonal variation in
sickness behaviors is due to seasonal variation in energy stores. The specific
aims of the research are to: 1) determine the contributions of seasonal changes
in food availability on sickness behaviors, 2) determine how metabolic hormones
influence variation in sickness behaviors, and 3) evaluate the contributions of
experimental manipulations of food availability and metabolic hormones on
endocrine and immunological factors that directly mediate sickness behavior in
seasonally breeding Siberian hamsters. An understanding of the physiological
signals that act to modulate the display of sickness behaviors will enhance our
knowledge of how environmental conditions affect how an animal responds to an
infection. The results of this research will contribute to the current
initiatives to understand disease susceptibility as a function of pathogen
prevalence (i.e., disease ecology) and host immune function (i.e.,
ecoimmunology). Additionally, this work has provided opportunities to engage
diverse undergraduates in research training and will continue to do so as these
projects are completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be made available on
Research Data Complex (RDC), http://pervasive.iu.edu/hps/rdc