* 1310166
* Dissertation Research: Decoding the dynamics of cryptic microscale biogeochemical cycling in a phototropic consortium
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Marc Facciotti, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,020.00

Microbial metabolism has shaped the global ecosystem since early geological time
and, despite the emergence of macroscopic life, remains the engine that drives
global cycling of nutrients. In diverse environments, from the deep sea to the
human gut, these essential ecosystem processes are mediated not by a single
species, but by the interactions of metabolically-interdependent microbial
communities. Ecosystem health depends upon these intricate webs of interacting
microbes. However, such exchanges are often invisible via traditional
approaches, and the chemical transformations involved remain cryptic. This
proposal investigates microbial aggregates, the 'pink berries' of the
Sippewissett salt marsh, as a model system for understanding how microbial
interactions moderate nutrient cycles over spatial scales relevant to
microorganisms (nanometers to micrometers). This research will link fluctuations
in carbon cycling throughout the day with changes in the micrometer-scale sulfur
cycle. This work investigates how the transfer of carbon from sulfide-oxidizing
photosynthetic bacteria drives the metabolic activity of nearby sulfate reducing
bacteria. An interdisciplinary approach will be used to synthesize information
from high-throughput genomics and systems biology with data from high-resolution
geochemical analytical techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will pioneer new ways to elucidate the influence of microbial interactions on
material and energy flux within ecosystems that will be broadly applicable
across other ecosystems. This work is relevant not only to understanding
microbial interactions, but will provide needed benchmarks for modeling of the
sulfur cycle in both modern and early earth history. Support for this project
will strengthen research collaborations between four major research institutions
across the country, and foster educational opportunities from the graduate
through K-12 level. All data will be publicly accessible and research findings
will be communicated broadly, through public lectures and science blogs.