* 1310783
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Joseph Hollmann, Hollmann                Joseph         L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Joseph Hollmann of Northeastern University to conduct a
research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at National Taiwan
University in Taipei. The project title is "Analysis and Modeling of Ultrasound-
Modulated Light in Tissue to Reduce the Effects of Scattering." The host
scientist is Professor Snow Tseng.

Optical interrogation of tissue uses non-ionizing radiation and has high
biological specificity. However, its application in biomedical imaging is
limited because, in most tissues, scattering masks physiologically important
information such as optical absorption. Recent work has shown phase conjugation
of a scattered probe beam can be utilized to reduce scattering and allow for
focusing deep within tissue. We can dynamically determine this focal point by
modulating an optical wave with an ultrasound beam to create a reference point,
or "guidestar," and achieve ultrasound resolution imaging to depths of multiple
millimeters. This project analyzes the coherent properties of an optical signal
propagating in a scattering medium to determine its effects on the formation of
the ultrasound-modulated guidestar.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow will extend the benefits of this
experience to others in several ways. First, the results will be presented to
Prof. Tseng's research group at the conclusion of the program. Second, after
traveling back to the United States, the research as well as the experience in
Taiwan as a Fellow will be presented to the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at Northeastern University. During the fall, the Fellow
will travel to Brownsville, Texas, a community with a large minority population,
and offer a series of discussions to local high school students about
engineering, research and the experience in Taiwan. The Fellow will mentor
students in programs designed to enhance representation of under-served
populations, such as the Young Scholars and Research Experience for Undergrads
programs. Finally, the Fellow will continue to collaborate with Prof. Tseng's
group to ensure the results of the summer?s work are disseminated by publishing
papers and giving presentations at conferences.