* 1310266
* Soft Materials: Synthesis and Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* David Weitz, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2017
* USD 560,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on the three
main themes in soft matter physics: Properties of colloidal gels formed with
depletion attraction will be investigated. The information will help explain the
origin of delayed collapse, a major impediment to the use of such gels to
stabilize commercial products. In a biophysics effort, the control of cell
stiffness by cell volume will be explored. If preliminary results prove to be
true, this would be a transformational change in our understanding of cell
properties. Finally, new microfluidic devices will be developed to use spray
drying to produce nanoparticles that are much smaller in size than can be
produced by any other means. This will enable the study of the unique properties
of such small particles; in particular, the kinetic delay in crystallization due
to their very small size. The work will be highly leveraged through interactions
with industry, which provides intellectual challenges, employment for students
and post docs and leverages NSF support. In addition, important technological
advances will be used to establish start-up companies, which create new, high-
quality technical jobs. The major educational component of this research will be
training of graduate students and post docs. In addition, a highly successful
outreach program, based on a Science and Cooking course, will be put online,
reaching literally hundreds of thousands of participants, teaching them soft
matter science through cooking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on a general class of materials
that are "soft," or easily deformable. Examples include many foods and personal
care products, made of gels, surfactants or suspensions of small particles in a
fluid, and even the cells that make up all living organisms. The research will
explore important properties of these materials. For example, a major limitation
of many food and personal care products is the long-term instability of the
materials; the fundament origin of this will be explored and industrial
production of the materials will be enhanced. A new control parameter for cells
will be developed that will offer new insight into their behavior, particularly
when they malfunction, such as occurs in many diseases. New devices will be
created to produce particles that are much smaller than can be produced by any
other means, and that will enhance the bioavailability of many newly developed
drugs. The work will be highly leveraged through interactions with industry,
providing an important outlet for technical advances, while offering employment
opportunities to the students and post docs whose training is supported by this
research. In addition, this research will lead to the formation of start-up
companies which create new, high-quality jobs. For example, previous NSF funding
has led to formation of 4 start-up companies which have created more than 120
new jobs, enhancing our nation's economy. As outreach to bring science to the
general public, a science course, based on cooking, will be offered online by
the PI through Harvard, with several hundred thousand participants expected.