* 1310211
* Dielectric Effects in Dynamical Self-Assembly of Anisotropic Colloids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Erik Luijten, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 315,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry Division and Division of
Materials Research contribute funds to this award. It supports theoretical and
computation research and education on the self-assembly of colloidal particles,
objects with sizes in the range 1 to 1000 nanometers, in suspension. This is a
phenomenon of widespread interest, as it enables creation of materials with
novel structures. Computer simulations of these systems usually ignore the
presence of polarization charges at the surfaces of the colloids, induced by
ions and other charged particles in solution. This research program focuses on
including polarization effects in the theoretical description by developing
efficient algorithms to calculate dielectric and induced magnetic effects in
colloids. These methods will be used to understand and predict the dynamics and
self-assembly of suspended dielectric and magnetic colloids under the influence
of the external fields. The PI aims to significantly accelerate methods to
compute induced charges that arise at surfaces separating regions of different
dielectric constant. The developed techniques will be extended to account for
induced magnetic interactions, which are subject to a very similar mathematical
formalism. The resulting algorithm will be ported to LAMMPS, one of the most
widely used molecular dynamics simulation packages and part of the software
cyberinfrastructure of the materials research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new methodology will be applied to control
colloidal assembly, in which time-dependent external magnetic and electric
fields could be used to induce interactions resulting in structures far from
equilibrium. This research will be conducted in close collaboration with
experimental groups. Furthermore, new methods will be used to uncover how
electrostatically bound aggregates in biological systems are affected by
dielectric mismatch. In particular, the effect of polarization charges on the
stability of biological, electrostatically assembled aggregates will be examined
for a range of systems, notably DNA bundles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The self-
assembly phenomena studied in the context of this research will become a part of
the undergraduate classes. The research itself will involve high-school
students, undergraduates, and graduate students. Students working on research
projects will learn modern computational and theoretical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemistry
Division and Division of Materials Research contribute funds to this award. It
supports theoretical and computation research and education on the self-assembly
of colloidal particles, objects with sizes in the range 1 to 1000 nanometers, in
suspension, a nanometer is about 100,000 times smaller than the diameter of a
human hair. Self-assembly enables the creation of materials with novel
structures and properties. Whereas computer simulations of these systems are now
commonplace, they overwhelmingly ignore the presence of polarization charges at
the surfaces of the colloids; polarization changes arise in response to ions and
other charged particles in the solution. This research project will make
possible the efficient simulation of these mobile dielectric or polarizable
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New algorithms will be developed and applied to
design new approaches to colloidal assembly, in which applied magnetic and
electric fields that vary in time are used to control self-assembly. These
methods will be used to study how dielectric effects affect electrostatic
aggregation in biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed simulation
methods will have an impact beyond the scope of this project by enabling the
study of broad classes of systems ranging from soft condensed-matter systems to
biologically relevant solutions. Furthermore, the self-assembly phenomena
studied in the context of this research will become part of undergraduate
classes. The research will involve high-school students, undergraduates, and
graduate students.