* 1310603
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Patrick Thomas, Thomas                  Patrick        R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Patrick Ryan Thomas of the University of Missouri, Kansas City
(UMKC) to conduct a research project in physics during the summer of 2013 at the
Department of Chemistry, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin
University in Japan. The project title is "Using Relativity in Calculations of
the Optical and Electronic Properties of Materials." The host scientist is
Professor Kazuyoshi Ogasawara.

This research consists of two specific objectives to improve the representation
of the wave function within the orthogonalized linear combination of atomic
orbitals (OLCAO) method for technologically important materials, in this case
Cerium doped YAG laser crystals. The first goal is to include relativistic
effects in the wave function. Such relativistic orbitals are necessary but not
sufficient for accurately computing key material properties such as the total
energy and eliminating excessive errors which result in present calculations.
The second objective is to develop an accurate approach to calculate the
relativistic kinetic energy contribution by making use of a linear combination
of kinetic energy calculations for isolated atoms.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture, and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. In addition to working with his host researcher, the
Fellow is also visiting the research labs of two other Japanese scientists to
explore prospects for future collaborations. Results will be made available to
the larger physics community via technical conference presentations and
publications. The cultural experiences will be shared through the UMKC physics
department's web site and other media outlets. Additionally, the Fellow has
regular direct interactions with area high school students and undergraduate
science students as tutor and teaching assistant thus giving him the opportunity
to share with students, including many from underrepresented groups, the study
of physics in an international setting.