* 1310135
* RUI: Probing Quantum Dynamics in Molecular Magnets and Superconducting Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Friedman, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This project will explore the quantum dynamical
properties of "macroscopic" objects, namely, single-molecule magnets (SMMs) and
Josephson devices. Each of these systems can be thought of as an artificial atom
capable of telltale quantum phenomena such as tunneling and superposition
states. As such, they hold promise as qubits in the burgeoning field of quantum
computing. In this project, some novel quantum phenomena will be investigated in
these systems, potentially illuminating their suitability as qubits. Microwave
spectroscopy of SMMs will be used to explore "forbidden" transitions in which a
selection rule is lifted by spin tunneling. Such forbidden transitions are
expected to have non-linear power dependence due, in part, to dynamical phase
interference effects. Geometric (or Berry) phase interference will be
investigated in both SMMs and Josephson devices by looking for the suppression
of dynamical processes, such as tunneling, when the interference is destructive.
The research will be conducted primarily at an undergraduate institution with
active participation of undergraduate student-scholars, a graduate student, a
postdoc and a faculty member. The research activities will afford amply
opportunities for training and mentoring that will help the participants develop
the technical and leadership skills needed in their future scientific and
technical careers.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Quantum computers harness the counterintuitive
laws of quantum mechanics to solve some problems more efficiently than any
classical computer could. Qubits, the processing elements of quantum computers,
need to be large enough to be individually addressable yet small enough to be
able to maintain well defined quantum states for long periods of time. This
project will investigate the quantum properties of artificial quantum objects
(magnetic molecules and superconducting devices) that occupy this middle ground.
Microwave spectroscopy will be used to explore "forbidden" transitions in
magnetic molecules that will illuminate their quantum properties and may herald
their viability as qubits. Quantum interference (one of the most
counterintuitive of quantum effects in which an object seems to take two or more
mutually exclusive paths simultaneously) will be explored in both magnetic
molecules and superconducting devices to reveal the extent to which such a
telltale quantum effect can be observed in "macroscopic" objects. The research
will be conducted primarily at an undergraduate institution with active
participation of undergraduate student-scholars, a graduate student, a postdoc
and a faculty member. The research activities will afford amply opportunities
for training and mentoring that will help the participants develop the technical
and leadership skills needed in their future scientific and technical careers.