* 1310139
* Molecular balance for measuring molecular-level anion effects on amino acids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Ken Shimizu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 411,105.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Ken Shimizu of the University of South
Carolina will study the ability of anions to stabilize and destabilize protein
structures. The strategy is use a "molecular balance," a small molecule model
system that can measure and provide molecular-level insight into the
interactions of anions with individual amino acid side chains. These molecular
balances are in equilibrium between folded and unfolded conformers. In the
folded conformers, amino acid side-chains in the balances form intramolecular
hydrophobic and non-covalent interactions with a hydrophobic aromatic shelf. In
the unfolded conformers, these intramolecular interactions are broken. Thus, the
influence of anions on these non-covalent interactions can be quantitatively
measured by monitoring the folded/unfolded ratios using NMR spectroscopy. The
balances are assembled in a modular fashion, allowing the rapid synthesis of a
series of balances containing different amino acid side chains, water
solubilizing groups, and various hydrophobic surfaces. The proposed balances
also contain fluorine NMR labels that provide more accurate measurements and
enable their study within complex heterogeneous environments. The broader
scientific impact of this project will be the development of new strategies and
methods for stabilizing and solubilizing proteins. Additional activities pursued
during this project will be: 1) to develop a free website to help undergraduate
students to study organic chemistry, 2) to provide research opportunities for
groups underrepresented in chemistry, and 3) to perform chemistry demonstrations
at area K-6 classes and to participate in the SCienceLab program that brings
middle and high school classes to the university for a hands-on laboratory
experience.

Proteins are biological molecules that perform critical structural and active
functions in biological systems. These studies will provide molecular-level
insights into how proteins and segments of proteins interact with each other as
well as how the fold into complex structures. A net result of this research will
be to enable new strategies and methods for stabilizing and solubilizing
proteins. Such work will have applications in enhancing the shelf lives of
protein- and antibody-based pharmaceuticals and as well as assisting in the
development of biosensors and new pharmaceuticals.