* 1310400
* Collaborative Research: Enabling a new technology for reconfigurable RF front-ends and antenna array systems through phase-change materials.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Dimitris Anagnostou, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 184,000.00

Abstract (Proposal #1310400 and #1310257):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The objective of this research is to develop new radio-frequency front-
end systems, filters, transmission lines, and antenna array topologies with
multi-reconfigurable characteristics through the unique properties of phase-
change materials. The defined research tasks span from fundamental materials
science to system integration, creating an intersection that leads to a new path
in the design of reconfigurable radio-frequency front-ends and antenna arrays.
The components that will be developed are expected to have a wide range of
responses. These responses will be enabled by the following approaches: (1) the
changes in the electric properties of vanadium dioxide across its phase
transition, (2) the compatibility with other components of different
characteristic impedance due to the controlled impedance matching and bandwidth
through the variable resistivity and dielectric permittivity, and (3) multiple
frequencies with "analog" tuning as well as patterns and polarizations. Vanadium
dioxide is a multifunctional phase change material (i.e. a smart material) that
will be integrated in specific radio-frequency designs in the form of patterned
thin films. The drastic and abrupt continuous variability in the dielectric
permittivity and resistivity of patterned vanadium dioxide films across their
phase change will be used as the reconfiguring element, while their hysteretic
behavior will be used to program multiple states in the devices. The
reconfigurability and programmability of the proposed devices will be
characterized in terms of amplitude and phase response.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The integration of multifunctional phase
change materials in antenna and microwave component designs adds a new degree of
freedom for radio-frequency component engineers. The proposed research will
produce multi-reconfigurable antenna arrays and will benefit applications
including array miniaturization, feed networks, and composite transmission
lines. The educational and outreach plan spans from elementary school through
the doctorate level and involves scientific presentations at conferences,
journal publications, social media, course enrichment, an open-source software
development, and the promotion of a multidisciplinary learning experience
through the exchange of complementary knowledge between the two institutions.