* 1310980
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Louis DeFalco, DeFalco                 Louis
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Louis DeFalco Jr. of the University of Connecticut to conduct
a research project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at the
National University of Singapore located in Singapore. The project title is
"Exploring the Solution Behavior of the Ribosomal Translation Factor BipA." The
host scientist is Dr. Ganesh Anand.

Coordinated global regulation of protein synthesis is essential for bacterial
survival in adverse growth conditions such as amino acid starvation, temperature
shock or oxidative stress. BipA is a highly conserved prokaryotic translational
GTPase (hydrolase enzyme) whose interactions with the ribosome are dictated by
guanine nucleotide pools in the cell, specifically levels of hydrolyze guanosine
triphosphate (GTP) and guanosine pentaphosphate (ppGpp), an alarmone responsible
for adaptation to adverse growth conditions in microorganisms. In this manner,
BipA operates as a metabolic sensor, acting as the mediator between cellular
processes, alerting the bacteria to current environmental conditions. This
project determines how the solution behavior of BipA is altered in response to
guanine nucleotide binding via hydrogen/deuterium exchange experiments with mass
spectrometry detection (HDXMS). This technique is used to study the formation of
both binary (BipA:GTP and BipA:ppGpp) as well as the ternary 30S:BipA:ppGpp
complex. Data gathered from the HDXMS studies provides the foundation for
understanding how particular dynamic motions brought about by either GTP or
ppGpp binding contribute to the formation of the two BipA:ribosomal species.
This data serves to explicate how critical information concerning the cellular
environment is conveyed between BipA and the ribosome to elicit an appropriate
cellular response.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, Singapore?s status as a leader in the
burgeoning medical tourism industry reflects a wider shift in the direction of
global economic competition and represents a trend towards the expansion of our
global community. As patients increasingly seek reasonable value for high
quality medical treatment, frequent travel affords aggressive strains of
microorganisms, once isolated to hospital settings, the opportunity to spread
from region to region. Such proliferation of these microbes may cause a rise in
communicable disease rates leading to epidemics in the near future. A focused
understanding of the requirements for essential biological processes occurring
in infectious organisms can lead to the rational design of targeted antibiotics
capable of treating multiple types of infection in public and clinical settings
worldwide.