* 1310995
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* James McKee, McKee                   James
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds James McKee of the University of Central Florida to conduct a
research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the Chinese Academy
of Sciences Suzhou Institute of Nanotechnology (SINANO) in Suzhou, China. The
project title is "Processing of Continuously Drawn Yarn from Self-Aligned Carbon
Nanotube Paper." The host scientist is Dr. Qingwen Li.

Carbon nanopaper (CNT) possesses many potential applications in composites and
other uses, but a critical issue is the creation of production-scale aligned
nanopaper. The alignment is key to producing controllable properties of the
nanopaper that can be tailored to the intended application. This project
investigates the nanotube fabric and yarn production practices in place at the
sponsor institution, namely the drawing process used, and how it can be applied
to the solution-filtration methodology currently practiced to produce in-plane
aligned CNT papers and yarns. The degree of alignment and anisotropy between the
drawn carbon nanotube yarns produced at Suzhou Institute of Nanotechnology
(SINANO) is being compared with the randomly oriented solution-filtration
produced nanopaper produced at the Fellow's home institution. The conceptual
model gained from this study will ultimately be applied to the current process
in use to produce continuous, aligned carbon nanopaper. Carbon nanotube paper
and fabric have immediate applications in the aerospace industry for repairable
electromagnetic shielding and lightning strike protection schemes for composite
bodied aircraft that represent a vast improvement over the current metal-mesh
techniques and can implemented with the composite manufacturing techniques that
are already well-known in the aerospace industry. The weight savings these
materials would allow for increased fuel efficiency in the transportation
sector, improving vehicle performance in sector that affects everything from
food prices to leisure air travel. With the improvements to conductivity, flame
resistance, and static and dynamic mechanical properties created with standard,
randomly oriented nanopaper, the ability to create continuous and even aligned
nanopaper represents a new ability to use nanomaterials in large aerospace and
structural applications more efficiently. The obvious industrial benefits are
impressive, as is the long-term environmental effect as the efficiency increase
would reduce vehicle emissions and part longevity. Additionally, the benefits of
the integration of the nanopaper into wind turbines could potentially improve
blade longevity, radar signature (many wind turbine farms are semi-invisible to
radar), and lower lifetime operating costs.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.