* 1310049
* The Two-Body Problem: An Evaluation of University Partner Accommodation Policies with Implications for Recruitment, Retention, and Promotion of STEM Women
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Julie Kmec, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 449,999.00

Despite decades of various efforts meant to increase the number of women in
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) disciplines, women in these
fields remain under-represented on university faculties. Female faculty in STEM
disciplines are more likely than their male counterparts to be partnered with
another academic and more likely than men to refuse a job offer if their
partners cannot find adequate employment at the same location. In light of such
facts, and in an effort to increase the proportion of female faculty in STEM
fields, many universities have adopted partner-accommodation policies (PAPs).
Until now the prevalence and type of PAPs in U.S. universities and the efficacy
of PAPs to recruit productive faculty as well as recruit and retain women STEM
faculty has been unknown. This research provides a much needed description of
PAPs in U.S. universities, as well as both theoretical and empirical evaluations
of PAPs and their implications for the recruitment, retention, and promotion of
women in STEM disciplines. The current state of PAPs will be documented and the
relationship between PAPs and the gender diversity in STEM fields will be
estimated. A rigorous modeling approach enriched with insights from sociology
and economics will be developed and tested with faculty productivity, retention,
and promotion data via the collaboration of an information technology expert who
specializes in coordinated academic data collection and analysis. The
theoretical model predicts that in any institution other than the most
selective, a faculty member who is hired as part of a dual hire couple is likely
to be more productive than an individual hire. Preliminary findings at
Washington State University (WSU) support the hypothesis that, on average,
faculty hired via a PAP program are more productive in terms of publications and
grants, less likely to leave the university, and more likely to obtain tenure
and promotion than faculty hired outside of formal PAP programs. In addition to
WSU, data has been obtained from University of Wyoming. Agreements to acquire
data have been made with Virginia Tech and Southern Connecticut State
University, with additional requests at four other universities. Data will also
be collected via the internet and randomly selected follow-up phone interviews
to assess the existence and type of PAPs and sex composition of STEM fields at
270 institutions. A web-based survey of tenure-line faculty will be administered
as part of this proposed project. The survey will focus on faculty?s non-
academic life (e.g., parental status, age of children in the home, marital
status and timing), race/ethnic background, job search strategies, career and
job satisfaction, anticipated mobility, long-term commitment to the university
and their experiences, if any, being part of an academic dual-career couple and
use of university PAPs. Increasing the representation of women in STEM faculties
is a general societal objective. Understanding the impact of PAPs is one
potential approach to finding effective ways to increase the number and the
success of women on university faculties in technical disciplines.

