* 1310562
* Optimal Joint Spectrum Allocation and Scheduling for Cognitive Radio Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Yanxiao Zhao, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 06/30/2017
* USD 153,464.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
significantly improve spectrum utilization through conducting optimal or near-
optimal joint spectrum allocation and scheduling in cognitive radio networks.
The PIs address critical and practical challenges for spectrum allocation and
scheduling in cognitive radio networks, in particular multi-hop cognitive radio
networks, such as dynamic traffic demands and pattern, unpredictable primary
user activity, wireless interference, and coexistence. A test-bed will be set up
to extensively evaluate the designed algorithms and
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of this project are: 1) this project develops creative
models and algorithms in the framework of restless multi-armed bandit to address
the critical challenges for spectrum allocation and scheduling in cognitive
radio networks; 2) the proposed methodology is novel in that it intelligently
combines the networked multi-armed bandit modeling, graph theory, and
communication scheduling theories; 3) this project significantly advances the
fundamental knowledge and understanding of cognitive radio networks; and 4) the
developed algorithms, models, and protocols significantly improves spectrum
utilization in future wireless communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
significantly improves the design, deployment, and operation of future wireless
communication systems. The proposed algorithms, protocols, and models enable
future wireless systems to share spectrum much more efficiently than today's
systems, which will result in significant economical, societal, and public
safety impacts. In addition, the proposed research is integrated into education
and training for both undergraduate and graduate students. This project also
significantly broadens the participation of underrepresented minority groups,
e.g., the Native Americans in South Dakota.