* 1310790
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Katie May Laumann, Laumann, Katie May
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Katie May Laumann of the Virginia Institute of Marine Science,
College of William and Mary to conduct a research project in Biology during the
summer of 2013 at the Natural History Museum & Institute in Chiba, Japan. The
project title is "Using Genetics to Build a Sturgeon Family Tree: More Data is
Better." The host scientist is Dr. Masaki Miya.

Understanding relationships among different species is important on many levels,
but reliably elucidating these relationships requires significant amounts of
data. Sturgeons are economically and culturally important, in addition to
representing an ancient lineage of fishes. However, recent studies of
relationships among the approximately 25 species of sturgeons have been limited
in the amount of data available. This has led to conflicting family trees, with
little resolution or agreement among researchers on the details of relationships
among species. This study aims to resolve differences among the various proposed
sturgeon family trees, and does so by using more genetic data than has
previously been available. This project uses laboratory techniques to obtain
genetic sequences of the full mitochondrial DNA (unit of DNA inherited only from
the mother) for individuals of each sturgeon species. Similarities among
sequences of different species are used to identify which species are most
closely related to one another, resulting in a sturgeon family tree built from
the largest data set available to date. This study provides new information
about relationships among sturgeon species. Building a reliable sturgeon family
tree is especially important because every sturgeon species is endangered,
threatened, or requires protection. Although we know that habitat damage and
overfishing of sturgeons have contributed to major population declines in these
fishes, information about relationships among sturgeons can help identify more
specific factors contributing to declines.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, managers will be able to use this information
to mitigate contributing factors and to aid in the recovery of those populations
that are most threatened. This will aid in the conservation of species that are
not only ecologically important, but economically and culturally important.
Sturgeons produce the finest caviar, and support the caviar industry and all of
the people whose livelihoods depend upon it. Additionally, sturgeons have been
traditionally important to Native American and First Nations people, and are
therefore of great cultural significance. This study will ultimately ensure that
these fishes and the industries and cultures that value them are preserved.