* 1310715
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jonathan Monk, Monk                    Jonathan       M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Jonathan M. Monk of the University of California, San Diego to
conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the Nara
Institute of Science and Technology in Nara, Japan. The project title is
"Improving Characterization of E. Coli Genes Using Genome-Scale Computational
Models and High-Throughput Experimental Screens." The host scientist is Dr.
Hirotada Mori.

Nobel Prize recipient Dr. Jacques Monod said, "What is true for E. coli is true
for the elephant," indicating that knowledge gained from an organism as
seemingly simple as E. coli is broadly applicable to all living organisms. This
project combines computational modeling with high-throughput experiments to
improve understanding of how gene products interact to achieve cellular
objectives and confer robustness in Escherichia coli. Traditionally, determining
genetic interactions is a very challenging and time consuming process, but new
technologies are changing this. Large scale double mutant libraries can now be
constructed to screen for genetic interactions. Analyzing these datasets can be
done efficiently by using biochemical network reconstructions that contain up-
to-date information on molecular components and their interactions in an
organism. This NSF award funds research that combines the Fellow's expertise in
systems biology modeling with the expertise of the host institution in
experimental double mutant screens to identify and better characterize the
effect of genetic interactions on E. coli metabolism. The project is furthering
the understanding of gene function and pathway architecture in this important
model organism and could ultimately lead to the development of novel
combinatorial antibiotic therapies. The discovery of new metabolic activities
and genes will be useful for metabolic engineering, fundamental biological
understanding and drug design where newly identified enzymes could prove to be
novel targets for new antibiotic therapies to fight against pathogenic bacteria.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. This NSF award represents an important collaboration
between the Systems Biology Research Group at UCSD and the Nara Institute of
Science and Technology. Both of these groups share the goal of studying the
systems biology of E. coli and have complementary research expertise and
equipment. The result is a productive collaboration that will last for years.
The results of this award will also be used in education. The methodologies and
results of this project will be incorporated into UCSD courses to teach the
experimental aspects of systems biology and will be used for educational
purposes in class projects. Additionally, important discoveries resulting from
this project will be published in high profile scientific journals and new gene
and protein annotations will be submitted to public databases to ensure
worldwide dissemination of this information.