* 1310293
* Functional Carbon Nano-skins: Integrating Nanostructured Oxides with Molecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Robert Hamers of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison and his students will integrate polymer chemistry with surface
chemistry to make ultra-stable interfaces between metal oxide nanoparticles and
molecular systems such as molecular photocatalysts and light-harvesting
molecules. They will explore the synthesis and properties of functional "nano-
skins" created on surfaces, using metal oxides such as TiO2 as model systems. In
order to form robust layers, molecules bearing multiple reactive groups will be
grafted to TiO2 surfaces; these will then be cross-linked to form two-
dimensional surface nets in which each surface oligomer has many linkages to the
surface. Electrochemically active species will then be linked to the net to form
functional layers with novel electrochemical and photoelectrochemical
properties. Fundamental properties such as electron transfer rates will be
measured using surface-attached ferrocene groups. A variety of experimental
measurements will be performed to characterize the chemical and physical
properties of the layers in order to establish whether extensive lateral cross-
linking within nanometer-thick molecular layers can lead to highly stable
interfaces with novel electrochemical and photoelectrochemical properties.

This project will provide graduate students, undergraduate students, and junior
scientists with state-of-the-art training in the techniques of surface chemistry
and other career skills necessary to become scientific leaders. Students will
learn techniques of chemical synthesis, characterization of surfaces, and a
variety of electrochemical and photoelectrochemical measurement techniques. They
will also receive training in oral and written communication, ethics, and
leadership. The research will provide important fundamental insights into
charge-transfer processes within and through molecular layers at surfaces and
will help to establish design rules for how to fabricate highly stable
interfaces between inorganic materials and organic-based molecular structures.
Inorganic-organic hybrid structures are of great interest in a range of existing
and emerging commercial technologies, and the ability to make water-stable
interfaces between molecules and metal oxides such as TiO2 would have both
commercial and societal impact in areas such as renewable energy. The project
will also impact society by providing opportunities for educational and outreach
activities with a diversity of outside groups.