* 1310850
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Catching Sequential Speciation in the Act
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Jeffrey Feder, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,760.00

Understanding the process by which new species evolve (speciation) is a
fundamental question in biological sciences. A popular, but largely untested
idea is that the formation of one species can catalyze the formation of other
species within a community of interacting organisms (sequential speciation).
Previous work has shown that a shift of the apple maggot fly from its native
hawthorn host plant to the introduced domesticated apple about 150 years ago in
the eastern US has induced a sequential host shift in the insect parasite
community that attacks the flies. Specifically, as the fly shifts to attacking
the fruits of a new host plant, the insect parasites that attack that fly shift
in kind. What remains unknown is how general and rapid sequential speciation
events are in nature. A powerful approach is to test the sequential speciation
hypothesis in a more proximate case in the western US where the fly was recently
introduced just 50 years ago. The proposed research will examine changes in the
flies and their parasites in this new habitat to better evaluate the rate of
speciation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the origins of biodiversity is
one of the central issues in biological sciences. In this regard, sequential
speciation may be particular relevant for understanding biodiversity in general
and in particular the astonishing levels of insect biodiversity (estimated 10-30
million species worldwide, the most diverse group of animals on the planet).
Additionally, the apple maggot fly and several closely related species are major
economic pests of several agricultural crops. Characterization of the origins of
the parasitoid community can inform bio-control schemes to help farmers control
the fly before it becomes a serious pest in the western United States.