* 1310425
* Memristors for Low-Power, Passive RF Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Jay Switzer, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,017.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Adaptive impedance matching enables
development of low cost hybrid antennas with dynamic beamforming capabilities
that will improve the performance of wireless communication. However, there are
several challenges with existing approaches including: (i) fixed impedance in
hybrid antennas restricts flexibility and prevents dynamic beamforming, (ii)
employment of semiconductors for impedance switching has several drawbacks.
These include: (a) requirement of ?holding? a transistor in a specific state by
maintaining a minimum activation voltage leading to an increase in its energy
consumption, and (b) nonlinearity of transistors and semiconductors introduce a
bias, which changes the effective impedance between strong and weak signals
received by an antenna. In contrast, the goal of this project is to study and
design a novel approach to RF front-end design with memristors replacing
traditional CMOS-based impedance switching. In particular, the memristor-based
RF front ends will be employed in a passive RFID technology and hybrid antenna
design. The expected contributions include understanding the performance of
memristors in radio frequency (RF) applications, and more flexible design of
impedance matching networks for antennas. The end result of this effort could
lead to a transformative paradigm in designing antennas and RF front-end
devices.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The main proposal outcomes are a new
knowledge and understanding of how different type of memristors could be applied
to RF systems such as adaptive antenna arrays for weak signals, and a simplified
design of impedance matching networks and their tuning. This will enable new
designs of cheaper and simpler beamforming hybrid antennas in passive radio
frequency identification (RFID) systems. The benefits will apply to other
communication systems such as cognitive networks and radar systems. A set of
outreach activities include engagement of women and students from under-
represented minorities through the Missouri S&amp;T Student Diversity Programs
office and K-12 outreach that engages high school students through the Missouri
S&amp;T Summer Research Academy (SRA) program. In the long term, the outcomes
will support a number of memristor based technology applications in
communication systems including wearable antenna systems and sensors, and
enhancing performance and coverage of wireless Internet access systems for
rural, currently-not-serviced areas.