* 1310722
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Donald Warren, Warren                  Donald         C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Donald Warren of North Carolina State University to conduct a
research project in the Math and Physical Sciences during the summer of 2013 at
RIKEN in Tokyo. The project title is "Simulating the Early X-Ray Afterglow in
Gamma-Ray Bursts." The host scientist is Shigehiro Nagataki.

The early X-ray afterglows of gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are important for
understanding these events and their impact on cosmology. This project models
the acceleration of cosmic rays, and emission from that population, using a
Monte Carlo code that simulates particle interactions with a modified, ultra-
relativistic, collisionless shock. This study focuses on the relation between
observed parameters of X-ray afterglows (e.g. the total energy output, and the
power law indices of energy flux in both wavelength and time), the
characteristics of the shocks that generate the afterglows (e.g. flow speed,
acceleration efficiency, or magnetic field strength), and the nature of the GRB
progenitors (e.g. stellar type and size, or properties of the central engine
powering the GRB). In addition, this project is obtaining spectral information
about the population of cosmic rays, which can be compared against observations
at Earth to see if GRBs and their afterglows are viable candidates for the
source of the highest energy cosmic rays.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.