* 1310762
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Nicholas Alunni, Alunni                  Nicholas
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Nicholas Alunni of Worcester Polytechnic Institute to conduct
a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) in Daejeon, South Korea. The project
title is "Creating an Interactive User Interface for a Humanoid Robot used in
Disaster Response." The host scientist is Jun Ho Oh.

This project works to create a highly dynamic user interface that can be used on
any robot, for any task, with minimal training required. Creating a fully
immersive user interface is an important aspect of this. The majority of current
user interfaces focus on portraying information through sight alone, negating
80% of the human senses. To successfully supervise any robot, maps need to be
created to intuitively display information from the robot to more senses in its
human counterpart, such as touch and audio. This project helps make robot
supervision, not teleoperation, the new paradigm for human-robot interaction.
This project uses the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) Robotics Challenge (DRC) as a prototype application for the user
interface. Their challenge is to create a humanoid robot capable of interacting
with our world, not an idealistic one, in order to respond to a simulated
nuclear power plant disaster. This challenge poses an incredibly hard problem to
solve given the high complexity of a humanoid robot and current technological
capabilities. This fellowship provides unlimited access to the HUBO humanoid
robot in Korea that will be used for the challenge.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this work will be released as open source
software once it is completed, which will benefit the entire robotics community.
The EAPSI experience and work will also be presented at the home institute,
which will foster future international collaboration.