* 1310545
* Single nanocrystal phase transition dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Aaron Lindenberg, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This award explores the dynamics of
nanomaterials, employing atomic-scale spatial resolution, femtosecond temporal
resolution techniques to explore the mechanisms underlying how nanoscale
materials transform in the single nanocrystal limit. Snapshots of nanoscale
phase transitions will be captured in order to understand the rules that govern
nanomaterial transformations, the energy barriers that separate metastable
phases of matter, and the atomic-scale pathways that connect them. In order to
achieve this, this project brings together techniques never before combined,
involving optical tweezers, short pulse x-ray scattering and spectroscopy, and
nonlinear-optical techniques. This award is coupled to an educational outreach
program involving a local high school student who will take part in this
research, with the goal of encouraging the student to continue on in science and
technology fields in college. This award will also support the education of a
PhD student in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how nanosized systems
transform, using the equivalent of stop-action photography to visualize the
atomic-scale pathways that nanoscale materials follow in real time. Novel
experimental techniques are combined together to capture the first steps in
processes fundamental to the efficiency and speed of technologically relevant
devices. The output of this program will be a basic understanding of single
nanocrystal phase changes and the development of new techniques for engineering
and controlling the properties of materials at the nanoscale. An integrated
outreach program is also part of this award, involving a student from an
economically-disadvantaged local high school who will take part in this
research, with the goal of encouraging the student to continue in science and
technology fields in the future. This award will also support the education of a
PhD student in this area with broad connections to advanced technologies and
novel synthesis techniques.