* 1310149
* Multiferroicity in Perovskite-Type Rare-Earth Manganites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Menka Jain, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 272,987.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project explores the fundamental understanding
of the structure and distortions of single-phase materials and finding new
avenues to control their physical properties that may impact the advancement of
multifunctional devices. The materials of interest are the magnetoelectric
multiferroic rare-earth manganites in which ferroelectricity is induced when at
some magnetic transition of the material. At the conclusion of this project,
insights will be gained into the scientific parameters affecting the structural
distortions, bond angles, magnetic, ferroelectric, and magnetoelectric
properties. Furthermore, this understanding may be used in rational design of
magnetoelectric multiferroics with enhanced polarization and critical
temperatures. During the course of this project (i) diverse undergraduate and
graduate students are being trained and mentored; (ii) results are being
incorporated to refine physics and functional materials courses; and (ii) the
results are being disseminated to a much broader audience through an energy club
(working in cooperation with local libraries), hosting summer research
opportunity for local high school teachers (at the University of Connecticut),
and close interactions with students at Alabama A&amp;M University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The PI and her team are synthesizing
single-phase pure and A/B-site doped orthorhobmically distorted perovskite rare-
earth manganites that show magnetoelectric multiferroic properties. Basic
scientific research is focused on controlling the average ionic radius, ionic
size mismatch, and magnetic properties of the doped ions at the A- and B-sites
of the rare-earth manganites and on studying their effect on the structure,
distortion, magnetic properties, ferroelectric transition, and magnetoelectric
coupling. Various state-of-the-art characterization techniques and calculations
at university and national laboratories are being utilized to train
undergraduate and graduate students in order to investigate the comprehensive
understanding of structure-distortion-property correlations in these material
systems. The investigation anticipates the rational design of magnetoelectric
multiferroics with enhanced electric polarization and/or critical temperatures,
which potentially impacts the advancement of magnetoelectric based devices in
consumer electronics, health care, and military systems.