* 1310693
* Protein Structure, Dynamics, and Folding via Ultrafast Multidimensional Infrared Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Nien-Hui Ge, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

In this award the Chemistry of Life Processes Program supports Professor Nien-
Hui Ge of the University of California at Irvine to use femtosecond
multidimensional infrared (MultiD IR) spectroscopy to study the conformational
dynamics, distributions, and folding of peptides. The goal is to provide
detailed knowledge of protein structure and dynamics that is essential to the
understanding of biological processes. The proposed work includes investigating
the interplay between helical and extended structures, determining
conformational distributions of nonfolding peptides, and elucidating protein-
membrane interactions. MultiD IR experiments access the backbone and side chain
vibrational modes of peptides, and provide data that reveal the angles,
distances, and correlations between structural units. Isotope editing and
incorporating IR probes at selected locations enhance the spatial resolution,
facilitate the assignment of resonances, and extend the method to larger
peptides and tertiary contacts. The effects of temperature, pH, solvent, and
chain length are investigated to understand the factors that control protein
stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins, long chains of peptides, fold rapidly
into complex shapes that affect their function and how they bind with other
molecules. Detailed knowledge of peptides and larger proteins - structure,
dynamics, and folding can shed light on protein misfolding that characterizes
many diseases. Understanding how proteins interact with membranes also informs
the design of novel functional molecules, potentially useful for medicine.
MultiD IR spectroscopy is a laser technique that can determine the shape and
behavior of a peptide by studying the infrared light emitted after it was
"photographed" using laser pulses at a "shutter speed" faster than one
trillionth of a second. Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
participating in the research gain valuable experience with advanced laser
techniques and core physical sciences that can strengthen their future career
development. This project is also integrated with outreach efforts on
maintaining an online spectrum database and contributing lectures and laboratory
courses for K-12 students.