* 1310806
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Darren Seibert, Seibert                 Darren         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Darren Seibert of Massachusetts Institute of Technology to
conduct a research project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at
RIKEN in Wako, Japan. The project title is "Encoding Human Brain Activity Using
a Multi-Staged Model of Visual Object Perception." The host scientist is Justin
Gardner.

It is easy to take for granted our ability to visually perceive the world.
Making sense of the vast amount of information transmitted nearly continuously
from our retinae is not a trivial problem: it requires approximately one third
of the human cortex to process. Our ability to effortlessly recognize a vast
array of objects in tenths of a second, despite being cast on the retina with
different illuminations, positions, and rotations, represents the end stage of
the so-called ventral pathway. This project contributes to the reverse
engineering of object recognition by expanding current prediction and fitting
procedures. Specifically, it expands these procedures in order to better exploit
the rich, spatially distributed response patterns in human functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI).

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the fellow plans to make his analysis source
code publicly available to aid other researchers and to facilitate learning.