* 1310398
* Colloidal III-V Nanomaterials: New Opportunities in Chemistry and Device Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Dmitri Talapin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 11/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;III-V semiconductors, such as GaAs, InP,
InAs and InSb, are used in laser diodes, photodetectors, fast electronic
circuits and the most efficient solar cells. However, very limited attention has
been paid to development of solution-processed forms of III-V semiconductors for
low-cost manufacturing of this important class of materials and making it
accessible to broad markets of energy-related technologies. &lt;br/&gt;The
research supported by the NSF Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
focuses on new synthetic and surface chemistry for III-V nanomaterials. It will
explore novel approaches to colloidal synthesis of III-V semiconductor
nanocrystals. Special attention will be paid to development of new inorganic
surface ligands for III-V nanostructures based on molecular metal chalcogenide
complexes and pnictide Zintl ions. The combination of strong quantum confinement
and new inorganic surface chemistry can lead to new physics due to the multi-
valley band structure of III-V semiconductors and due to emergence of the
collective electronic states (minibands) in strongly coupled nanocrystal
assemblies; it may also lead to new applications for this important class of
semiconductors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fastest commercial transistors and the most
efficient solar cells use III-V semiconductors such as GaAs. At the same time
technological difficulties associated with preparation and handling III-V
semiconductors do not allow them to compete with silicon and other less
expensive materials for large consumer markets. This project supported by the
NSF Solid State and Materials Chemistry program focuses on development of new
soluble forms of III-V semiconductors for low-cost manufacturing of new
materials for applications in green energy technologies. The proposed research
will create a new class of inexpensive semiconductors suitable for applications
in electronics, light-emitting devices and solar cells. Research program will
also involve participation of underrepresented minority groups and public
outreach to the south side Chicago community. These activities will help recruit
minorities and disadvantaged students and promote their pursuit of careers in
science and engineering.