* 1310036
* Dissertation Research:  Genetic and Environmental Mechanisms Mediating Disease Resistance and Tolerance in Amphibians
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Kelly Zamudio, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,833.00

Identifying the causes of recurrent outbreaks of infectious diseases in the wild
is critical to understanding human and ecosystem health. Environmental change
may reduce the ability of hosts to evolve resistance or persist within their
tolerance limits, thus making pathogens more likely to cause disease and
mortality. This project investigates seasonally variable patterns of infection
in tropical amphibians and tests the hypotheses that disease patterns are a
consequence of changes in the frequency of individuals that have genetically-
based resistance to the pathogen, or alternatively, a result of a weakened host
condition caused by environmental stress. Frogs lacking genetic determinants may
also rely on environmental modulators (e.g., symbiotic bacteria) to alleviate
pathogen damage. How and when these immune strategies interact to allow
amphibians to persist emergent diseases is unknown. Using declining frog
populations in Puerto Rico that exhibit high heterogeneity and seasonality in
infection dynamics, the PIs combine population genomics and metagenomics to
determine how environmental and host adaptive responses affect the outcome of
disease. &lt;br/&gt;The topic of amphibian declines, and its implications for
environmental health, has reached public awareness; thus this project offers an
excellent opportunity to educate non-scientists about genetics, immunity, and
disease ecology. Both PIs disseminate their scientific findings to general
audiences through media, educational outreach, and NGOs. In addition, the
project involves students and researchers from underrepresented minorities,
fosters collaborations between USA and Puerto Rican institutions, and increases
diversity among students interested in ecology, evolution, and conservation.
These results can be used by conservation agencies in species prioritization
schemes and captive breeding
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;