* 1310791
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Peter Johnson, Johnson                 Peter          C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Peter Charles Albert Johnson of Virginia Commonwealth
University to conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of
2013 at Geothermal, Reservoir Engineering and Environmental Fluids group in the
Department of Engineering Science at The University of in Auckland, New Zealand.
The project title is "Inverse Computer Modeling of Geothermal Reservoirs." The
host scientist is Professor Mike O'Sullivan.

Models of geothermal reservoirs that are used by a geothermal power plant are
essential for understanding a reservoir's properties. Determining these
properties through inverse methods is vital for managing power plants, and by
using a calibrated numerical model of heat and mass flow within a given
geothermal reservoir, reservoir properties can be determined. This research
investigates uses of software such as PEST (Parameter ESTimation) and iTOUGH2
(Inverse Transport Of Unsaturated Groundwater and Heat 2) to dramatically
improve the accuracy of the reservoir models. This has the potential to
facilitate the implementation of geothermal power generation in geologically
suitable locations across the United States, which can provide continuous base-
load electrical power in a sustainable, economical, and carbon reducing manner,
especially when compared to electricity generated from fossil-fuel sources. This
renewable domestic energy resource will not only lower greenhouse emissions and
aide the United States quest for energy independence, but will also reduce the
negative impacts of mining for other natural resources such as coal and uranium.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. The results of this work will be disseminated to the
scientific community through presentations at conferences and publication in
peer-reviewed journals. The Fellow will work with his U.S. advisor to present
the important aspects of geothermal power to visiting middle school and high
school students through summer enrichment programs hosted at VCU and to their
teachers through programs like GreenSTEM@VCU.