* 1310654
* Optrode array for optical neural stimulation and recording
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Gregory Clark, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 180,000.00

Optical methods are becoming established in the fields of neuroscience, medical
imaging and diagnostics, etc. Optogenetics, for example, despite being a nascent
field of study, has been named the Method of the Year 2010 by Nature Methods. We
propose to develop and test a novel device structure to facilitate three-
dimensional deep-tissue light penetration and collection with capabilities for
simultaneous spatiotemporal modulation of different wavelenghts to advance a
broad range of applications in optical neural stimulation and recording. A 3D
optrode array consisting of optically transparent needles can penetrate &gt;1 mm
directly into tissue, thereby creating multiple independent paths for light
propagation that avoid attenuation due to tissue absorption and scattering. We
will develop SiO2 arrays suitable for visible and even NIR applications.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this research lie in the addressing the
barrier for nearly all modes of optical excitation where penetration depth is
determined by optrode length, not by wavelength. We propose to leverage off of
the extensive body of microfabrication methods developed for penetrating
electrodes to achieve the same advantages for optical delivery and reception as
compared to external approaches. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Multiple, broadly
enabling, and potentially transformative, impacts may emerge from this work.
Although our focus is on optogenetic neural stimulation and recording, optrode
array devices have application in basic neuroscience research, highly selective
photodynamic therapy, and deep tissue imaging for diagnostics and therapy. From
an applied neuroscience and neuroengineering perspective, the optrode array
device will facilitate deeper access into neural tissue, such as axon bundles
within the fasicles of central or peripheral nerves. Deeper access across
multiple stimulation/recording sites may enable restoration of lost motor or
sensory function after nervous system disorders or disease. Potential
representative applications, among many, include restoration of hand grasp or
stance after paralysis, and restoration of cutaneous and proprioceptive sensory
feedback after limb loss. From an educational perspective, the inherently
interdisciplinary and interactive nature of the proposed research will provide
unique opportunities for training in biophotonics, microfabrication,
neuroengineering, and basic neuroscience, and will interact synergistically with
ongoing major research and educational initiatives at the University of Utah.
From diversity and outreach perspectives, the established success of the
Bioengineering Department (of which the PI is an adjunct-faculty member, and the
co-PI a tenure-track member) in attracting and mentoring female engineers, along
with recently enhanced College- and University-wide outreach and recruitment
efforts, will help bring underrepresented populations into the emerging neuro-
engineering growth area.