* 1310743
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Transmission biology and gametocyte gender ratio of a malaria parasite
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Joseph Schall, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,825.00

Malaria parasites produce male and female cells within the blood of their
vertebrate host (e.g. humans, birds, or lizards) that infect the blood-feeding
insects that transmit them. The proportion of male vs. female cells influences
the number of new parasites produced following mating, and Sex Ratio Theory
predicts the best ratio that will maximize parasite transmission success. The
graduate student developed new predictions for the optimal sex ratio based on
the parasite?s transmission, which is that proportionally fewer parasites
surviving within-insect development should favor sex ratios nearer 1:1. Insects
will be infected with multiple strains of a lizard malaria parasite. Parasite
numbers and the abundance of different strains will be monitored throughout
development using newly-developed techniques in molecular
genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is important for understanding not
only the sex ratio of malaria parasites, but also malaria transmission in
general. This lizard parasite is of particular interest because it has the
fastest known within-insect development. Monitoring proportions of strains may
help understand patterns of genetic diversity, which relate to drug resistance
and virulence. This project will provide opportunities for undergraduates and
younger students to gain research experience, including directly funding one
undergraduate field assistant. Data, animations, and research descriptions will
be available online (www.uvm.edu/~aneal/homepage.html).