* 1310720
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Lauren Zarzar, Zarzar                  Lauren         D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Lauren Dell Zarzar of Harvard University to conduct a research
project in the Math and Physical Sciences area during the summer of 2013 at the
University of Tokyo in Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. The project title is Self-
Assembly of Mechanically-Responsive Liquid Crystals within Deformable
Substrates." The host scientist is Professor Takashi
Kato.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For many materials where there exists a strong
structure-function relationship, the process of directed self-assembly shows
great promise as a general approach by which to influence materials properties
via the control of nanoscale order. Self-assembly of liquid crystals, as well as
other materials, is a sensitive dynamic process and the resulting assembled
structure is affected by tunable external and internal parameters, one of which
is the new surface interactions resulting from geometric confinement.
Specifically, this project focuses on the assembly of luminescent liquid
crystals within flexible nano/microscale 3D-patterned surfaces. The color of
luminescence of this particular class of liquid crystals is sensitive to the
self-assembled structure of the molecules. This project therefore focuses on 1)
how certain surface and geometric parameters affect initial assembly order/color
of the liquid crystals within confinement and 2) how subsequent changes in these
geometric parameters (such as by substrate deformation) may trigger
reorganization of the liquid crystal molecules into a new self-assembled
structure with different properties. The ability to use rationally designed
confining surfaces to externally trigger a material's self-
reorganization/assembly could lead to the development of a novel, transformative
class of "smart" materials capable of adapting to external pressures via self-
assembling mechanisms. The development of numerous "smart" materials could
impact every-day life, including wearable technologies, self-camouflaging
surfaces, and tamper-reporting labels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of
an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand research
experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science policy, and
scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an orientation to the
society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF goal to educate for
international collaborations early in the career of its scientists, engineers,
and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific workforce.
Furthermore, the results of this research will be disseminated through
presentation, publication, and public outreach programs, including the
development of a hands-on demonstration that will introduce young students to
the concepts of liquid crystals and self-assembly.