* 1310803
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Rimas Gulbinas, Gulbinas                Rimas          V
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Rimas Gulbinas of Virginia Tech to conduct a research project
in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Lincoln University in Christchurch,
New Zealand. The project title is "Understanding Human Network Effects on Energy
Consumption at the Workplace." The host scientist is Dr. Shannon Page.

The EAPSI fellowship is enabling Rimas to exchange research methodologies and
data analysis techniques with leading building energy efficiency researchers in
New Zealand. This project invents novel analysis techniques that integrate
methods from systems analysis and modeling, organizational theory, and
statistics to understand how organizational and social networks within
commercial buildings impact energy (and more broadly, resource) consumption. It
introduces an energy feedback software system, designed by the Fellow, to New
Zealand researchers and allows the Fellow and host scientists to discuss ideas
for future system improvements and applications.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the the Fellow will hold workshops at
multiple New Zealand universities and present in greater detail the research
described in current and planned publications. For the research to have a
significant impact on carbon emission reductions, a global network of
international experts in energy efficiency is required. The EAPSI collaboration
will expand the Fellow's collaborative network in the area of energy efficiency
and help move research in this field beyond national borders.