* 1310812
* Dissertation Research:  Linking Phylogeny and Functional Morphology to Assess the Evolution of Gill Ventilation Systems in Teleost Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Stacy Farina, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,024.00

To explore the evolution of complex functional anatomical systems, the
researchers will study the respiratory apparatus in a diverse group of bottom-
dwelling fishes (sculpins and allies). They will develop a new phylogenetic tree
of relationships among 27 representative cottoid species based on DNA sequence
data from four nuclear genes. The researchers will use dissection and computed
tomographic (CT) scans to study anatomy of the respiratory apparatus and
reconstruct its patterns of evolution. Functional consequences of these
evolutionary anatomical changes will be studied using (1) an easily modified
robotic model to simulate different types of fish breathing; and (2) pressure
recordings from five representative species to assess the predictive power of
the robotic model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the
graduate education of doctoral candidate Stacy Farina. The robot will be used in
a workshop for the Expanding Your Horizons conference at Cornell University,
which provides STEM experiences for 7-9th grade girls. While the focus of this
study is on sculpins and allies, variation in cottoid anatomy is such that
findings will be broadly applicable to many other groups of fishes. This project
will also contribute to the development of techniques for using robotic models
to study evolution of complex biomechanical systems.