* 1310644
* Collaborative Research:  An EarthCube Domain Workshop integrating the inland-waters biogeochemistry and fluvial sedimentology communities, April 22-24.
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Albert Kettner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Hailiang Dong
* 03/31/2015
* USD 88,622.00

Continental surface waters represent distinct environments that are hot spots of
biogeochemical storage and transformation, as well as conduits for large-scale
material transport to the oceans and atmosphere. These systems are integral
components of global geochemical cycles, are intertwined with human health and
economic activity, and are highly sensitive to anthropogenic impacts. Without
data from a wide variety of disciplines, such as organic and physical chemistry,
ecosystem science, sedimentology, landscape evolution, water-rock interaction,
and element and material cycles (weathering products, trace elements, carbon
burial, nutrient fluxes, mineral particles, etc.), it is not possible to
realistically model these important surface water systems and understand the
complex interactions between their various physical and biological components.
Data necessary to populate such models comes from field-based, experimental,
laboratory, and theoretical work, involving short research projects, long-term
research observatories, and water quality monitoring systems. The goal of this
workshop is to surface requirements in the fields of river and fresh water
biogeochemical studies for a major new NSF data and knowledge management
initiative (i.e., EarthCube) that is dedicated to revolutionizing geoscience by
providing easy access to, discovery of, and visualization of data from across
the geo- and environmental sciences. This workshop will bring together ~60
geoscientists from across the US who come from relevant disciplines, including
cyber/computer science experts, this coallition of parties will have a job to
collectively define future science goals in this important arena. It will also
be used to identify the most critical, widespread needs shared by those working
on surface water and fresh water biogeochemical problems and to guide the
development of NSF EarthCube cyberinfrastructure for this community. The
workshop will also focus on strategies that help scientists and data that they
need to cross sub-discipline barriers. Discussions will encompass all aspects of
experimental, in-situ, geospatial, and modeling data as well as address issues
related to quantitative analytical and scaling approaches that enable the
integration of observations. Workshop participants will also address topics such
as process rates along flow paths ranging from short scales such as sediment-
water interfaces, to continental-scale basins. Progress addressing these needs
in a coordinated fashion across sub-disciplines has the potential to lead to
transformative advancements in this dispersed but critical intersection of
research communities. Broader impacts of the work center primarily on building
infrastructure for science.