* 1310771
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kelly Spendlove, Spendlove               Kelly
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Kelly Spendlove of Montana State University to conduct a
research project in the Math and Physical Sciences area during the summer of
2013 at Kyoto University in Kyoto, Japan. The project is entitled "Computing the
Signatures of Critical Transitions Arising in a Complex System." The host
scientist is Hiroshi Kokubu.

Complex dynamical systems, which range from physiological systems and financial
markets to models of the Earth's climate, often exhibit critical thresholds -
commonly entitled tipping points - at which the system may radically shift its
behavior from one state to another. For instance, in physiology, there are
spontaneous systemic failures such as asthma attacks or epileptic seizures, as
well as the sudden onset and progression of certain diseases; in ecology there
is the collapse of wildlife populations or catastrophic desertification of
environments; in the Earth climate system, abrupt shifts in ocean circulation or
climate may occur. It is notoriously difficult to predict such critical
transitions before they happen: empirically, systems may show little change
before reaching a tipping point; theoretically, it has been proven that changes
in global dynamics can occur on all scales in both phase space and parameter
space. Moreover, models of complex systems are typically imprecise, parameters
are rarely known exactly and computations may contain errors of various
magnitudes. In spite of this difficulty, recent work now suggests the existence
of generic early-warning signals, not specific to any particular class of
system. Utilizing such generic indicators, this project implements a novel form
of analysis, based on ideas from dynamical systems theory and applied algebraic
topology, aiming to uncover the fundamental characteristics - or signature - of
critical transitions before they occur.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, all developed code is being incorporated
within an existing open-source project with which the host scientist is
currently involved. The emphasis on an open-source framework in this project is
particularly important, since as part of an on-going website and source-code
repository the results of the work are publicly available, unhindered by
academic institution, monetary cost and even scientific discipline.