* 1310817
* Collaborative Research: Strategies Proposal: Creating a STEM Pipeline for Low Income and Immigrant Youth
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/2014,09/30/2017
* Leslie Herrenkohl, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2017
* USD 574,458.00

This project focuses on a community-based approach to providing middle and high
school students living in low-income public housing with opportunities to learn
about STEM higher education and STEM careers and to develop interests,
identities, and skills to pursue STEM higher education and workforce
opportunities. The University of Washington 3DL Partnership, a collaboration
between the College of Education and School of Social Work, together with the
University of Washington Undergraduate Academic Affairs' Dream Project, will
partner on this effort with Neighborhood House, a community organization that
has served Seattle and King County's low-income, immigrant and refugee
communities since 1906.

Building on a robust, existing program, Youth Empowered with Leadership Strength
(YELS), new YELS STEM programming will take place in two cohorts - a middle
school cohort and a high school cohort. Each cohort will experience 120 hours of
programming time, which includes mentoring through the University of Washington
Dream Project, a Making and Tinkering Studio, and exposure to a multicultural
STEM curriculum designed to increase awareness of the role of people of color in
the STEM workforce. A formative assessment will explore the strengths and
weaknesses of the program on a yearly basis in order to modify and improve it on
the ground. A summative evaluation component will study the effects of STEM
enhancements on youths' knowledge of STEM careers and higher education
opportunities, interests and motivation to pursue STEM learning, and
identification with STEM disciplines. Embedding this project in a wrap-around
community organization with a long history of serving community needs will
ensure long-term sustainability.

The proposed activities use innovative programming methods to increase
opportunities in STEM learning for underserved youths of color. These methods
will be widely disseminated locally, nationally, and internationally through
practice, research and policy channels to provide knowledge for similarly
planned efforts in other settings. This study will involve 116 youths in
intensive YELS STEM programs and will build understanding of STEM learning and
STEM careers within the community through Neighborhood House public events.
Findings from this study will help develop programs to increase the diversity of
the STEM workforce.