* 1310669
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* ian rowen, Rowen                   Ian            G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Ian Rowen of the University of Colorado, Boulder to conduct a
research project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at Fudan University in Shanghai, China. The project title is
"Tourism and State Territory in 'Greater China.'" The host scientist is Yingzhi
Guo.

How is tourism reconfiguring "Greater China," and in particular, relations
between the People's Republic of China (PRC) and Taiwan? Over 1 million Chinese
tourists visited Taiwan in 2011, even though the PRC continues to point over
1000 ballistic missiles at what it considers a breakaway province. This marks a
profound regional change, with direct tour arrivals from China only permitted to
arrive in Taiwan starting in 2008 after decades of tension and travel bans. This
ethnographic research project uses tourism as a lens to analyze spatial politics
between the PRC and Taiwan, and to explore the relationship between tourism and
state territoriality in general. Examining tourism in Taiwan sheds light on the
political and cultural implications of the rapid development of China's outbound
tourist market, soon to be the world's largest, with over 100 million annual
visits overseas projected by 2019. Additionally, this project's theoretical
framework brings tourism practice into larger discussions about state power and
spatial practice.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow will present the research to his
associates at Fudan University, and collaborate on surveys and other research
tools.