* 1310855
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Patterns of Diversity and Endemism in South-East Asian scorpions: Systematics and Biogeography of Chaerilidae
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Lorenzo Prendini, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,766.00

The scorpion family Chaerilidae includes 43 species distributed across South and
South-East Asia. Chaerilids are morphologically diverse and adapted to caves,
leaf-litter and rocky habitats. They have restricted distributions and are often
endemic to islands. The classification of these scorpions is in disarray and
little is known about their evolution. The co-PI will revise Chaerilidae and
investigate how they diversified across South-East Asia. This will require
collecting chaerilid scorpions across their range, assessing variation within
and between species, constructing an evolutionary tree for the family using DNA
and morphological data, and mapping their distribution across South-East Asia.
An NSF DDIG will allow the co-PI to collect chaerilid scorpions in Indonesia,
where they have been poorly surveyed, and gather the data necessary to complete
her dissertation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;South-East Asia has a geologically
complex history and much remains to be understood about how organisms
diversified across this region. This project will contribute to understanding of
the geological history of Indonesia and the evolution of its fauna. The biota of
Indonesia is also severely threatened by habitat destruction. Assessing the
diversity of chaerilid scorpions will contribute to understanding the
biodiversity of South-East Asia, important for making informed conservation
decisions.