* 1310338
* Voltage controlled spintronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Weigang Wang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2017
* USD 361,000.00

The objective of this project is to achieve fundamental understanding on voltage
controlled magnetic anisotropy in 3d transitional ferromagnet based spintronic
devices. Although the influence of voltage on magnetic properties of metals is
generally weak due to strong screening of electric field by free electrons,
voltage may have profound effects in systems where the magnetic anisotropy is
dominated by the surface or interface. This project will address the critical
issues of electrically controlled magnetism in metallic ferromagnets both
experimentally and theoretically. Using magnetic tunnel junctions with large
magnetoresistance and interfacial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy as the
research platform, systematic study will be carried out to investigate the
dependence of the voltage effect on the structural, electronic, magnetic and
transport properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
research addresses the critical challenge of large energy consumption of
spintronic devices during magnetization reversal. Voltage controlled magnetic
anisotropy offers a promising way to achieve a greatly reduced switching energy
in nanomagnets. With a new fabrication method for magnetic tunnel junction
nanopillars, the interplay among the interfacial magnetic anisotropy, tunneling
magnetoresistance and voltage effect will be studied by tuning the interfacial
oxidation states. Element-resolved orbital magnetic moments will be determined
and correlated with magnetic and transport properties, providing vital
information to understand the voltage effect. Devices with high-k oxides and
novel structures will also be fabricated to enhance the change of magnetic
anisotropy by voltage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The knowledge on
the fundamental mechanism of voltage controlled magnetic anisotropy opens a new
avenue to achieve voltage induced ultra-low energy switching that will directly
benefit many devices including magnetic random access memory, spin logic unit
and microwave nano-oscillators. The results obtained in this research are
expected to have broad technological impact in many areas such as wireless
communication, space exploration, sensor technology and transportation safety.
As an integrated part of this project, effort will also be directed to the
education and training of graduate/undergraduate students and high school
teachers, as well as the outreach activities at local, regional and national
level with emphasis on the participation of underrepresented minorities.