* 1310528
* Combining Reversible and Permanent Crosslinks in Thermosets for High Technology Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Christopher Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer networks composed of thermally
reversible crosslinks have become popular in mendable, recyclable, and smart
materials. These materials have the ability to respond to stimuli such as light
exposure or temperature change with a change in material properties, impacting
fields from metamaterials and biomaterials to microdevices, additive
manufacturing and photolithography. Here, a class of thermoreversible polymer
networks will be developed based on Diels-Alder networks; however, by using
those networks in combination with one of two other thiol-vinyl click reactions,
a new class of materials offering fundamental and practical advantages will be
explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of thermoreversible networks will
be translated into several approaches for achieving the potential of these
polymers to be used as smart, self-healing materials. In particular, controlled
elimination of thermoreversiblity (i.e., through a Michael addition reaction)
either of a uniform fraction of the crosslinks or with spatiotemporal control of
the reversible crosslinks should create novel materials, approaches and
understanding that enables the complex fabrication and physicochemical
patterning of polymer networks and subsequent devices in 3D. Specifically, (i)
new polymeric materials will be created that combine thermoreversible networks
with conventional irreversible networks, including the ability to eliminate the
thermoreversibility in a spatiotemporally controlled manner, (ii) the network
structure will be systematically varied and the relationship between reversible
bond structures and rheological, mechanical, and healing behavior will be
assessed, (iii) direct-write and layer-by-layer approaches for additive
manufacturing approaches to 3D devices will be developed, and (iv) dual-stage
shape-memory polymers will be created with two distinct thermal transitions
associated with the glass transition and the crosslink
reversibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermosetting plastic materials, as a multibillion
dollar industry, are ubiquitous in high technology applications that range
broadly from dental materials to additive manufacturing to photovoltaic coatings
to advanced optical materials and many others. These polymers are highly
functional, specialty materials whose performance is largely dependent on the
underlying molecular structure, which is comprised traditionally of irreversible
molecular bonds. While this structure gives rise to many of the desired
attributes of these materials, that same structure limits their behavior and
prevents them from being self-healing, recyclable, or able to change their
permanent shapes. Here, through the development of special molecular approaches
to these materials that renders the structure reversible at appropriate times
and conditions, thermosetting polymers will be formed that combine the optimal
features of traditional thermosets with those of smart, responsive materials.
This approach will be used to develop improved materials and approaches for use
in the fabrication of complex 3D parts by additive manufacturing, novel optical
applications, and use as reformable, recyclable, and healable thermosetting
polymers. Beyond the technological advances, this approach simultaneously has
significant broader impacts associated with the training of a future workforce
in an interdisciplinary combination of polymer chemistry, materials science, and
optics. The graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project will
also participate in the launching of a new Materials Science and Engineering PhD
degree at the University of Colorado that will lead to the training of highly
qualified researchers for the materials science and engineering workforce.