* 1310793
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The genome-wide occupancy and thermosensitivity of histone variant H2A.Z in embryonic Chrysemys picta, a turtle with temperature-dependent sex determination
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Nicole Valenzuela, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2016
* USD 19,224.00

In most animals, the sex of the offspring is determined by its genetic
constitution (Genotypic Sex Determination, GSD) while in others it is determined
by the incubation temperature during development (Temperature-dependent Sex
Determination, TSD). In TSD, genes important for the formation of males or
females are switched on/off depending on the temperature, but the exact
molecular mechanism by which temperature operates remains unknown. The goal of
this project is to test the hypothesis that H2A.Z, a DNA-binding protein known
to be thermosensitive in plants and fungi, is also thermosensitivity in TSD
vertebrates and responsible for making the DNA more or less accessible to
activation, thus translating the temperature signal into differential gene
expression. Using the painted turtle Chrysemys picta (TSD) and Next-Generation
DNA Sequencing technology, the location and thermosensitivity of H2A.Z binding
to DNA will be mapped across the turtle genome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes a novel hypothesis about how animals sense and respond to
temperature, which if true, could transform our understanding both how sex is
determined in TSD vertebrates, and how temperature affects overall vertebrate
development. This project provides many opportunities for undergraduate
research, and both the PI and Co-PI are committed to providing educational and
research experiences to underrepresented groups in science. The Co-PI is also an
NSF GK-12 Fellow, bringing science education to local middle school classrooms
and public speaking events.