* 1310974
* Econometrics of Asymmetric Information Models with Applications to Nonlinear Pricing, Insurance and Compensation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Quang Vuong, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2017
* USD 413,154.00

Since the nineties, the empirical analysis of auctions has been an active
research area to which the PIs contributed with the support of previous NSF
grants. Auctions are mechanisms in which buyers compete given their private
willingness to pay for an object. The seller's problem is to design auction
rules that secure the maximum return. Auctions are asymmetric information
models. The PIs propose to analyze new data modeled similarly. As in their
previous work, they begin with an economic model, study thoroughly the mapping
between it and the data as well as develop quantitative methods drawing from
empirical processes, kernel estimation and characteristic functions. First,
price discounts (nonlinear pricing) to big buyers are studied. The PIs collect
new data on yellow page advertising and cellular phone services. For the latter,
they consider a firm proposing two products, namely, voice and SMS. They also
address the problem of testing adverse selection by deriving the model
restrictions on observables. Second, the research project analyzes insurance in
which insurers are heterogeneous in both risk and in attitudes toward risk.
Moreover, the PIs consider a finite number of contracts. Both lead to pooling at
equilibrium, which represents new challenges. They assess deviations from
contract optimality and resulting losses for the insurer. Policy questions are
addressed with new data on automobile insurance. Third, this project studies
executive compensation and develops models incorporating moral hazard and (i)
competition among firms to attract managers and (ii) heterogeneous managers in
risk attitudes; utilizing data from S&P ExecuComp. This project further advances
the structural analysis of asymmetric information models while addressing
fundamental questions. Several new data sets on yellow page advertising, mobile
phone service and automobile insurance are collected and will be available to
the research community. The methods developed by the PIs will be used by
empirical researchers from industrial organization but also from other fields
such as health, labor and corporate finance. The results of this project will
also assist public institutions in better understanding the impact of regulatory
policies on the insurance industry.