* 1310719
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Rachel Racicot, Racicot                 Rachel         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Rachel Racicot of Yale University to conduct a research
project in Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at The National Museum of
Nature and Science/Tsukuba Science Center in Tokyo and Tsukuba, Japan. The
project title is "Evolution of Echolocation in Porpoises and Dolphins Elucidated
from High-Resolution CT Scans Revealing Inner Ear Morphology." The host
scientist is Dr. Naoki Kohno.

Living dolphins and whales (cetaceans) employ echolocation as a means of
avoiding predators and finding prey; this involves a unique suite of anatomical
features that allows the emission and reception of sound from parts of the ear,
skull, and soft tissue structures. How porpoises and their relatives evolved
echolocation is an important area of research crucial to developing more
effective conservation strategies. In particular, the inner ears of these
animals perform a pivotal role in both sense of space and sound reception. This
project examines the evolution of echolocation in porpoises and their relatives
by digitally extracting the inner ear labyrinths from computed tomographic (CT)
scans of some of the earliest fossil delphinoids, and comparing them with extant
species. Documenting the changing morphology of inner ears from early-diverging
porpoises to extant species provides a sense for how they perceive the three-
dimensional world around them. This project CT scans Fossils and recent material
from museum collections in Japan and the morphology of their inner ears is
digitally reconstructed using state-of-the-art software. The morphology of inner
ears helps reconstruct the evolutionary relationships between modern groups of
dolphins and porpoises, for which additional morphological evidence is sorely
needed.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the analyses used by the Fellow employ
cutting-edge CT scans and software for accurate measurement and statistical
analyses. These CT data represent an increasingly important resource in the
earth and natural sciences; three-dimensional analyses allow for non-destructive
digital examination of internal features (which are otherwise impossible to
obtain), and are permanent digital records available to future researchers,
museums, and the general public via websites such as www.digimorph.org. This
project will be submitted to peer-reviewed scientific journals such as the
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, Trends in Ecology and Evolution, and
Paleontological Research. The charismatic nature of marine mammals affords
exceptional opportunities for public outreach, including lectures and
development of educational materials. Ongoing mentorship of undergraduates at
Yale in the use and interpretation of CT scans will be enhanced by this research
in Japan. The Fellow will also share her experiences with the Japanese Society
for Women in Science.