* 1310866
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* David Linz, Linz                    David          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds David Linz of Miami University to conduct a research project
in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at the Center for Developmental
Biology (RIKEN) in Kobe, Japan. The project title is "Beetles in Flight: Using
RNA Sequencing to Analyze Stag Beetle Wing Development." The host scientist is
Dr. Shigeo Hayashi.

This research project aims to understand the genetic mechanisms underlying the
formation of the evolutionarily integral wing structures (elytra) in the
coleopteran insects (beetles). The elytra of beetles have been a driving force
in the impressive evolutionary success of these insects by providing a
protective armoring over the dorsal surface. This project provides the first
detailed documentation of these wing structures in a Japanese stag beetle,
Dorcus hopei. RNA sequencing techniques along with gene knockdown are also
implemented to elucidate the molecular basis of the elytron evolution in these
beetles.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the stag beetle is an immensely popular
animal in Japanese culture. Often, young adults and children raise the beetles
as pets. By initiating the scientific study of such an organism, this project
will simultaneously catalyze an interest in science itself among youthful
collectors. The CDB in Japan, where this research will be performed, provides
open house sessions to the public. Upon completion of the project, findings will
be presented during these events as an opportunity for excited stag beetle
enthusiasts to learn about project outcomes. Miami University in Ohio also has
close connections with the Talawanda School District in the same city. In order
to have a more global impact, experiences during this project will be presented
to Talawanda school science classes upon completion of the work. By sharing
experiences in Japanese culture and science, this project provides an example to
students of the international engagement that scientific study can offer. The
project also aims to spur an interest in insects and their role in studying
evolution and hopes to thereby spawn a scientific fascination among students.