* 1310245
* Synthesis and Characterization of Two-Dimensional Mn+1Xn Layers Derived from the MAX Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Michel Barsoum, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 669,592.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) materials have
unique properties compared to their conventional three-dimensional counterparts.
Graphene, which is a single atomic layer of carbon, is the most illustrious and
studied of these newly emerging 2D materials. Graphene, however, is limited to
just one element - carbon. Recently, a new family of 2D early transition metal
(e.g. titanium, vanadium, niobium, etc.) carbides and carbonitrides (so called
MXene) was reported. These 2D materials offer a large variety of chemical
compositions compared to graphene and they can exist in different numbers of
atomic layers. MXenes may have a wide range of potential applications, ranging
from composite reinforcements, to industrial catalysts, to energy storage and
electronic devices. Before the best application can be identified, however, the
fundamental physics of these materials must be developed and the synthesis-
structure-property relationships must be established. Combined experimental and
theoretical work will be used to understand the surface chemistry, structure and
properties of MXenes compounds. This work could result in batteries that charge
in minutes for thousands of cycles or robust supercapacitors that can be used
for very high power energy storage applications such as regenerative breaking in
cars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Recently, a new family of 2D
early transition metal (e.g. titanium, vanadium, niobium, etc.) carbides and
carbonitrides (so called MXene) was discovered. The latter offer a large variety
of chemical compositions, as multiple atoms can co-exist in the 2D sheets.
Furthermore MXenes exist in 3, 5 or 7 atomic layers. The as-synthesized MXene
surfaces are functionalized with OH, O, and/or F. Theoretical calculations
predict that the MXenes can be either conductors or semiconductors depending on
their surface chemistry. MXenes may have a wide range of potential applications,
ranging from composite reinforcements, to industrial catalysts, to energy
storage and electronic devices. Since this class of solids is quite new, the
fundamental basic science of these materials must be developed and their
synthesis-structure-property relationships need to be established. The aims of
this project are: (i) isolate single MXene layers on different substrates, (ii)
determine whether these layers have attractive electronic properties like
graphene and could thus be used as transistors, (iii) measure the electrical and
optical characteristics of these films, as a function of surface terminations
and MXene chemistry, (iv) disperse the 2D sheets in various solvents, including
water, and form stable suspensions, (v) use various spectroscopy techniques to
investigate MXene surfaces and correlate them to theoretical first principles
calculations to fully understand the surface chemistry and its effect on
properties, (vi) investigate how MXene surfaces can be chemically functionalized
and understand the effects of such functionalization on the aforementioned
properties, and (vii) spin-coat MXene thin films and measure their optical and
transport properties. This work offers exciting research opportunities for
students - undergraduate students will be trained on state of the art equipment
and graduate students will work towards their doctorates.