* 1310279
* A High-Performance Wideband Receiver for Cognitive Radio
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Won Namgoong, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive radio enables efficient use
of the scarce radio spectrum by sensing available bands and communicating in an
opportunistic manner. Although significant work has been reported in the
literature that enables dynamic use of these under-utilized spectrum resources,
the underlying assumption in cognitive radio is the availability of a flexible
and efficient wideband receiver. Designing such a receiver, however, is
challenging. The specific problems are the inter-modulation and harmonic
distortion caused by the wide passband of the receiver, the need for a wide
tuning range frequency synthesizer to span the frequency band of interest, and
the use of power-hungry high-speed ADCs to reduce sensing time. In the proposed
research, the harmonic mixing process in wideband receivers is viewed as a
multi-user access system in communications. This perspective allows leveraging
on existing work on multi-user detection theory to develop techniques to
overcome many of the implementation challenges. To fully realize the benefits of
the proposed approach, several research tasks will be pursued, including
developing a scalable receiver architecture, exploring analog combining methods
of multi-phase/multi-frequency clocks to maximize performance after digital
equalization, and devising a robust and high-performance digital equalizer that
exploits the structure of the mixing process. Furthermore, this research will
demonstrate the feasibility and the advantages of the proposed approach to
wideband receiver design by realizing it on silicon. A complete design framework
will be developed based on a clear understanding of various design options and
the corresponding tradeoffs in performance and implementation
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research should help realize a high-
performance cognitive radio, which has emerged as a promising approach to
efficiently exploit the scarce radio electromagnetic spectrum. In addition, the
concepts developed in this research are broadly applicable to many existing and
emerging wideband systems such as in multi-standard/multi-band radios and
software defined radios. The principles can also be applied to non-communication
applications in radar systems and sensor networks. The above research plan is
coupled with an education plan that describes how the proposed research will
help train both graduate and undergraduate students. The multi-disciplinary
nature of the proposed research will broaden the students technical
understanding, which the PI believes is essential for next generation of
engineers. The proposal also includes plans to improve the participation of
undergraduate students and members of under-represented groups.