* 1310380
* Functionalized Nanostructures at Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Janice Reutt-Robey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 460,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Janice E. Reutt-Robey of the University
of Maryland, College Park, and her students will use a combination of scanning
probe microscopy and spectroscopy measurements to image functionalized carbon-
based C70 nanoparticles and nanoassemblies at crystalline surfaces. This
research will determine how functional groups influence the transport, stability
and structural arrangements of nanoparticles at interfaces. Prof. Reutt-Robey
and her students will undertake systematic measurements of two nanomaterial
classes: (1) covalently functionalized nanoparticles and (2) nanomolecular
assemblies joined by weak (noncovalent) forces. They will develop vacuum-
compatible liquid delivery methods, based upon microaerosols and microliquid
jets, for the controlled deposition of nanomaterials at well-defined surfaces.
They will obtain detailed topographic and potentiometric contours of discrete
species by UHV Scanning Probe Microscopy through complementary tunneling-based
and force-based measurements. The impact of nanoparticle electric moment,
polarizability, and stereo features on structure and dynamic evolution will be
determined for pristine nanoparticles and for solvated nanoparticles and
nanoassemblies. Molecular-level mechanisms for nanoparticle motion, disassembly
and nanocrystallizaiton under different thermochemical stimuli will be measured.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide laboratory research experiences
for graduate and undergraduate students and junior scientists with direct
exposure to cutting-edge experimental methods and instrumentation. Students and
researchers will gain expertise in nanoparticle characterization, thin film
growth and the preparation of advanced materials. Additionally, students will
become trained in quantitative scanned probe measurements and analysis and will
receive hands-on training and experience in surface-sensitive microscopies and
spectroscopies and vacuum science. The project consists of a systematic
exploration of nanoparticle structure and dynamics at chemical interfaces, which
will provide detailed information on how nanoparticles diffuse at surfaces and
arrange into functional structures. The external field tunability of
nanoparticle orientation during growth and trapped in multilayer films will be
quantified through structural and impedance spectroscopic measurements. Students
and researchers will have significant opportunities to participate in
educational and outreach activities with broad national, international and
societal impact.