* 1310542
* Robust Room Temperature Electric Field Control of Structural, Magnetic and Transport Properties of Ultra-Thin Shape Memory Heusler Alloys Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Renat Sabirianov, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 06/30/2018
* USD 364,567.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The goal of this project is to demonstrate a new family of
nanoferroic multifunctional devices, based on shape-memory Heusler alloy films
in ferroelectric heterojunctions, where resistance, magnetic and structural
properties of the Heusler alloys will be switchable by applied electric field.
Heusler alloys are a group of intermetallic compounds that have unique and
interesting electro-magnetic behaviors, including the magnetic shape-memory
effect. Selected shape-memory Heusler alloys are expected to be better than
manganite-based compounds because their transformations can be controlled to
occur near room temperature. This research attempts to distinguish the roles of
electronic and strain-mediated coupling between layers in heterojunctions in
order to determine the origin of each effect. It also attempts to identify the
mechanism of the martensitic phase transformation in the Heusler alloy films. It
is ultimately envisioned that this research may lead to a new class of
nanoferroic multifunctional devices enabling new sensor and electronic
applications. These devices will have a potential for use in memory, sensors and
magnetic refrigeration. Long-established participation of high-school teachers
and their students in the research laboratories of the investigators will be
enhanced. Graduate and undergraduate students will be educated and trained
through research activities.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The magnetic shape-memory effect in Heusler alloy films
will be used to explore physical behaviors of these alloys alone and when paired
with other materials to make a functional device. It is ultimately envisioned
that this research may lead to a new class of nanoferroic multifunctional
devices enabling new sensor and electronic applications. These devices will have
a potential for use in memory, sensors and magnetic refrigeration. Long-
established participation of high-school teachers and their students in the
research laboratories of the investigators will be enhanced. Graduate and
undergraduate students will learn nanofabrication techniques, chemical
synthesis, sensitive electrical measurements, and theory of quantum transport
and magnetization dynamics, providing hands-on experience suitable for their
further research and development in leading industrial and academic
laboratories.