* 1310503
* Probability Density Function of Dislocation Free Path Length: Experimental Determination through GND Measurements
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Kysar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2017
* USD 370,254.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The dislocation mean free path length is a unifying
concept in understanding plastic deformation across all pertinent length scales.
Plasticity formulations that account directly for the motion of dislocations are
stochastic processes because of the non-deterministic behavior of dislocations
combined with the otherwise deterministic equations of solid mechanics. The mean
free path length (MFPL) succeeds only partially in quantifying the dislocation
free path length. It is also necessary to quantify the probability density
function (PDF) of the dislocation free path length. The overall research
objective of this proposal is to measure experimentally the MFPL and the PDF of
dislocation free path length and relate them experimentally to the deformation
quantity of plastic shear strain in individual crystallographic slip systems.
The concept of making such measurements has existed for several decades, but the
capabilities to perform such experiments have not existed until now. This
program will develop and use the methods and procedures to make these
experimental measurements. In that context, the overall educational objective of
this proposal is to promulgate not only the results from the research objective,
but also the underlying mechanics concepts as well as experimental methods and
procedures necessary to perform research of this type to the larger research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The safety and
reliability of the nation's infrastructure and transportation systems depend
upon the ability of scientists and engineers to predict the behavior of
materials, especially metals, used to build that infrastructure. Metals
experience mechanical failure due to the presence of defects called dislocations
that cause permanent deformation as they move throughout the interior of the
metal. The goal of this project is to measure the average distance and the
variation in distances that dislocations travel as metals are deformed
permanently and to relate these quantities to the amount of deformation that
occurred. These quantities are very important for the development and validation
of theories that predict the failure of metals. New fundamental understanding of
the motion of defects in metals has the potential to lead to better theories
that predict the behavior of materials in the nation's infrastructure with
greater fidelity. The main educational goal of this project is to introduce the
novel concepts and methods necessary to make the measurements to engineers and
scientists through technical articles as well as teaching seminars at scientific
conferences. A Ph.D. student will be supported in this project, thus enhancing
the nation's human resources.