* 1310721
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Pamela Allen, Allen                   Pamela
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Pamela Allen of Oregon State University to conduct a research
project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area during the summer
of 2013 at Fu Jen University in Taipei, Taiwan. The project title is
"Perceptions of Aging in Taiwan and the United States: Cross Cultural
Differences in Domain Specific Attitudes." The host scientist is Zai-Ting Yeh,
Ph.D.

Worldwide population aging is transforming gerontology into a globalized
discipline and creating a context in which age discrimination could have
significant human and economic costs. To examine the largely untested assumption
that a collectivistic Asian culture promotes more positive attitudes toward
aging, this project identifies differences in stereotypes of the elderly
specific to certain life domains (e.g., social, cognitive, physical, financial,
sexual) between older adults (65+) in Taiwan and older adults in the U.S. These
perceptions of aging are being measured among older adults in the Taipei
community using a mixed methods approach with both quantitative survey data and
qualitative interview data. Identifying differences in the negativity of aging
stereotypes in various life domains between Taiwan and the US helps determine
the appropriateness of international translation of gerontological education
programs aimed at ameliorating the negative impacts of negative aging
stereotypes and ageism. This examination also identifies potential limitations
to the goals of globalized gerontology, which promotes international translation
of educational programs, and thereby also enhances an understanding of how to
mobilize educational resources efficiently.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. The EAPSI Fellow is using first hand experience under the
Taiwanese host mentor to build the skills necessary for effective cross cultural
research in social science. The benefits of this experience are being passed on
in the Fellow's mentoring activities with undergraduate research assistants at
Oregon State University. In addition, the collaboration made possible by this
fellowship allows the Fellow to include other Oregon State University graduate
students in the developing an international research network. At the
institutional level, participation in the EAPSI program is enabling the Fellow
to assess the feasibility of establishing a lasting research partnership by
introducing a research component to the existing student exchange program
between the Fellow's host and home institutions (e.g., research assistantships
for undergraduate students in Oregon State University's gerontology program).
Beyond academic outlets, results of the EAPSI project are to be disseminated
through the EAPSI Fellow's interdisciplinary research activities and engagement
with the community as an NSF IGERT in Aging Sciences trainee.