* 1310917
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Stephanie Fiorenza, Fiorenza                Stephanie      L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Stephanie Lynn Fiorenza of CUNY Graduate Center to conduct a
research project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at Nagoya University in Nagoya, Chubu, Japan. The project title
is "Infrared-Bright Galaxies: The Connection Between Starbursts and Active
Galactic Nuclei." The host scientist is Tsutomu T. Takeuchi.

The evolutionary connection between nuclear starbursts and active galactic
nuclei (AGN) in luminous infrared galaxies (LIRGs) and ultraluminous infrared
galaxies (ULIRGs), which form from galaxy interactions and produce the bulk of
their radiation as infrared (IR) emission, is not well understood. To this
effort, this project examines 12 U/LIRGs within the IRAS 2 Jy Redshift Survey.
This project classifies the primary source of IR radiation as being a nuclear
starburst or a type of AGN by using key emission line ratios and then performs
spectral decompositions on IR spectra to quantify the contributions of the
starbursts and/or AGN to their host galaxies' IR luminosity (LIR). Finally, this
project uses the CIGALE (Code Investigating GALaxy Emission) to measure
starburst ages. Comparing the starburst ages with the IR-power source
classifications and starburst/AGN contributions reveals which type of IR-power
source forms first and how starburst age varies with starburst/AGN strength in
U/LIRGs.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. The Fellow is the first doctoral astrophysics student in
at least two decades to be enrolled at the City University of New York (CUNY),
an urban minority-serving institution, and she hopes to help expand the program
by encouraging others, including students in Japan, to enroll as doctoral
students in astrophysics. Furthermore, the Fellow is a co-chair of CUNY Women in
STEM, and will promote careers in science and technology to women by sharing her
experience as an EAPSI participant at STEM-sponsored events. Finally, the Fellow
will use the EAPSI experience to inform work teaching a college-leel astronomy
course for Johns Hopkins Center for Talented Youth Summer Programs.