* 1310235
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Animal weapon diversity: Insights from the form and function of rhinoceros beetle horns
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Douglas Emlen, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 18,078.00

Understanding the selective pressures that drive morphological diversity is one
of the most exciting challenges facing evolutionary biologists. Mate Choice and
male-male competition, in particular, are potent drivers in the evolution of
male morphology and has given rise to an array of flashy ornaments that are
attractive to females, and an arsenal of enlarged weapons that aid in male-male
combat. Although previous studies have focused extensively on the process of
female choice and the evolution and diversification of male ornaments,
surprisingly little work has been done on the evolution of male weapons, and the
diversity of selected weapons to engage males and attract females is still
poorly understood. The research takes a multidisciplinary and integrative
approach to explore the evolution and diversification of a class of particularly
extravagant male weapons: rhinoceros beetle horns. Specifically, the project
examines how 1) selection to minimize the physiological costs of horns, and 2)
selection to maximize the performance of horns during combat may help explain
the patterns of divergence in weapon form among rhinoceros beetles. One exciting
and unexpected explanation for why beetle horns are so large and diverse is
already emerging from this research: horns are not especially costly to produce
or carry, and therefore may be particularly evolutionarily labile. The
experiments outlined here expand on this research by incorporating several novel
techniques, including micro-CT scanning and finite element analysis, to
explicitly test how variation in horn morphology affects performance during
combat. This dissertation project therefore encompasses many fields of biology,
including evolution, behavioral ecology, physiology, and biomechanics, and
applies new engineering tools for analyzing and interpreting variation in animal
body form. Combined, the research promises new insight into the interplay
between organismal form, function, and diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface
reconstructions of the horns will be posted at http://dbs.umt.edu/emlenlab/