* 1310436
* Phase Transitions and Dynamics in Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Morse, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational studies
of the equilibrium behavior and dynamics of block copolymer materials aimed to
identify universal behavior. Understanding the equilibrium behavior of these
materials has long been based on various forms of self-consistent-field theory.
The self-consistent-field approximation is valid in the limit of very long, very
strongly overlapping polymers, but neglects strong collective correlations that
have very important effects for shorter, more strongly interacting polymers.
More sophisticated coarse-grained theories beyond self-consistent-field
approximations yield predictions for all physical properties that depend upon
the degree of overlap, as quantified by a dimensionless parameter. Simulations
of the disordered phase of diblock copolymers have confirmed the predicted
existence of systematic, universal behavior of the structure factor that can now
be quantitatively described by recently developed theories. Two research thrusts
supported by this award will build upon this progress in different
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first thrust is a comprehensive computational
study of the parameter dependence of phase boundaries in diblock copolymer
melts, using graphics processor unit accelerated simulations and free energy
methods to precisely identify phase boundaries. This project aims to use
simulation to produce a universal phase map for finite diblock copolymers. This
will generalize the phase map in a manner that should allow accurate
quantitative predictions of phase boundaries even for short, strongly
interacting diblock copolymers. Distinctive features of this approach include
development of more sophisticated methods for analyzing simulation results in
order to minimize ambiguities that arise from imperfect knowledge of the
phenomenological Flory-Huggins interaction parameter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second thrust focuses on the use of simulations to study collective dynamical
phenomena in diblock copolymer melts. Specifically, it will address collective
dynamics in the disordered phase near the order-disorder transition, and the
dynamics and mechanisms of order-disorder and order-order transitions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award will provide
opportunities for training graduate students in cutting edge computational and
theoretical methods in an environment that provides rich exposure to
experimental aspects of polymer science. This award also supports the
development, documentation, and dissemination of open source computational
software for both particle-based simulations and self-consistent field
calculations, which contributes to the cyberinfrastructure of the soft-materials
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational studies aimed to
advance understanding of materials made from long chain-like molecules,
polymers. Block copolymers are polymers comprised of linear blocks or subchains
of different chemistry. A linear polymer chain, that contains two such blocks,
of A and B monomers, bonded together by their ends forming a bigger chain (AB),
is called a diblock copolymer. At temperatures at which mixtures of liquids
composed of pure A and pure B chains would still be a liquid, diblock copolymers
form periodically ordered structures. Spontaneous formation of these periodic
structures is driven by the tendency of different blocks to phase separate, and
by the fact that macroscopic phase separation is suppressed by the covalent
linkage of the two blocks with each other. These ordered structural materials
found applications as membranes for water purification, and as template
materials for microelectronics and storage devices. Studies suggest that diverse
kinds of diblock copolymers display nearly identical behavior when interpreted
in the correct way. This award supports research aimed to advance fundamental
understanding of diblock copolymer materials and would contribute to the ability
to design new diblock copolymer materials with desired properties for new
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate whether much more
accurate predictions might be possible for real systems by quantifying how the
behavior seen in computer simulations depends on interactions between chains. A
primary goal of this research is to use computer simulations to generate a map
of structural transformations as related to chemical structure and chain
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the development,
documentation, and dissemination of open source software that contributes to the
cyberinfrastructure of the soft-materials research community.