* 1310916
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Benjamin Fine, Fine                    Benjamin       T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Benjamin Thomas Fine of the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering at Texas A&M University to conduct a research project in the
Computer and Information Science and Engineering area during the summer of 2013
at the Australian Centre for Field Robotics at the University of Sydney in
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. The project title is "Manipulating Migratory
Motions of Flocks of Birds: A Computational Exploration." The host scientist is
Dr. Salah Sukkarieh.

Many groups of agents, such as birds, fish, and locust, exhibit emergent
collective behaviors (e.g., schooling fish and locust migratory band formation).
The environment in which the agents operate is one determinant of the resulting
behaviors. Using unmanned aerial vehicles to monitor the migratory motions of
the swift parrot in New South Wales, Australia, this investigation attempts to
identify which properties of the agents' environment influence the exhibited
behaviors of the parrot flocks. The Fellow developed an approach for the
generation of environments that elicit a pre-specified behavior from a given
group of agents. This approach is used to explore how different environmental
properties can be used to manipulate the migratory motions of the parrots.
Moreover, the data collected from the field will be used to refine the
geometrical theory and computational implementation, which can be used for
investigating other agents and collective behaviors (e.g., migratory motions of
locust bands and evacuation behaviors of pedestrians). The computational
implementation developed for this investigation along with empirical data
collected from the field, will allow the PI to explore the possibility of
effectively manipulating collectives by altering their environment.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the understanding of the environmental
properties that effect group behaviors could also be applied to effective
manipulation of Australian Plague Locust migratory bands, which has the
potential to affect the livelihoods of one in ten people throughout the world.
Moreover, this work would also be useful for applications in livestock/poultry
management, the study of emergent behaviors, and assisting in improving the
efficiency of building evacuations.