* 1310985
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Bacterial-symbiont-mediated competitive interactions among entomopathogenic nematodes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Heidi Goodrich-Blair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2015
* USD 14,011.00

The negative effects of individual species of parasites on animals have been
intensively studied and can be very strong. Many animals are infested by
multiple species of parasites, some of which have symbiotic microorganisms, but
we know relatively little about how the interactions between parasites and their
symbionts within a host may reduce or exacerbate the effects of parasitism. This
project will investigate the interactions between two species of nematodes that
parasitize insects and a bacterial symbiont of one of these species. Researchers
will infect an insect host with nematodes, bacteria, or both to test the effect
of the bacteria on the ability of the nematodes to reproduce. To investigate the
underlying mechanisms, chemicals produced within the host in the different
treatments will be compared for ability to induce responses in the bacteria and
to inhibit the growth of the parasites. The results will broaden our knowledge
of the role of parasites in natural systems and how they affect the health of
animals.

Previous studies have shown that bacteria within a host can influence the
performance of parasites and even prevent them from successfully reproducing.
This project will add to this promising new avenue for preventing or controlling
parasitism. Research will also develop the parasite-bacteria system as a tool
for teaching K-12 students, and train a Ph.D. student.