* 1310013
* High-Vacuum Molecular Micropumps for High Performance Gas Analysis Microsystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Carlos Mastrangelo, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 05/31/2016
* USD 359,999.00

The generation of high vacuum environments is essential in many chemical
analysis analytical techniques such as mass spectrometry which constitutes the
gold standard in many applications. In spite of great progress achieved in
miniaturization techniques for sensor analysis systems over the past three
decades, vacuum instruments have largely remain un-scaled due to the lack of
miniaturized devices that can pump down to low vacuums. In this work we propose
the design construction and testing of microfabricated molecular pumps that can
attain micro-volume pressures of a few µTorr. We believe these devices will
permit the realization of precision vacuum analytical micro-instruments for a
wide range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
identification of chemical species is of vital importance in analytical
instrumentation for liquid and gas based samples. In particular, the mass
spectrometer is the gold standard instrument used for identifying species with
exquisite resolution, but it intrinsically requires micro-Torr vacuums and bulky
and expensive high vacuum pumps. Interest in the realization of low-cost
portable handheld gas sensing microsystems has motivated research in gas micro-
pumping technology for more than two decades, but it has not yet produced a
micro-Torr capable micropump for micro-environments. The availability of high-
vacuum micropumps is critical for the realization of miniaturized mass
spectrometers for gas analyzers. Such analyzers enable high-sensitivity
detection of chemical, biological agents and explosives in a micro-miniature
integrated form never realized before. The principal goal of this work is the
development of new pumping techniques and devices for the realization of high
performance micro-Torr vacuum pumps suitable for analytical micro-
instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The potential societal
and economic impacts of this project are very
important.&lt;br/&gt;Microfabricated high vacuum pumps are key components
enabling the realization of miniature precision gas analysis equipment based on
mass spectrometry. The successful implementation of this research can realize
mass spectrometers of the size of a postage stamp. Such miniaturized mass spec
has diverse applications in life sciences and national security. Presently the
US government has a strong interest in detection and conclusive identification
of harmful or dangerous gas phase compounds such as explosives, nerve gas, and
other agents at very low concentrations in a pervasive manner. This project will
specifically locally promote and develop a range of broader impact and outreach
educational activities. In particular we will engage high-school student
participation and awareness via the University of Utah nano camps, and we will
promote the work to the local community including local high-diversity high
schools (Salt Lake City East and West High). These camps are aimed to capture
the interest of our excellent local high-school students from West and East high
school campuses.