* 1310620
* Photonic-jet Coupled Optical Antenna for Near Room Temperature Infrared Detectors and Imagers
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Hooman Mohseni, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 10/31/2016
* USD 330,562.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to achieve high quantum efficiency
in a deep sub-wavelength absorbing region, using a novel metallo-dielectric
optical antenna. The reduced volume of the device leads to a reduced noise,
while the antenna maintains high quantum efficiency. This combination leads to a
high detectivity even at elevated temperatures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research provides a new
insight into the operation of optical antennas; in particular, the use of
metallo-dielectric structures to enhance efficient coupling of light to deep
sub-wavelength structures. Realization of thermoelectric-cooled LWIR detectors
and imagers with background limited infrared photo-detection performance could
significantly impact many fields of science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Some of the results of this research will
be incorporated in the photonics courses and an advanced course on Infrared
Detectors. Open-source simulation tools that will be developed in this research
effort will become publicly available through the literature and shared with
other researchers in this field. Undergraduate and graduate students from under-
represented and minority groups will be encouraged to take part in this
research. Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professorate (AGEP) program
at Northwestern University would be used in this regard.