* 1310407
* Rational Design of Molecular Thermal Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Daniel Glatzhofer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 380,000.00

Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is a close collaboration
between theory and experiment to design molecular interfaces to tune thermal
transport. Using current theoretical tools (e.g. R-matrix theory, Langevin
formalism and simulations) and new ones developed under this proposal (e.g.
Fokker-Planck analysis of interfaces), we will be able to rapidly analyze and
optimize the thermal properties of molecular structures without having to resort
to repeated simulations. We will then synthesize these designs and test their
thermal conductivity, using these results to improve our theoretical models,
which will in turn suggest improved designs. This iterative loop will lead to
fundamental progress in the modeling of thermal transport as well as new
composites with high thermal conductivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to
functionalize the ends of carbon nanotubes so as to minimize their Kapitsa
resistance and measure their thermal conductivity. Initially, we will react
alcohol [end-group] functionalized nanotubes with acid chlorides to form ester
groups. Alternatively, amine [end-group] modified nanotubes will be modified by
reaction with the acid chlorides (of the desired end-groups) to form amide
linkages[, progressively increasing stiffness of the coupling group]. Finally,
interfacial synthetic methods can be used to directly couple end group moieties,
such as long chain perfluoroalkyl groups, selectively to the nanotube ends.
These methods will also be modified to couple other end groups of interest
directly to the nanotubes. These materials will be incorporated into carefully
chosen polymer matrices and their thermal conductivities measured. Vibrational
coupling of the nanotubes, via the endgroups, to the polymer matrix will be
signaled by increases in thermal conductivities of the composites relative to
those made using non-modified nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will iterate
between theory and experiment to study how size, orientation, alignment,
connectivity, and interactions with the host material affect thermal
conductivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is a close collaboration between theory
and experiment to design chains of atoms that will be attached to the ends of
molecules in order to improve how they conduct heat. Using current theoretical
tools and new ones developed under this proposal, we will be able to rapidly
optimize how different molecular structures conduct heat without having to
resort to repeated simulations. We will then synthesize these designs and test
their thermal conductivity, using these results to improve our theoretical
models, which will in turn suggest improved designs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
goal is to design chains of atoms that would be chemically attached to the ends
of carbon nanotubes. Carbon nanotubes, themselves, conduct heat as well as many
metals, but because they are very stiff, it is difficult to get heat to flow
into them from their surrounding medium. We will iterate between theory and
experiment to study how size, orientation, alignment, connectivity, and
interactions with the host material affect thermal conductivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minimizing the resistance to getting heat into and out of
carbon nanotubes would be very important. For example, polymer composites could
be used in car and truck radiators to replace heavier, costlier metallic
components, saving money and fuel; adhesives that conduct heat well could be
used in aviation and in electronics to improve high temperature performance and
lower the rate of failure. There are hundreds of potential industrial
applications.