* 1310678
* Spatially Resolved Optoelectronics of Strongly Correlated Nanostructures and Mott Transistors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Dong Yu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2016
* USD 273,957.00

Technical Description: This research project aims to enhance our understanding
of the optoelectronic properties of strongly correlated nanostructures and to
develop Mott transistors incorporating vanadium dioxide nanobeams. The project
is to establish a clear physical picture of energy band alignment and carrier
dynamics in the insulating and metallic phases in vanadium dioxide nanobeams.
The application of scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM) offers spatially
resolved photocurrent mapping, from which local electric field distribution and
charge carrier diffusion length can be extracted. Using efficient
electrochemical gating, the PI also develops Mott transistors, which take
advantage of the sub-100-femtosecond phase transition for information
processing. SPCM is a unique tool for identifying the gate-induced metallic
layer and studying the associated interfacial junction.

Non-Technical Description: Strongly correlated materials are not only
fascinating test beds for studying condensed matter physics but also have high
application potential for smart windows, ultrafast optical shutters, and Mott
transistors, a new type of transistors with very fast operation speeds and very
low energy consumption. The spatially resolved optoelectronic investigation of
vanadium dioxide nanobeams can provide key information for better understanding
of the metal-insulator transitions and the development of ultrafast Mott
transistors. The project involves an outreach endeavor including regular
seminars on nanotechnology with a focus on K-12 public schools in low-income
areas of Sacramento and Davis, California. The PI incorporates the research
topics on strongly correlated nanostructures into a new interdisciplinary
course.