* 1310832
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation - Portable, High-Power, Tunable CW Terahertz Source by Intra-Cavity Type-II Conversion in T-Cavity Two-Chip VECSEL
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Chris Hessenius, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2015
* USD 161,885.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating and
developing a portable, high power, tunable semiconductor-based THz (terahertz)
source. The technology is based on unique characteristics of high-power widely-
tunable two-color laser in a novel two-chip vertical external-cavity surface-
emitting laser (VECSEL). Access to the VECSELs' high-Q intracavity circulating
power with orthogonal polarization provide highly efficient mean for type-II
difference frequency generation (DFG) of THz radiation. Current THz sources
suffer from low-efficiency, low output power in the range of tens of micro-
Watts, limited operating temperature or large size and high cost. The
intracavity THz generation in the two-chip cavity promises to overcome the
limitations by providing high CW (continuous wave) power in the 10s of milli-
Watts combined with mature and low-cost semiconductor technology, filling a
major gap in THz technology. Targeted frequency in the 0.1 to 10 THz range will
be achieved by accurately adjusting wavelength difference between the two chips
in the 0.3-30 nm and selecting a suitable nonlinear crystal. The Air innovation
partnership provides means to fabricate and demonstrate a high-power CW THz
source in a compact prototype, transforming the future of THz technology. The
business objective is to commercialize a compact, low-cost tunable THz source
covering the broad THz spectrum. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The transformative
impact of high-power THz source will be in various fields of science and
technology including medical, pharmaceutical and manufacturing in the next
decade. This will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in commercial and
defense market. The commercialization of this novel laser technology will impact
development of new tools in chemical and biological sensing with long term
social and economic impact.