* 1310709
* AIS: Collaborative Research: A Novel Intelligent Grid Optimization Architecture Using Hierarchical Multi-Agent Framework for Modern Sustainable Power Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2013,01/31/2019
* Reza Ghorbani, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2019
* USD 315,508.00

The objective of this research is to develop a high-performance novel and
intelligent grid optimization architecture which is distributed (low-cost) and
that balances supply and demand in real-time over multiple levels of the
electric power grid. The approach is to link power flow optimization routines
across a three-layer hierarchy of power grid: circuits, substations, and the
transmission grid using the proposed integrated Approximate Dynamic Programming
and Dynamic Stochastic Constraint Optimal Power Flow methodology in order to
meet the requirements of dispatching unit portfolios with different objectives
at different layers of hierarchy.

Intellectual Merit: The key merit of this project is the ability of the proposed
method to accommodate high in-feed of distributed resources and storage, provide
a low cost solution to exponential increase in decision and grid variables and
allow generation schedule dispatch with low bidding margin, including both
supply and demand elasticity. This is possible by implementing massively
distributed intelligent optimization architecture with coordinated hierarchical
and distributed control that can interact with grid devices. This approach will
allow the transmission and distribution network to operate efficiently
satisfying various grid level objectives simultaneously and yet achieving global
optimality conditions.

Broader Impact: The broader impact is the ability of the proposed infrastructure
to transform the power grid functionalities that has substantial economic
(improved grid efficiency and optimal supply and demand elasticity), societal
(sustainable, reliable and resilient infrastructure) and educational value (new
curriculum methods and generation and retention of next generation global
workforce) which is important for developing next generation power grid.