* 1310387
* Collaborative Research:   Biomimetic Nanostructured Materials Based on Synthetic Spider Silk
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Randolph Lewis, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,985.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1310534 PI: Dzenis, Yuris ORG: University of
Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1310387 PI: Lewis, Randolph
ORG: Utah State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research:
Biomimetic Nanostructured Materials Based on Synthetic Spider
Silk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Part: Spider silks exhibit excellent
strength, stiffness, and toughness simultaneously, a feat unachievable in most
synthetic structural materials. However, natural silks cannot be harvested in
quantities necessary for applications. Recombinant silk proteins closely
mimicking the natural silk sequences have been synthesized in processes that can
be further scaled up. However, fibers made from these proteins, while they are
tough, are significantly inferior to natural fibers in the important metrics of
strength. Much has been learned in recent years about the effects of various
protein motifs on mechanical properties. Despite a very intensive effort in many
laboratories, reproduction of the native fiber spinning process resulting in
highly structured strong and tough fiber has so far proven elusive. The
objective of this project is to develop and study novel nanostructured synthetic
spider silk fiber based on continuous silk nanofilaments. Rather than trying to
replicate the elusive exact conditions of the delicate native structuring
process via self-assembly, biomimetic hierarchical silk fibers will be built
using a recently optimized top-down nanomanufacturing technique. The technique
is capable of producing highly aligned and dense nanofilamentary fibers with
simultaneously improved strength, modulus, and strain at failure, compared to
the solid microfibers from the same polymer. Preliminary studies show impressive
properties for individual ultrafine nanofibers electrospun from two different
synthetic spider silk proteins. These properties will be further improved by
precision-manufactured microscopic nanofilamentary fibers. These fibers will be
analyzed using solid state NMR, FTIR, and X-ray diffraction to determine the
structural elements responsible for the best materials properties. These
biomimetic constructs, combined with the original potential of spider silk
proteins can lead to revolutionary new fibers that can be produced in industrial
quantities. Expectations are to develop synthetic spider silk fibers exceeding
the mechanical performance of the natural fibers, thus improving on nature's
best structural material. This research will build on the complimentary
interdisciplinary expertise and several recent breakthroughs in the laboratories
of the co-PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Part: The extreme flexibility
of the electro-spinning process and recently developed precision methods of
process control, based on sophisticated multi-physics process modeling, open up
near unlimited possibilities for the development of new high-performance
nanostructured fibers. These next generation ultrastrong/tough fibers promise
broad applications. Both research groups have proven records of commercializing
research results including advanced supercomposites with nanofiber reinforced
interfaces for military applications and spider silk fibers for tendon repair
materials, sporting goods, and military protective materials. The two
Universities will partner strategically to further develop and commercialize the
unique ultrahigh-performance nanoflamentary synthetic spider silk fibers
developed under this grant. Two PhD students with different backgrounds will
interact and work closely with each other and the co-PIs. At least 5
undergraduates from both universities will also be involved with this research
program. In addition senior design project groups will be joining the research
to test various applications of these fibers. The proposed research covers
biochemistry, mechanics, materials science, and nanomanufacturing and will
provide students a unique interdisciplinary experience. Undergraduate students
will present their results at Undergraduate Research Day. Both laboratories will
be involved with their universities' efforts to recruit underrepresented groups,
particularly providing laboratory tours and hands on efforts for high school
students. A new nanostructured silk design, fabrication, and characterization
testbed will be developed as part of the UNL Nanofiber Core Facility. This
testbed will be used for demonstrations during frequent visits to our
laboratories of fellow researchers, students, and members of the public in
classes, and for research. This facility testbed will also serve as a vehicle
for dissemination of new research results. Previous research from both groups
has been featured in the popular press as well as several television programs
both in the U.S. and in several other countries. Of specific note is that this
research was featured on NSF's Science Nation program as well as Nova's "Making
Stuff"and the Discovery, History and Disney Channels. The two groups will
continue to jointly popularize this exciting research performed at the two
universities.