* 1310723
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Amit Shavit, Shavit                  Amit
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Amit Shavit of the University of Pennsylvania to conduct a
research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Academia Sinica in
Taipei. The project title is "Molecular Simulations of Confined Polymer Films."
The host scientist is Dr. Yeng-Long Chen.

Although ultra-confined deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) appears throughout the human
body and within many biotechnological applications, it is unclear exactly how
ultra confinement itself affects the characteristics and properties of DNA. It
is typically difficult to physically manipulate DNA molecules under such
confinement, which makes molecular simulations extremely advantageous in this
area. This project investigates polymers, such as DNA, using molecular
simulations, with a focus on observing how such materials change under ultra-
confined dimensions. Results from this project might aid in the development of
improved nanodevices for disease detection, as well as advanced gene therapies
that rely on the manipulation of DNA.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Principal Investigator (PI) plans to hold
a workshop upon his return to the United States, where he will teach others the
techniques he learned overseas. He also to present results to interdisciplinary
groups within his institution and to participate in a local series of "Geek
Night" public outreach talks.