* 1310274
* Quadratic Echoes and the MRI of Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Sean Barrett, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The small difference between hard pi-pulses
and their delta-function approximation can be used to generate new classes of
spin echoes which have promising applications in NMR, magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) or microscopy of solids, and related spectroscopies. For example, using
the quadratic echo line-narrowing pulse sequence, a novel tool for the control
of spin coherence, this project will pursue a new approach to carrying out MRI
of solids with high spatial resolution. This project has a strong focus on the
education and training of students from the early undergraduate level through
the Ph.D., along with K-12 outreach efforts. While the plan of work is aimed at
making fundamental scientific contributions, there are potential societal
benefits as well. First, advancing new forms of spin coherence control,
applicable to a wide variety of spin (or qubit) Hamiltonians, will be broadly
useful in many areas of spectroscopy. Second, squeezing more information from
less (sparse) data has immediate benefits to the kind of NMR that is used for
structure determination in biology and chemistry (including drug discovery), and
it should work in other areas as well. Third, applying an entirely new
experimental tool to problems in granular physics will advance theory and
experiment in a field that is very important to industry. Historically,
improvements in our ability to 'see' inside opaque solids have had broader
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Historically, the development of new tools to 'see'
inside opaque solids has been an important driver of progress in science and
technology, with far-reaching economic impact. This project will develop new
approaches to a long-standing goal in the field of magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), namely, multinuclear MR images of hard and soft solids with high spatial
resolution. Conventional MRI detects only the signal from the Hydrogen in liquid
water; MRI of solids is so much more difficult that it is rarely attempted. This
project will develop high-resolution MR imaging of solids using the innovation
of quadratic echo line-narrowing, which was recently discovered as a direct
result of the NSF's investment in basic, curiosity-driven research. Potential
solid targets include porous rocks, composite materials, "through-silicon vias"
in 3D integrated circuits, bone and soft tissues. Cutting-edge science with a
broad range of potential applications will enable excellent education and
training of students from the early undergraduate level through the Ph.D., along
with K-12 outreach efforts. While this project's plan of work is aimed at making
fundamental scientific contributions, the work should find applications in other
areas of science and technology, and there are potential societal benefits as
well. For example, applying an entirely new experimental tool to problems in
granular physics, such as the properties of grain in silos, will advance theory
and experiment in a field that is very important to industry.