* 1310072
* Phase Equilibria, Thermodynamic and Transport Properties of Thermoelectric Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ramana Reddy, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 440,000.00

TECHNiCAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectric materials and devices, that can
convert heat energy to electrical energy and vice versa, are viable solutions to
some energy needs. Compared to conventional power generation systems, their main
disadvantage is lower efficiency. The lower efficiency of thermoelectric devices
is primarily attributed to the low figure of merit (ZT) of thermoelectric
alloys. For power generation applications, high ZT at high temperature is
essential. The goal of this project is to develop newer thermoelectric (TE)
alloys that have high figure of merit at high temperature. The figure of merit
is the key material property that can achieve high heat-to-electricity
conversion efficiency. In order to increase the figure of merit, the lattice
thermal conductivity and electrical resistivity needs to be lowered while
maintaining high thermoelectric power. Alloying the binary thermoelectric alloys
leads to disordered unit cell structure thereby reducing the lattice
contribution of the thermal conductivity which results in higher ZT. The lattice
disorder in the crystal structure can be assessed in terms of increase in
entropy change of the TE alloys. Since the newer thermoelectric alloys are
typically multi-component alloys, a thermodynamic study of such systems will be
investigated to better understand the properties of TE alloys. This research
project aims to develop fundamental data (thermodynamic properties, phase
equilibria and transport properties) for newer high ZT at high temperature
thermoelectric alloys of type ABX and ABX2: where A and B are transition metals
(Ti, Nb, Co, Mn) and X is Boron or Silicon. Thermodynamic properties of
thermoelectric alloys using solid-state galvanic cell method will be
investigated. Gibbs energy of formation of compounds and excess Gibbs energy of
mixing will be determined. Phase stability in the alloy systems at different
temperatures will be determined. The alloy phases will be characterized using
several techniques such as TEM, SEM and XRD. Various transport properties such
as thermal conductivity, electrical resistivity and Seebeck coefficient will be
determined with already existing experimental setup. Experimental data generated
in this study for phase stability, excess Gibbs energy of mixing, Gibbs energy
of formation of the compounds, available crystal structural data of the
compounds will be used in modeling the phase equilibria of the newer
thermoelectric alloys. This work is expected to generate new thermodynamic
properties data that can be used in development of newer thermoelectric alloys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The demand for
alternative, sustainable energy conversion and power generation is imminent due
to the increasing demand for energy, high cost and exhaustion of combustible
fossil fuels and the environmental impact of current technology. Thermoelectric
materials and devices, that can convert heat energy to electrical energy and
vice versa, is a viable solution to the energy needs. Thermoelectric devices
offer the advantages of being silent, reliable, and scalable, and having no
moving parts. However, compared to conventional power generation systems, their
main disadvantage is lower efficiency. The lower efficiency of thermoelectric
devices is primarily attributed to the low figure of merit (ZT) of
thermoelectric alloys. For power generation applications, high ZT at high
temperature is essential. The goal of this project is to develop newer
thermoelectric (TE) alloys that have high figure of merit at high temperature.
The outcome of this research would improve our fundamental understanding of
thermoelectric alloys. Thermodynamic properties and phase equilibria data
generated will form a basis for the development of newer thermoelectric alloys.
The program would provide a wide variety of expertise (teaching and research),
enrichment of scientific knowledge and to instill new creative and critical
thinking among students. Integration of research and education at the university
will be enhanced, particularly minority students through the proposed research
project. With the collaboration of the HBCUs and high schools, the proposed
research program will facilitate experience for K-12 students and high school
teachers. Fundamental science and newer TE alloys used in efficiently harnessing
the waste heat from various high temperature processes will be emphasized. The
research results will be disseminated to a wide network of scientific personnel
via presentations and publications in relevant journals.