* 1310639
* GOALI: In Situ Electron Microscopy Studies of Zinc Electrodeposition for Secondary Battery Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Frances Ross, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 06/30/2016
* USD 370,000.00

This IBM-UCLA-LLNL collaborative research aims to develop a fundamental
understanding of the kinetics of nucleation, growth, and stability of
electrodeposited zinc (Zn) thin films for applications in batteries.
Rechargeable batteries, starting with lead-acid batteries, have been integral
part of our society. With the surge in consumer electronics along with the
recent demand for clean, sustainable energy, recyclable and rechargeable
batteries have received renewed attention. Among the several possible candidate
systems, zinc-alkaline and zinc-air batteries are attractive owing to their
stability, safety, and cost. However, a major challenge impeding the realization
of Zn-based rechargeable battery technology is the formation of high-aspect-
ratio Zn dendrites and porous thin films, which reduce performance and operation
life time. Progress in this area requires a basic understanding of the factors
affecting the morphological evolution during electrodeposition at multiple
length scales. This research addresses this issue via electrodeposition of zinc
in situ in a transmission electron microscope and in situ in an optical
microscope using Hele-Shaw cell geometries, which allow imaging of the
interfacial structure during charge and discharge cycles. The acquisition of
data as a function of solution chemistry and electrodepostion parameters enables
the development of mechanistic insights into factors influencing the formation
of smooth Zn thin films, an essential criterion for the realization of
rechargeable batteries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to advancing knowledge
important for the development of Zn-based rechargeable batteries, contributions
to the society include training of future scientists and engineers with broader
awareness of national laboratory and industrial research activities. This
collaborative research provides to the postdoctoral scholars and students at
UCLA opportunities for interactions with eminent scientists from industry (IBM)
and national laboratory (LLNL), hands-on training on some of the most
sophisticated state-of-the-art characterization tools, and exposure to
industry's perspective on energy-related research.