* 1310824
* Disseration Research: Comparative genomics of mammal louse heritable symbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* David Reed, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,360.00

Organisms often form intimate relationships with one another called symbioses.
Sometimes these relationships result in the sharing of duties needed for each
partner to survive. For example, human head lice have bacterial symbionts that
synthesize vitamins that are needed for louse survival. A defining
characteristic of bacterial symbionts is their very small genomes, which results
from a process of gene loss during symbiosis. There is strong evidence that gene
loss is ongoing in the bacterial symbionts of human head lice, which makes them
an ideal model system to study how symbiosis influences genome evolution. The
proposed research will use advanced DNA sequencing technologies and high-
performance computing to sequence the genomes of bacterial symbionts of lice
that infect humans and chimpanzees. Using comparative genomics, the research
team will determine which genes were lost in symbiosis and
when.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is critical to understand how symbiosis
rapidly alters genomes. Although this research focuses on symbionts that are
beneficial to their host, deadly pathogens undergo a similar process of gene
loss, and the results of this study can be broadly applied to all symbionts,
beneficial or otherwise. This grant will also support the graduate student
training in evolutionary genomics and a public high school teacher workshops in
biotechnology and genomic data analysis.