* 1310766
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Hui-Yiing Chang, Chang                   Hui-Yiing
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Hui-Yiing Chang of Vanderbilt University to conduct a research
project in MPS during the summer of 2013 at Korea Astronomy and Space Sciences
Institute in Daejeon. The project title is "Testing the Integrated Sachs-Wolfe
Effect in Different Models of the Universe." The host scientist is Dr Yong-Seon
Song.

Dark energy forms anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background, resulting in
the integrated Sachs-Wolfe (ISW) effect. The ISW-LSS (Large Scale Structure)
cross-correlation function, which shows the ISW effect on large angular scales,
is derived. Relevant data from the nine-year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe observations and the Planck mission results are employed, and the Cosmic
Linear Anisotropy Solving System used to perform integration in the process. In
conclusion, the ISW effect on the Viscous Dark Fluid cosmology, which will
likely produce strong ISW signals, and the Inflection Point Quintessence
cosmology, which will likely produce the opposite kind, is tested.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, a paper about the research results targeting
physics amateurs will be disseminated to a broad audience, including through a
non-technical journal. Presentation of the research will be proposed at national
and international general science and interdisciplinary conferences that even
involve the arts disciplines. Coordination will be made with the Society of
Physics Students at the author's home institution for launching an outreach
program in the Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools (MNPS) in Nashville, TN to
make presentations at the 21 high schools and other schools where high school
students are enrolled, which include the Baxter and Cohn Alternative Learning
Centers, the MNPS Virtual School and the Cohn Adult High School. The students
will be introduced to the mystery of dark energy and its pivotal stance. Then,
the rest of the research will be presented in a systematic fashion through
visual materials. Due to the ethnic and socio-economic demographics of the
student population in MNPS, a significant number of under-represented minorities
in the STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields will be
reached.