* 1310996
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Andrew Burton, Burton                  Andrew         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Andrew Robert Burton of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
to conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the
Disaster Prevention Research Institute of Kyoto University in Kyoto, Japan. The
project title is "A Patterned Thin Film Sensor for Damage Detection in Steel
Frame Connections." The host scientist is Masayoshi Nakashima.

The destruction caused by recent earthquakes has demanded new methods for
performance monitoring of critical infrastructure. Paramount to this goal of
post-event damage assessment is reliable, quantitative data for informed
structural safety characterizations. This project addresses this challenge
through the development of patterned carbon nanotube (CNT) thin film sensors
tailored to detect specific failure modes in steel frame connections. These thin
film sensors are being created in the Lurie Nanofabrication Facility at the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor by patterning CNT-polymer films on parylene
substrates using optical lithography and then instrumented through other
processes common to microelectromechanical systems. These patterns are being
designed for electrical sensitivity that is specific to damage behaviors
experienced by steel frame connections under seismic loading. The films are
being tested at Kyoto University on a partial-scale steel test frame. They are
epoxy bonded to the frame connections and then connected to wireless sensor
networks for data acquisition. A large-scale shake table is used to simulate a
seismic event on these frames. Data is collected from these sensors during and
directly following the event and the sensor signals from each test is being
analyzed in relation to the observed structural damage. This project provides
two highly-valuable results as CNT thin films will reach a scale necessary for
practical civil infrastructure applications and the need for rapid post-seismic
damage detection will be addressed.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this project will spark subsequent
partnerships facilitating transnational human connections that provide the basic
infrastructure for global research. Most immediately this will aid both
societies in the shared ambition for increased public safety through performance
characterization of critical infrastructure. Following completion, the project
will strengthen engineering understanding, far beyond those involved, through
presentations and educational outreach by the Fellow.