* 1310706
* Wide-Field Ground-Layer Adaptive Optics Demonstrator
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Mark Chun, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 650,532.00

Over the last 20 years, the technology and methods of adaptive optics have
revolutionized observational astronomy at optical and infrared wavelengths by
delivering dramatically sharper images, images corrected to some degree for the
blurring effects of the earth's atmosphere. These sharper images enable a range
of new science, and enhance the efficiency of many kinds of observations.
Traditionally, the beneficial effects of adaptive optics are achieved only over
a somewhat limited field of view on the sky. This project will extend that range
and deliver much larger adaptively corrected fields of
view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new approach to adaptive optics is called ground-
layer adaptive optics (GLAO). It builds on recent measurements showing that
wavefront phase variances on Mauna Kea are correlated over fields of at least
half a degree. The approach is to correct for the wavefront aberrations that
arise close to the ground. Site survey data indicate that GLAO can be extended
to fields potentially 1 square degree in extent, or more than 3 orders of
magnitude larger than those of a classical adaptive optics system. The
scientific impact of much larger adaptively corrected fields coupled with high
angular resolution will enabling dramatically more sensitive and efficient wide-
field survey-style projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These developments will
produce experience and techniques that will influence the design of GLAO systems
for future facility-class systems, including those that will be used on the next
generation of 30-meter telescopes. The project will be a training ground for
students, and will undoubtedly inspire the public with exquisite images.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being provided by NSF's
Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.