* 1310821
* Dissertation Research: Disentangling temperature controls on turnover of old, nitrogen-rich soil organic matter
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Richard Conant, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 19,301.00

Soil organic matter is the largest land reservoir of carbon and nitrogen, the
two major building blocks of all life on earth. Warmer temperatures may
accelerate the breakdown of soil organic matter by microorganisms, causing major
shifts in the dynamics of carbon and nitrogen. Among other impacts, the
transformation of soil organic carbon into carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
could intensify climate change. But warming will accelerate soil organic matter
breakdown only if microbes have access to it. Stabilization of organic matter in
soils by minerals is the dominant control on the availability of soil organic
matter to microbes and so is the key to understanding how soil carbon and
nitrogen will respond to warming. The approach proposed here uses a simple,
realistic soil incubation experiment involving plant material labeled with
isotopes to reveal the effects of warming. This experiment improves upon
previous work by enabling tight control over carbon inputs and other driving
variables (temperature, moisture, etc.), while using real plant material and
soils. The results will improve our ability to predict future climate change and
advance our understanding of the global carbon and nitrogen cycles.

Throughout this study, the results will be disseminated through the mentoring of
undergraduate students and presentations made at scientific meetings. The
investigators will work with the Academic Advancement Center at Colorado State
University, to recruit a low-income, first-generation and disabled student into
a new program for undergraduate research. This student will take part in a
series of workshops designed to improve scientific literacy and critical
thinking and will be involved in every aspect of this project. At the
culmination of this work, results will be presented at the 6th International
Workshop on Soil and Sedimentary Organic Matter Stabilization and
Destabilization and at the Colorado Front Range Student Ecology Symposium. By
attending meetings designed for different audiences, the results will be made
broadly available and integrated into research in multiple fields.