* 1310714
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Richard Vallett, Vallett                 Richard        J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Richard Vallett of Drexel University to conduct a research
project in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering area during the
summer of 2013 at Hubo Lab at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST) in Deajeon, South Korea. The project title is "Kinematics of
Humanoid Robot Vehicle Operation." The host scientist is Dr. Jun-Ho Oh.

This research project develops a kinematic joint controller to enable the
humanoid robot, Hubo2+ KHR-4 (Hubo), to operate a small utility vehicle as
required for the 2013 DARPA Robotics Challenge (DRC). This project involves
analyzing the kinematics of rotating the steering wheel and pressing the foot
pedals of a golf cart, simulating the desired steering and throttling/braking
motions using the Hubo virtual model (openHubo) and virtual vehicle model, and
verifying the planned motion using the Hubo and physical hardware. This approach
allows the DRC driving team to correlate the desired linear and angular
velocities of the golf cart to the Hubo's joint movements to effectively control
the vehicle during the first DRC event. Further research tasks involve updating
the dimensions and mass properties of the Hubo Computer Aided Design (CAD) model
to develop a more complete 3D model, which will be reflected in the improved
accuracy of the openHubo model used by affiliated DRC teams working on related
competition tasks. The outcome of this research will immediately benefit
engineers and DRC affiliates working with Hubo platforms in the United States on
humanoid motion planning.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the knowledge gained from working with
humanoid researchers at Hubo Lab will be documented and shared with students
working at the Drexel Autonomous Systems Lab (DASL) and affiliated research labs
and will be used to instruct students on proper operation and maintenance of the
Hubo platform. The revisions made to the Hubo CAD model will be used to
facilitate cooperation between universities by providing an accurate and
standardized model in this concurrent engineering project. The improvements to
the virtual Hubo model will aid researchers in accurately simulating and
prototyping planned motions before testing with the physical Hubo. Ultimately,
this research will assist in the adoption of the Hubo as a standardized platform
used for humanoid research.