* 1310875
* Collaborative Research:  Turnkey Laser Frequency Comb for the Calibrator for the Habitable Zone Planet Finder
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Scott Diddams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 638,586.00

The discovery of planets around other stars, in startling numbers and sometimes
with surprising physical properties, is one of the more noteworthy achievements
of observational astronomy over the last two decades. Most exoplanet discoveries
are made by observing with great precision the Doppler shift of the star around
which the planet orbits, and seeing the very small recoil velocity as the mass
of the planet pulls the star a small amount from its average position. The less
massive the planet, the smaller is this stellar motion, and the more difficult
are the measurements. So observing planets as small as our earth is a
particularly challenging task that can only be done with spectral calibration of
extreme precision. This project will build such a calibration system that will
enable detection of terrestrial-mass exoplanets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technology employed is a near-infrared (NIR) laser frequency comb with field-
tested technology, capable of improving radial-velocity calibration by a factor
of 5 or more. A complete telescope-ready subsystem will be made and then
deployed in 2015 on the 10 meter Hobby-Eberly Telescope. An immediate science
program of surveying low-mass and low-temperature M stars takes advantage of the
carefully stabilized spectrograph's sensitivity to near-infrared light, along
with velocity precision better than a meter per second from the new calibrator.
This program will help resolve a fundamental but still unanswered question: "are
there planets like our own around other stars, and how common are
they?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is addressing a topic listed as one of
the three most important research areas by the Astro 2010 decadal survey in
which the astronomical profession prioritizes research directions for the next
10 years. There is certainly wide public interest in the questions to be
answered, and an active program of outreach and educational activities will be
supported as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being
provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced
Technologies and Instrumentation program.