* 1310963
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Joanna Corby, Corby                   Joanna         F
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Joanna Corby of University of Virginia to conduct a research
project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during the summer of 2013
at University of New South Wales in Kensington, New South Wales. The project
title is "Mapping Molecules in the Center of the Milky Way." The host scientists
are Dr. Maria Cunningham and Dr. Paul Jones.

The project utilizes Australia's radio telescope observatories to constrain the
physics and chemistry of Sagittarius B2, a molecular gas cloud in the Milky
Way's Galactic Center with active star formation. The project maps spectral line
emission and absorption by organic and pre-biotic molecules and provides
information on the spatial distributions of these species that is essential for
determining the chemical reaction networks that produce them. Data analysis
focuses on molecules that provide specific insight into physical processes,
including the passage of shocks. This details the kinematics and geometry of
highly energetic processes in the central 600 light years of the Galaxy.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the data resulting from this collaboration
will be used to train and motivate a younger generation of scientists, drawing
on the Fellows work with high school students in central Virginia on 8-month
research projects in astrochemistry. Project data will also be used in planned
research in 2013-2014.