* 1310886
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* William Carter, Carter                  William        L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,304.00

This action funds William Lake Carter of Virginia Tech to conduct a research
project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the University of Canterbury
in Christchurch, New Zealand. The project title is "Use of Surface Wave Tests
for Evaluating the Efficacy of Ground Improvement Techniques for Mitigating the
Risk from Earthquake Induced Liquefaction." The host scientist is Dr. Brendon
Bradley. After the devastating 2010-2011 Canterbury earthquake sequence, the
city of Christchurch, New Zealand is in a state of rebuilding. A particular
focus is on mitigating future risk of damage from earthquake induced
liquefaction at proposed building sites. Ground improvement technologies, like
stone columns, reduce soil liquefaction potential by increasing the density and
lateral effective confinement of the soil profile. However, the installation
technique for stone columns is non-standardized and varies from company to
company; stone columns installed by one technique may have a lower liquefaction
potential than sites where stone columns were installed using another technique.
This research determines the effectiveness of ground improvement techniques and
their installation techniques by evaluating the improved sites using surface
wave tests. Using Multichannel Analysis of Surface Waves (MASW) equipment, the
PI performs active source, shear wave profiling of various improved ground sites
around Christchurch and its environs. The tests are performed at the improved
ground sites and adjacent unimproved ground sites to provide a comparison. Both
sets of measurements are transformed into one-dimensional shear wave profiles
and subsequently, compared to quantify the soil improvement defined by an
increase in shear wave velocity across the site; an increase in shear wave
velocity constitutes an increase in soil stiffness and resistance against soil
liquefaction.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the proposed research will continue to
cultivate the professional and academic relationship between the University of
Canterbury and Virginia Tech. It is also hoped that both research groups will
learn from each other and further the profession's knowledge of earthquake risk
mitigation worldwide. Stemming from this research will be an MS thesis, which
will document the findings of this unique study. It is expected that the
findings from this research will be shared with the earthquake engineering
community by publishing the results in a high quality journal and/or a
conference proceedings.