* 1310753
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2013
* Nicholas Sakamoto, Sakamoto                Nicholas       Y
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 11/30/2013
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Nicholas Yoshio Sakamoto of Purdue University to conduct a
research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Kansai University
in Osaka. The project title is "Modeling Tensioned Membranes Using an
Electromagnetic Numerical Method." The host scientists are Professor Yasuhito
Kawai and Professor Masahiro Toyoda.

Tire-pavement noise and vibration have a significant impact on motor vehicle
pass-by noise, passenger comfort, and manufacturer design constraints.
Previously, modal models of tire vibration have been developed, but they are not
appropriate in the high frequency region (above 1 kHz) in which most tire noise
is generated. Modal models are inappropriate both because of the number of modes
involved and the heavy damping of the tire structure (so that waves generated in
the contact patch area are fully attenuated by the time they propagate half way
around the tire). This project applies the Finite-Difference Time-Domain method,
which has an established history in the field of electromagnetics, to acoustics
and vibroacoustic problems which could be instrumental in developing a model to
computationally determine the behavior of noise and vibrations within tires and
other tensioned membranes.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Upon returning, a seminar will be set-up to convey
personal research experiences and to encourage other U.S. born researchers at
the Ray W. Herrick Laboratories to explore the advantages of NSF international
fellowships and direct contact with international labs performing similar
research.