* 1310194
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of insulin-like peptides in the behavior of malaria parasite-infected mosquitoes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Shirley Luckhart, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 06/30/2015
* USD 18,420.00

ABSTRACT: The insulin-like family of peptides controls a wide variety of
biological functions across the animal kingdom. In insects, insulin-like
peptides are most commonly known as mediators of behavior. This research project
seeks to understand how insulin-like peptides produced during malaria parasite
infection affect the behavior of infected mosquitoes. Mosquito behavior during
malaria parasite infection can drastically affect transmission to human hosts.
As such, the project will analyze behaviors including but not limited to
feeding, general activity, and temperature seeking in a genetically modified
mosquito model. These experiments will determine whether insulin-like peptides
play a potential role in increasing malaria parasite transmission to human hosts
by altering essential behavioral processes in mosquitoes. Many insect-borne
parasites such as malaria primarily affect impoverished communities with few
available resources to combat them. Therefore, extrapolating the findings of
this research to control the behavior of wild populations of mosquitoes may
enhance transmission control efforts in such areas. Furthermore, the research
will also foster interdisciplinary collaborations between behavioral biologists,
molecular biologists, and ecologists while enhancing training for the next
generation of scientists by promoting the participation of undergraduate
students.