* 1310289
* CDMR:   Design and Processing of High-Energy-Density Cathodes for Li-ion Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Zi-Kui Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, a new class of high-energy-
density, Li- and Mn-rich layered cathode materials has been discovered. The
project aims to build the fundamental knowledge base needed to progress towards
design and processing of the materials with desired properties through
integrated first-principles calculations, CALPHAD modeling, materials
processing, and battery assembling and testing. This fundamental knowledge base
also builds the genome foundation to discover new cathode materials. The new
cathode material resides in a multi-component space of xLi2MnO3Âª(1-x)LiMO2 with
M being alloying elements including Mn, Co, and Ni. In the project, first-
principles calculations will be used to systematically investigate the effects
of these common alloying elements and potential outliers on electronic
structures and charge transfers and predict thermodynamic properties of
individual phases as a function of temperature and compositions. CALPHAD
modeling will be utilized to establish phase relations and optimize the
composition space (x and M) for superior charging-discharging performance. To
validate the predictions from first-principles calculations and CALPHAD
modeling, cathode materials will be synthesized with tailored composition and
assemble coin cells to test battery performance. The project objectives are:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.Establish fundamental understanding of effects of
alloying elements and search for potential outliers;&lt;br/&gt;2.Develop a
thermodynamic description of the Li-Mn-Co-Ni-O system plus potential
outliers;&lt;br/&gt;3.Synthesize and characterize cathode materials and test
battery performance based on computational modeling and feedback to improve
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new materials and the capability
of tailoring existing materials to meet new and demanding applications are
critical for continued improvements in the quality of human life. Materials are
a determining factor in the global competitiveness of the U.S. manufacturing
industry as materials account for up to half of the costs of most manufactured
products. Li-ion rechargeable batteries are the key constituent for low cost and
high-energy-density storages needed for numerous applications such as electronic
devices and electric vehicles. The development of novel cathodes is critical
because of the limitations of cost and energy density for cathodes used in
current rechargeable Li-ion batteries. Recently, a new class of high-energy-
density, Li- and Mn-rich layered cathode materials has been discovered. The
project aims to build the fundamental knowledge base needed to progress towards
design and processing of the materials with desired properties through
integrated first-principles calculations, thermodynamic modeling, materials
processing, and battery assembling and testing. This fundamental knowledge base
also builds the genome foundation to discover new cathode
materials.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal's intellectual merit lies on its
collaborative, synergistic approaches between theory, computation, and
experiments to rapidly build a chemistry-processing-structure-property-
performance knowledge base for the Li- and Mn-rich layered cathode materials.
This integrated approach will be based on the combined expertise in simulations,
syntheses, and evaluation of battery materials. The research project aims to
move the low cost and high-energy-density cathode materials research in the US
to a new level by further building the foundation to answer fundamental
questions that can only be addressed efficiently via combined computational and
experimental methodology. These include: what is the best combination of Li/Mn/M
layers in terms of cost and performance? what are the composition/temperature
variations for their robust processing? and what are the potential outliers of
alloying elements for superior performances?&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include
following aspects, in addition to economic impact of low-cost and high-energy-
density cathode materials on battery manufacturing, a) educate students to be
professionals mastering both innovative computational and experimental
approaches with cross-disciplinary knowledge of materials and batteries; b)
encourage students to make presentations at professional meetings to improve
communication skills; c) foster students' writing skills through peer reviewed
journal publications; d) participate in activities to broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups through the SEEMS (Summer Experience in Earth and
Mineral Science) programs for high school students and WISER (Women in Science
and Engineering Research) program for first year students, e) contribute to new
materials research paradigm in shortening the time for developing new materials
and improving existing materials to minimize the cost to the society and the
negative impact to the environment, and increasing the competitiveness of US
manufacturing.