* 1310982
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Deborah Sunter, Sunter                  Deborah        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Deborah Ann Sunter of University of California, Berkeley to
conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Shanghai
University of Electric Power in Shanghai, China. The project title is
"Evaluating Concentrating Solar Thermal Power as a Renewable Energy Alternative
for China." The host scientist is Dean Jianxing Ren.

Concentrating solar thermal power is an environmentally friendly technology that
could help reduce greenhouse gas emissions in China and on a global scale by
providing a model for meeting growing energy needs in a sustainable manned. This
research project develops a computational model to identify economically
promising locations for large-scale solar thermal power plants. These sites are
compared to conventional coal power generation with a multi-objective
optimization program to minimize the cost of power generation, storage and
transmission. There are potentially transformative aspects of the proposed work
that could alter the energy portfolio of China. Changes in China's energy
portfolio have the potential for benefits for China and beyond, including
inspiring similar changes in other countries.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, participation at Clean Energy Expo China
enhances the Fellow's perspective on the current international research efforts
in the area of renewable energy.