* 1310200
* Nonlinear Wave Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mark Ablowitz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 266,371.00

Research will center on the construction of solutions and the investigation of
the properties of a class of physically significant nonlinear wave equations.
Applications include water waves and nonlinear optics. In water waves, when
surface tension is relatively small, the solutions to be investigated describe
interactions of non-decaying soliton waves that have X, Y and more complex
structure. From results of prior NSF supported research by the PI, it is known
that novel multi-lump solitons can occur in water waves with relatively large
surface tension. In this case a complete characterization of the multi-lump
class of solutions will be considered. Related nonlinear equations that have
similar types of solutions will also be investigated. New classes of nonlocal
equations that are solvable by the inverse scattering transform will be
analyzed. Interactions of dispersive shock waves in a wide variety of physically
interesting systems will be considered by the inverse scattering transform.
Nonlinear wave propagation in optical materials with periodic lattice
backgrounds will also be studied.

Wave phenomena in oceans and optics have broad appeal. Numerous observations of
shallow water wave interactions on flat beaches by the PI and a graduate student
funded by NSF have led to mathematical descriptions that provide deeper
understanding of such phenomena. These interactions frequently appear visually
to be of X and Y structure, though sometimes they are more complex.
Interestingly these waves also have application to tsunami propagation. As a
result of the initial research, a journal article was recently published in
Physical Review. The work was subsequently described in a focus article in
Physics Today, the Society of Industrial and Applied Math News and was featured
in a number of articles by popular news organizations. These articles included
remarkable photos taken by the authors. In other directions, the mathematics
also applies to nonlinear optics with applications that involve the dynamics,
steering and manipulation of localized electromagnetic waves. The contemplated
research will extend the mathematical understanding of the nonlinear equations
to a variety of physically interesting systems. The PIs work has been widely
referenced and used by researchers worldwide.