* 1310642
* Tattoo Antennas for Implantable Medical Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Patrick Tresco, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 359,914.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Implantable medical devices touch virtually every
major function in the human body. Cardiac pacemakers and defibrillators, neural
recording and stimulation devices, cochlear and retinal implants, etc. Wireless
telemetry for these devices is necessary to monitor battery level and device
health, upload reprogramming for device function, and download data for patient
monitoring. Antennas are inevitably one of the largest if not the largest
component of the telemetry communication system and are generally mounted on or
in the implanted battery pack, usually in a body cavity. This limited real
estate significantly constrains the performance of implantable antennas and
results in substantial power loss in the body. Lost power means lost transmit
distance and lost battery life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
fundamentally change the design of implantable antennas by tattooing (nearly
invisible) conductive nanoparticles in the skin and adjacent fat layer at the
body surface, coupling passively to the implant. The antenna will be able to use
as much surface area as needed, and dramatically reduce the transmission lost in
the body tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a fundamental, transformative
shift in antenna design for implantable medical devices, enabling the next
generation of tiny wireless sensors and devices in the body. This work will
evaluate the fundamental options and tradeoffs in implantable antenna design
including losses in the antenna (resistive losses), coupled feed system (near
field body losses), and antenna radiator (body losses). Both SAR and MedRadio
regulations will be taken into account. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the direct benefits to improved medical care,
this project includes a substantial educational outreach/dissemination component
for undergrad/K12 retention and recruitment and general public interest. In
addition to traditional scientific dissemination, video tutorials, lab tours,
interviews with the research team, etc. will be produced and disseminated
broadly following methods currently in use by the PI. Engaging public outreach
will leverage this compelling bio-themed NSF research project (having likely
appeal to a diverse audience) for use as a recruitment and retention tool in
undergraduate programs and high school science/math programs, or just for
general interest. This will help students see that their
math/science/engineering programs can be used for fascinating science that can
make a difference in the world, and will help show the fun and excitement of
research and invention.