* 1310634
* Sensing, Modeling, and Control of Smart Sustainable Microgrids
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Anthony Kuh, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 371,800.00

Intellectual Merit: This project considers both theoretical and practical
aspects of&lt;br/&gt;response, control, and status of the University of Hawai`i
Manoa (UHM) campus&lt;br/&gt;electrical microgrid and studies its behavior when
distributed renewable energy sources&lt;br/&gt;are added. This project will
transform the UHM campus's electrical distribution network&lt;br/&gt;into a more
modern, intelligent and responsive microgrid which relies on a greater
share&lt;br/&gt;of locally generated energy and energy efficient practices.
Three interlinked research&lt;br/&gt;projects will be integrated into the
education program on smart grids, renewable energy,&lt;br/&gt;and energy
efficiency. The first component assembles all relevant information about
the&lt;br/&gt;state of the microgrid and surrounding environment. A second
component models and&lt;br/&gt;analyzes the microgrid using probabilistic signal
processing and networking models to&lt;br/&gt;accurately predict the state of
the microgrid and detect anomalous events (e.g. ramps in&lt;br/&gt;amount of
solar PV produced and electrical grid outages). Once accurate models
are&lt;br/&gt;constructed and verified through simulations and data gathering,
the third project&lt;br/&gt;provides decision-making capability for the
microgrid using distributed control and&lt;br/&gt;optimization algorithms to
create a secure and stable microgrid to reduces costs and&lt;br/&gt;energy use.
Students and faculty will work in a newly created smart campus energy
lab&lt;br/&gt;(SCEL) which will house the data and networking components of the
UHM campus&lt;br/&gt;microgrid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: UHM
researchers and students will be able to combine what they&lt;br/&gt;learn in
the classroom with theoretical and practical research projects in the SCEL and
on&lt;br/&gt;the UHM campus microgrid. This understanding and practical
knowledge will lead to&lt;br/&gt;better insight on the design and integration of
new technology for the microgrid and&lt;br/&gt;future utility-scale smart grids.
Through collaborations with the Native Hawaiian&lt;br/&gt;Science and
Engineering Mentorship Program (NHSEMP) and the Society of
Women&lt;br/&gt;Engineers (SWE), the project will also target underrepresented
students. This project&lt;br/&gt;differs from other smart sustainable microgrids
being deployed at other academic&lt;br/&gt;institutions and communities as our
energy profile is unique (Hawaii pays the highest&lt;br/&gt;electricity prices
in the nation), we will incorporate large shares of distributed
renewable&lt;br/&gt;energy (rooftop PV), and Hawai`i has unique micro-climates
(no heating and wide&lt;br/&gt;variability in rainfall and cloud cover).