* 1310224
* Travel Support for 7th International Conference on Levy Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Mark Meerschaert, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

The 7th International Conference on Levy Processes: Theory and Applications will
be held on July 15 - 19, 2013 in Wroclaw, Poland. Levy processes are stochastic
processes that evolve in continuous time on a continuous state space. They
include Poisson processes, Brownian motion, and any other process with
independent and stationary increments. Levy processes provide a useful class of
processes with jumps for applications in many diverse fields of science and
engineering, as well as many useful models in mathematics and statistics. This
conference is held every other year, and brings together leading researchers in
the field. There is also a strong tradition of including students and beginning
reserchers, includign a "summer school" that precedes the meeting.

This NSF travel grant will provide financial support for attendees, with
preference given to students and beginnign researchers. This technical
conference brings togetherleading international researchers in random process
modeling, including both deep theory and practical applications. Important
applications include finance, physics, climate, and water resources. This series
of conferences has become a valuable resource for students and beginning
researchers, exposing them to the latest advances, and providing useful
networking opportunities. There is also a "summer school" to prepare for the
meeting, so that attendees can clearly understand the advanced topics. For more
details, see the conference web site at http://bcc.impan.pl/13Levy/