* 1310441
* Hybrid Inorganic-Nucleic Acid Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Catalina Achim, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/2017
* USD 405,000.00

Through this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
is funding Professor Catalina Achim at Carnegie Mellon University to carry out
studies of metal-containing, ligand-modified nucleic acid structures, with a
particular emphasis on peptide nucleic acid (PNA) triplexes. Metal complexes
with coordination number 3 to 6 will be incorporated in the PNA triplexes by
substitution of a triplet of nucleobases with two or three mono-, bi-, or tri-
dentate ligands. The ligand modification of PNA triplexes will be used to
integrate metal ions with larger DNA nanostructures, which have an extensive
range of topologies and geometries. This method may lead in the future to
complex inorganic nucleic acid structures with interesting magnetic and
electronic properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current technological advances and
needs require the manufacturing of materials that have morphological features
close to the size of molecules and atoms. A candidate for building blocks for
such materials are nucleic acids, of which DNA is an example, because the
information needed to assemble two- and three dimensional structures from
nucleic acids can be encoded in their sequence just as the genetic information
is encoded. Research in Professor Achim's group takes advantage of these
properties of nucleic acids and makes use of chemical synthesis and spectroscopy
methods to create and characterize metal-containing, nucleic acid
nanostructures. The graduate and undergraduate students who conduct the research
acquire knowledge and skills of chemistry, biology and physics. The results of
the proposed research are integrated in a course on Functional Nanodevices Based
on Nucleic Acids for graduate and undergraduate students. Professor Achim is the
Director of DNAZone, the outreach program of the Center for Nucleic Acids
Science and Technology at Carnegie Mellon. She and her students participate in
the development and delivery of the outreach activities of DNAZone, which are
intended to improve the engagement, attitudes and beliefs of 4th-12th grade
students towards STEM careers.