* 1310453
* Unimolecular Micelles: Design, Synthesis, and Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Thomas Seery, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Douglas Adamson of the University of
Connecticut will synthesize and study polymers that can form stable, single
chain globules in solution. Natural proteins, in a very general sense, are
polymers containing mostly hydrophobic monomers and a relatively thin layer of
hydrophilic monomers at the surface of the protein globule. It has been
predicted that single chain polymer globules can be stabilized to aggregation
and precipitation if they possess this type of morphology. To test this
prediction, polymers will be synthesized that contain a hydrophobic main chain
and a set number of hydrophilic grafts serving to stabilize the single polymer
chain against flocculation and precipitation. The design of the polymer
architecture will be driven and informed by theoretical work that predicts the
effect of the placement and type of hydrophilic components on the stability and
morphology of the synthesized polymer. The broader impacts such research include
increasing our understanding of the folding and morphology of proteins, as well
as opening the door for synthetic materials that may perform some of the
functions of proteins. In addition, the project will involve visits to local
schools and will contribute to the training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of precisely defined structures that
have dimensions on the order of nanometers (termed "nanostructures") continues
to be a challenge for chemists. Nature has perfected many methods to assembly
nanostructures, including the folding of proteins into precisely defined
3-dimensional nanostructures. Polymers are long chain organic molecules and are
found in many facets of everyday life that utilize plastics, including food
packaging, structural materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and
lightweight electronic devices. This project seeks to understand how synthetic
polymers can mimic the nanostructure forming abilities of proteins at a very
fundamental level. Ultimately, precisely defined synthetic nanostructures could
impact technologies ranging from pharmaceuticals to biotechnology and
electronics.