* 1310979
* Utilizing likelihood models for phylogenetic reconstruction from discrete phenotypic characters
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* April Wright, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 6,820.00

Presently, there are two major methods for estimating phylogenetic trees from
morphological data. In this study, researchers will simulate morphological data
and use these data to to test the effectiveness of these methods. A strength of
using simulated data is the ability to manipulate relevant parameters to create
data sets that are relevant to many different types of researchers and
scientific questions. The goals of this project are twofold: to provide
practical recommendations and guidelines for best practices in estimating
phylogenetic trees from morphological data and to understand the strengths and
weaknesses of various methods for estimating phylogenetic
trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estimating a phylogenetic tree is a common way to
understand the relationships among different groups of organisms. These trees
can be used to understand the evolution of a trait, to test hypotheses of
biogeography, or to infer other aspects of the evolution and ecology of
organisms. Fossils are the only way that scientists can directly observe long-
extinct organisms, making the study of fossil data a relevant practice, even as
the price of DNA sequencing falls. The results from this project can be used to
inform scientists about appropriate methods for inferring phylogenetic
relationships from fossilized remains.