* 1310087
* Study of gap symmetry and gap structures in iron pnictides using Josephson junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Xiaoxing Xi, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 375,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This project will use heterojunctions between the
electron-doped and hole-doped iron pnictide superconductors to perform the
phase-sensitive test of the sign-changing s-wave symmetry and use high quality
tunnel junctions to measure the values and distributions of the multiple energy
gaps of these superconductors. The iron pnictides and chalcogenides, with Tc up
to 55 K, are a new family of high temperature superconductors with
unconventional mechanism and unusual properties. The disconnected electron and
hole Fermi surfaces in the iron pnictides give rise to unconventional pairing
symmetries and gap structures, with the sign-changing s-wave pairing widely
believed to be the correct one among several possibilities. Proving this pairing
symmetry unambiguously with phase-sensitive measurements is the "Holy Grail" of
the iron pnictide research. Josephson effect between the electron- and hole-
doped iron pnictides has been suggested as the most promising technique to probe
the gap symmetry and gap structures. This project will fabricate the
electron/hole heterojunctions by depositing epitaxial thin films of the
electron-doped pnictide on the single crystals of the hole-doped pnictide and
use them to perform the phase-sensitive measurement. This basic research on iron
pnictides could lead to the understanding of the mechanism of high-temperature
superconductivity in general and lead to the discovery of more new
superconductors with even higher Tc and better properties. This project will
provide multidisciplinary training for a PhD student and provide research
experiences for undergraduate students.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** The iron-containing superconductors, including
the pnictides that contain arsenic and the chalcogenides that contain selenium,
were discovered in 2008 to have superconducting transition temperatures up to 55
degrees Kelvin. They are a new family of high temperature superconductors with
unconventional mechanism and unusual properties, one of which is the unique
symmetry of the characteristic superconducting order parameter in the momentum
space. It is widely believed, but not yet unambiguously proven experimentally,
that both positive and negative order parameters exist in the iron-containing
superconductors, but the signs do not change with respect to the directions in
the momentum space. This project attempts to prove this symmetry using Josephson
junctions between an electron-doped and a hole-doped pnictide; the junction will
be formed by growing an electron-doped pnictide thin film on a hole-doped
pnictide single crystal. Understanding the symmetry of the superconducting order
parameter in the iron-containing superconductors can help to understand the
mechanism of high-temperature superconductivity in general, which in turn could
lead to the discovery of more new superconductors with even higher transition
temperatures and better properties. This project will provide multidisciplinary
training for one graduate student for his/her PhD degree, and provide research
experiences for undergraduate students at Temple University, an urban university
with a diverse student population.