* 1310858
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Johanna Nevitt, Nevitt                  Johanna        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

-----

This action funds Johanna M. Nevitt of Stanford University to conduct a research
project in the Geosciences area during the summer of 2013 at the University of
Otago in Dunedin, New Zealand. The project title is "Improving Numerical Models
of Fault Deformation at the Crustal Scale." The host scientist is Dr. Virginia
G. Toy.

Numerical models of fault-related deformation are built upon a number of
physical equations, including constitutive equations that define how rock
deforms in response to stress. Implementing accurate constitutive equations is
essential to producing significant and reliable model results. Rocks located
within fault-zones may creep (i.e., deform viscously) in either a grain size
sensitive (GSS) or grain size insensitive (GSI) manner, which is believed to
result in either aseismic (steady-state) slip or seismic (earthquake-producing)
slip on faults, respectively. Constitutive equations for GSS and GSI creep are
currently poorly constrained, which limits our ability to model fault-related
deformation, particularly at the crustal scale. This project determines
appropriate constants for GSS and GSI creep constitutive equations by analyzing
samples collected by scientific drilling into New Zealand?s Alpine Fault Zone.
Microchemical and microstructural maps, created using energy-dispersive x-ray
spectroscopy (EDX) and electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) analysis of the
samples, reveal whether deformation occurred via GSS or GSI creep. The maps can
then be imported into Elle, a modeling platform for simulating the two-
dimensional evolution of microstructures in a polycrystalline material during
and following deformation. Numerical experiments are conducted in Elle to
determine the constants for the creep constitutive equations that best simulate
the fabrics observed in the samples. Dr. Toy will eventually use these
parameterized constitutive equations in crustal scale numerical models of the
earthquake cycle on the Alpine Fault.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Upon returning to the U.S., the fellow will share what she
learned with current and future users of Stanford's EBSD lab by creating a
quartz-specific EBSD manual and leading a seminar on strategies specific to
analyzing and modeling quartz deformation. This will be valuable, since no
faculty members at Stanford are currently using EBSD analysis or numerical
methods to study quartz deformation. In addition, the fellow will share her
experience studying the Alpine Fault in New Zealand through "Geokids," a
Stanford University outreach program that teaches basic earth science to
elementary school children. In a more formal sense, the results of this project
will be disseminated at the American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting in San
Francisco in December 2013, and will be published in a peer-reviewed journal.