* 1310574
* Chemical, Electrochemical and Physical Properties of Metallosupramolecular Architectures with Tetrazine Based Ligands Including Investigations of Anion-pi Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kim Dunbar, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 465,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Kim Dunbar of the Texas A&M University will
study various aspects of anion-pi interactions: anion interactions with aromatic
molecules. The goals are to study metal complexes with ligands containing
electropositive tetrazine rings that form unusual molecular ring assemblies
including five-membered pentagons exhibiting high stabilities in solution and
remarkable flexibility that allows them to be easily converted to other ring
sizes by the addition of different anions. Another goal is to study chemical
reactions triggered by the capture or release of anions which may be a way to
alter the physical and chemical properties of the assemblies. Data from solid-
state, solution, gas phase and computational studies will be used to assess the
strength of anion-pi forces and to assist in future experiments aimed at
predicting structures. One application of this research will be to design very
large polyhedral molecules by using the five-membered ring molecules as building
blocks. Another application will be to construct molecular magnets by taking
advantage of the ease of reduction of tetrazine ligands to prepare organic
radicals that can act as bridges between paramagnetic metal ions. The broader
impacts of the research include graduate student and postdoctoral researcher
training in the chemical sciences, efforts to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in chemical science research, and outreach to local
museums and science fairs in order to enhance scientific and technological
understanding. The versatility of skills required to work on the project
presents an excellent opportunity for students to learn about a broad spectrum
of research disciplines.

In this project the assembly of organic molecules and metal ions will be
harnessed to promote the formation of large geometric structures that often can
display unusual properties useful for applications. This work will expand the
repertoire of chemistry that can be used to create magnetic and conducting
materials starting with molecular components. The results of these studies could
have many important long term impacts on a variety of applications in which
magnetic materials are important, including non-volatile memory and spintronics.