* 1310705
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Debra Perrone, Perrone                 Debra
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Debra Perrone of Vanderbilt Institute for Energy and
Environment at Vanderbilt University to conduct a research project in
Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at the National University of Singapore in
Singapore. The project title is "Sri Lanka's Water-Food-Energy Nexus: An
Economic Analysis of Water Allocation Schemes." The host scientist is Dennis
Wichelns, Director of the Institute of Water Policy.

The water-energy-food nexus is a central focus in efforts to allocate scarce
water resources. This work explores how Sri Lanka, a small island nation in
South Asia, makes choices in allocating its water resources with respect to
energy and food: water for energy and economic growth or water for agriculture,
food security, and cultural preservation. A portfolio of scenarios is created to
understand projected water supply and water demand within Sri Lanka over the
next twenty years. Different water management scenarios are explored using
opportunity cost theory, and tradeoffs are analyzed to prioritize water
allocation.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Dissemination of the anticipated results is a key aspect
of the proposed work, as the results are intended to inform decision makers and
support effective management of water resources. All results from this researchl
will be published in peer-reviewed journals, presented at national and
international conferences, and available on the Vanderbilt Institute for Energy
and Environment webpage.