* 1310731
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Heather Harper-Lovelady, Harper-Lovelady         Heather        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Heather Harper-Lovelady of the University of South Florida to
conduct a research project in the Mathematics and Physical Sciences area during
the summer of 2013 at Laboratory of Bio-Solid State Science, Waseda University
in Tokyo, Japan. The project title is "Characterizing Environmental Effects on
the Physical Properties of Collagen." The host scientist is Professor Toru
Asahi.

Many tissues in the body such as ligament, bone, and cornea, derive much of
their structural and mechanical properties from type I collagen. All of these
tissues have drastically different physical properties but they are all
constructed using the same collagen molecule. How the same molecule can be
responsible for such a range of tissues is of great importance in the fields of
tissue engineering, bio-technology, and more. Previous research has demonstrated
that ionic environment plays a key role in the physical properties of individual
collagen molecules. For collagen to form a tissue, such as cornea, it has to be
assembled in a specific pattern to create a sheet. It remains unknown how the
physical properties of individual molecules affect a larger scale collagen
sheet. This project investigates the physical properties of collagen sheets and
relates them to previous research on collagen molecules. Comparing the physical
properties of collagen on these different scales will provide valuable knowledge
for engineering collagen based tissues in the future.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, outreach activities are being performed to
introduce high school students to opportunities in international study and
collaboration through scientific research. Both before and after the internship,
local high school students will be introduced to the EAPSI program, NSF, and the
Fellow's research through an interactive web-based blog in written and video
format. The goal of this outreach is to educate, inspire, and encourage students
to pursue education and careers in the STEM fields.