* 1310898
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jamie Smith, Smith                   Jamie          L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Jamie Smith of Ohio University to conduct a research project
in Education and Human Resource Development during the summer of 2013 at the
University of Southern Queensland in Toowoomba, Queensland, Australia. The
project title is "Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge Development in
Science Teacher Preparation: A Mixed Methods Case Study in Queensland,
Australia." The host scientist is Dr. Peter Albion.

This study seeks to identify key characteristics that impact the development of
technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK) in the science teacher
preparation program at a large university in Queensland, Australia. TPACK is a
conceptual framework of a body of knowledge from which teachers draw to
influence practice; it is a dynamic and emergent form of knowledge that informs
the employment of technology for teaching specific subject matter. This study
employs a mixed methods case study approach, including delivery of a TPACK
survey instrument, class observations, faculty and student interviews, and
document analyses, to identify the key characteristics that influence the
development of TPACK among preservice science teachers. The research addresses a
specific need cited in the literature, identifying TPACK impact factors, and
lays a foundation for the conception of a theoretical model of TPACK
development.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. As our nation strives to remain competitive in a
knowledge- and innovation-driven global economy, the preparation of quality
teachers, specifically in STEM fields, is a critical issue. Research conducted
through this fellowship yields significant implications for this agenda.
Findings will be disseminated in the instructional technology, science
education, and teacher education fields via international conferences, scholarly
journal articles and practitioner publications. This study on TPACK in
development in science teacher preparation broadens the current, narrower focus
of Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK) in science education. As both the host
and fellow teach courses relevant to this topic for pre-service teachers and
work closely with science methods faculty, the potential exists for active
application and continued collaboration at both institutions. Results of the
study help inform the preparation of quality science educators on a global
scale.