* 1310893
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* David Fuhry, Fuhry                   David          P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds David Fuhry of The Ohio State University to conduct a research
project in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering area during the
summer of 2013 at Singapore Management University's Living Analytics Research
Center in Singapore. The project title is "Finding and Characterizing
Communities in Online Social Networks: Utilizing Content, Links, Interactions
and Affinities." The host scientist is Ee-Peng Lim.

Important functions and discoveries in the social and computational sciences
relate to the understanding of information networks. A fundamental task in
gaining high-level knowledge from these networks is to find communities within
which nodes are strongly related but between which nodes are only weakly
related. In social networks these communities are found and characterized using
available content, location, time and relationship information. This project
addresses two sets of questions: 1) Social Media Analysis: Given large, dynamic,
noisy networks, how can communities be identified and characterized, and the
predictive power of discovered communities, i.e. to what extent does the
behavior of a community determine or correspond with the individual behavior of
its constituent users? And 2) Systems Challenges: To what extent can emerging
high-performance computer architectures be utilized (e.g. using many standard
processors or graphics processors in parallel within a computer, and using many
networked computers in parallel) and scalable data analysis techniques (e.g. new
high-performance data processing systems under active development by internet
technology companies and the research community) to achieve fast, approximate
results and user-driven interactive discovery on social media data? This
research builds on promising initial results for fast approximate query response
by transforming data according to a computational technique known as "locality-
sensitive hashing," and for distinguishing community differences by a visual-
analytic method of plotting communities' cumulative term (word) frequencies
across local and global axes.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the results - data, tools, and algorithms -
are being disseminated through the publication of one or more research papers in
internationally recognized social-computing research conferences, and as freely
available software posted on the Fellow's web page for others to use and build
on. This dissemination is consistent with the Fellow's strong track record of
research paper and software publication. The Fellow's EAPSI experience will be
featured in a dedicated column of The Ohio State University Department of
Computer Science and Engineering department's Fall newsletter, with a
circulation in the thousands of students, staff, and alumni. Outside of
academia, immediately subsequent to the EAPSI fellowship the Fellow has a Fall
internship at a leading U.S. social network company, Twitter, Inc. (San
Francisco, CA), during which the EAPSI research results will be disseminated and
to the extent possible, used to improve Twitter's capabilities.