* 1310805
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating genomic and paleobotanical data for phylogenetic and biogeographic reconstruction in the basal lamiid family Icacinaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Steven Manchester, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,386.00

Numerous plant groups?approximately 330 families and 60 genera?have distribution
patterns spanning the tropical regions of South America, Africa, and
Australasia. These complex modern distribution patterns suggest a dynamic
history for tropical ecosystems, involving frequent biotic exchange among major
tropical regions over geologic history. Detailed evolutionary studies of
widespread tropical groups can shed considerable light on the historical factors
that have shaped the global distribution patterns of tropical organisms and
ecosystems. However, such studies require extensive fossil evidence to reveal
the timing and location of diversification events, and the fossil record of
tropical plants is notoriously poor. The Icacinaceae, a pantropical family of
flowering plants including approximately 140 species of woody vines and trees,
are unique among tropical groups in that they have an excellent fossil record,
documenting a diversity of genera across wide geographic and geologic ranges.
This makes the Icacinaceae an excellent model for inferring broader historical
patterns of tropical plant expansion and diversification across the tropics.
This project will integrate the extensive fossil record of Icacinaceae with DNA-
based studies of relationships among species in the family. The result will be a
comprehensive picture of the family?s evolutionary history, offering important
broader implications for tropical plant diversification and spread in response
to climatic and geologic changes over the past ~65 million years. Additionally,
this study will resolve the precise evolutionary placement of Icacinaceae in the
flowering plant tree of life, which has been ambiguous in previous studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate cutting-edge DNA sequencing
techniques with traditional morphological and paleobotanical approaches,
providing a diversity of training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students. The synthetic approach employed here will also serve as a
methodological model for future studies aiming to combine DNA and fossil
evidence for reconstructions of historical biogeography. The results of this
research, which will be disseminated at meetings and in peer-reviewed
publications, will be of interest to both tropical biologists and angiosperm
systematists given the broader importance of Icacinaceae for understanding both
tropical biogeography and patterns of morphological evolution across the
flowering plant tree of life.