* 1310825
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evaluating phenotypic consequences of accelerated mutation accumulation in the absence of mating
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Joel Sharbrough, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,630.00

Why sexual reproduction is so overwhelmingly common in nature despite its
profound costs remains an open question in evolutionary biology. One potential
explanation for the predominance of sexual reproduction resides in the benefits
of genetic recombination. A likely important positive outcome of recombination
is that it allows organisms to produce offspring that do not inevitably inherit
harmful mutations borne by their parent(s). Consequently, asexual lineages are
expected to exhibit accelerated accumulation of harmful mutations compared to
sexual lineages, so that asexual lineages would eventually be driven extinct. We
will evaluate the functional impact of mutation accumulation in asexual vs.
sexual lineages using Potamopyrgus antipodarum, a New Zealand freshwater snail
in which accelerated mutation accumulation in asexual lineages has already been
documented. This research will provide the first known attempt to connect
mutation accumulation at the DNA level with functional consequences at the
organismal level in a species in which sexual and asexual individuals regularly
coexist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major component of this project involves
collaboration with more than 100 high school and undergraduate students in which
students will make meaningful contributions to understanding how sexual
reproduction influences genotypes and phenotypes. As such, this research
represents a joint public and scientific effort to better understand the role of
sexual reproduction in the evolution of life.