* 1310318
* Collaborative Research: NanoMine: Data Driven Discovery for Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Linda Schadler, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 120,000.00

Technical Abstract

In the past 15 years, research into nanoreinforced polymers has exploded,
providing numerous examples of property enhancements ranging from altered
thermal, mechanical, electrical, diffusion, optical and other properties. The
amount of experimental data and simulation data, compounded with the data on the
individual constituent phase materials is staggering. At the same time, while
some mechanistic principles underlying property changes have been slowly
uncovered, our ability to both deeply understand the underlying principles and
to design new nanostructured polymers with desired properties from known
processing steps is severely limited by the lack of integration of the
information. To determine the type of property changes that have been observed
requires manual searching of online journal databases, full reading of the
articles, and manual accumulation and then synthesis of the information. This
approach ensures that many relevant papers and articles are overlooked and
allows only rudimentary synthesis of data and understanding of the processing-
structure-property relationships. The birth of the materials genome concept
provides a new paradigm for developing understanding of materials and designing
new material concepts. In this research project, we tackle this challenge in the
domain of polymer nanocomposites. While the materials genome approach has had
some success in the metals field, the polymers area is considerably less
developed and no resources exist for nanocomposite systems. Yet with the
infinite design space available to polymer nanocomposites, it is a prime system
for a new data driven approach. The Intellectual Merit of the work is
application of materials genome concepts to the complex material system of
polymer nanocomposites, with the goal of uncovering the processing-structure-
property relationships. The overarching framework is to consider the material
response as a function of processing conditions, constituents, interactions and
morphology. Specific accomplishments include 1) development of a data resource
(NanoMine) for housing and exchange of polymer nanocomposite data, 2)
development of reduced descriptor sets to characterize data and quantify
structure, and development of new data mining methods to enable discovery of
underlying material physics, 3) integration of simulation tools to augment
experimental data and enable exploration of design concepts. The Broader Impacts
of the work are the NanoMine data resource itself, the new data-driven approach
for materials understanding and discovery, and through use of these tools the
ability to make deeper connections between processing, resulting material
morphology and properties. The creation of an open-source, freely accessible
data resource will provide not only a fast and easy source of information, but
will also link researchers together in new ways. The data driven approach
applied to this one system of nanocomposites, will provide strategies that can
be extended to other material systems, greatly extending its influence. We will
also integrate research and education through interdisciplinary graduate
education including a special project based course. We will include
undergraduates in our research program. This cadre of graduate and undergraduate
students will have an interdisciplinary approach to materials discovery. We will
also reach out to the broader community through NU and RPI High School outreach
days (such as Design Your Future Day and Career Day for Girls) and teach them
about Materials Design and data driven research.

Development of nanoparticle reinforced polymers in the past 15 years has created
new materials with extraordinary properties - such as conducting yet transparent
plastics, tennis balls that retain their bounce longer, and stiffer, stronger
structural plastics for cars and airplanes. Yet the development of these
advanced new materials has been very slow due to lack of integrated information,
both experimental data and simulation tools. Currently, understanding the state
of the field requires manual searching of online journal databases, full reading
of the articles, and manual accumulation and then synthesis of the information.
No resources yet exist for assembling the data, nor do tools exist to allow
assembled data to be effectively mined for correlations, much less to enable
rapid design of new materials. In this research, we will develop a data resource
(NanoMine) for housing and exchange of polymer nanocomposite data and
development of new data mining methods to enable discovery of underlying
material physics. We will integrate of simulation tools to augment experimental
data and enable exploration of design concepts. The creation ofan open-source,
freely accessible data resource will provide a fast and easy source of
information, and will enable both fundamental new understanding of materials as
well as much more efficient material design. The data driven approach applied to
this one system of nanocomposites, will provide strategies that can be extended
to other material systems, greatly extending its influence. We will also
integrate research and education in several ways from K-12 through to practicing
engineers.