* 1311436
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The regulatory landscape of Hox gene expression and evolution in fish fins
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Neil Shubin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 18,039.00

One of the most important discoveries from the rise of genomics is that animals,
despite their staggering differences in shape and size, utilize a common set of
genes. How does the incredible diversity of animal forms arise if animals all
contain the same core genetic code? There is a growing body of evidence that
changes in the time, location, and amount of gene expression is responsible for
the evolution of structures. This project is aimed at determining how regulation
of gene expression may have influenced the defining feature of limbs, which is
the presence of the hand. Fish do not possess hands, but they possess all of the
genes necessary to build one. Thus, the goal of this project is to identify the
gene regulatory elements in zebrafish that drive gene expression in fins, and
compare them to their counterparts in mouse. This knowledge will help us
understand what aspects of fish fin development are ancient, and what aspects
have evolved to be specific for building a hand. &lt;br/&gt; As the hand is a
?new? feature of limbs that is not present in fins, this project will shed light
on how novel features may originate during the evolutionary process.
Investigating how genetic switches have influenced the fin to limb transition
may provide a general model for how complex and unique features of animals have
arisen. In addition, this project is collaboration with a lab in Seville, Spain.
This type of collaboration between institutions is beneficial to the greater
scientific community by promoting exchange of ideas and techniques in genetics,
especially as genomics gets further integrated into evolutionary biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;