* 1311220
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms Of Coral Adaptation In The Florida Keys
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Mikhail Matz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 18,782.00

Coral reefs in the Florida Keys have experienced unprecedented declines over the
last 30 years. Hard corals, the backbone of the reef ecosystem, have seen their
populations reduced by 44% since 1995. However, the loss of coral is not uniform
and it is unclear why some reefs in this system are more resilient to stress
than others. For example, reefs closer to shore that are exposed to temperature
extremes and pollutants also exhibit higher coral growth and cover than offshore
reefs that experience more stable temperatures and better water quality. This
project will measure gene activity in corals that were experimentally
transplanted between inshore and offshore reef environments. This will help
identify the stressors acting at each reef and the mechanisms used by corals to
adapt to them. Understanding the physiological mechanisms used by reef-building
corals to adapt to local conditions can help refine predictions about how they
will respond in time to the effects of global climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reef-related activities in the Florida Keys generate $3.4
billion in sales and income annually and support 36,000 jobs. Loss of this
ecosystem would be devastating both ecologically and economically. The results
of this project will advance understanding of the relationship between the
environment and the state of the coral reefs. It will also identify mechanisms
of coral adaptation, and provide molecular tools to assess coral condition in
natural environments which will better inform management practices aimed at
conserving this valuable ecosystem. Training of students would occur.