* 1311677
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Comparative thermal physiology and evolution of Australo-papuan Eugongylus skinks: testing Janzen's hypothesis for gradients in species diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Craig Moritz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2015
* USD 16,380.00

An understanding of temperature physiology is necessary to comprehend many
biological phenomena, such as temporal and spatial patterns of growth, species
diversity, and range size. Comparative studies of thermal physiology also yield
insight into how intrinsic physiological limits affect the propensity for
speciation and explain macroevolutionary patterns, such as the latitudinal
diversity gradient. The proposed research will examine temperature responses and
traits for a set of related forest lizards across an extensive latitudinal
gradient (tropical New Guinea to temperate Tasmania) and between montane and
lowland taxa, all in a phylogenetic context. Central predictions are that
thermal tolerance breadths will be narrower in species at lower than high
latitudes and wider for species at high compared to low altitudes. Measurements
of thermal tolerance and other physiological parameters will be considered in
relation to phylogeographic data to test the hypothesis that tropical taxa are
more prone to topographic isolation and hence speciation due to physiological
limits.

This project seeks to explicate mechanisms responsible for a major
macroevolutionary pattern, the latitudinal diversity gradient, but it also has
implications for conservation. To minimize biodiversity loss, ecosystems must be
managed by prioritizing conservation areas based on vulnerability, which
requires that factors governing sensitivity to environmental change be
identified. Sensitivity is controlled by intrinsic traits of a species, such as
physiological limits. Mechanistic species distribution models that integrate
physiological traits may provide greater predictive power when extrapolating to
novel situations likely to cause range shifts or extinctions. Thermal
physiological traits of species estimated through this research will be
incorporated into such models to assess which species might be most vulnerable
with impending climate change and thus identify conservation priorities.