* 1311052
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Steven Callen, Callen                  Steven         T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Steven Thomas Callen of Saint Louis University to conduct a
research project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at the Kunming
Institute of Botany in Kunming, Yunnan, China. The project title is "A
comparative analysis of floral reproductive traits between native and introduced
kudzu (Pueraria montana)." The host scientist is Dr. Hong Wang.

The ability of invasive plant species to reproduce in new environments may be
limited by the availability of compatible mates and pollinators. In such
situations, shifts in plant mating systems (for example, from outcrossing to
self-fertilization) may promote invasion by providing enhanced fruit and seed
production. Current understanding of mating system shifts during invasion is
limited, particularly for perennial (long-lived) invaders that reproduce both
sexually and clonally. In this study, the Fellow uses the vine kudzu (Pueraria
montana), one of the most potent plant invaders in North America, as a model to
investigate the consequences of invasion for the mating systems of perennial,
clonal plants. The reproductive biology (pollinator and pollen availability and
its capacity for fruit/seed set and self-fertilization) from its native range
(China) to that from its introduced range (North America) are compared.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this study supplements other comparative
studies of plant invasions among China and North America to identify common
factors driving invasion success between the two countries. Photos and videos
will be integrated with the knowledge and results generated from this fellowship
for presentations at national and international scientific meetings, reports for
conservation organizations, and teaching activities. Establishing international
collaborations allows the Fellow to connect undergraduate and high school
students with Chinese researchers through video conferencing, helping to expand
student concepts of scientific research to a global view.