* 1311121
* Enhancing the Capacity of Developing Nations in Regional Global Change Research in Asia and the Pacific
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Linda Stevenson, Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change Research
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 488,000.00

This award provides support for international collaboration in global change
research in the Asia Pacific region. The Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change
Research (APN) was formed in 1996 as a result of President Bush?s Rose Garden
speech calling for international cooperation in global change challenges. The
APN seeks to make its research results available to help the development of
science-based strategies and decision-making processes, as well as the
development of scientific capacity to address these important issues. This award
will support multidisciplinary research that focuses on key issues of global
environmental challenges in the Asia Pacific region. The results are expected to
provide a strong scientific basis for decision-making at many levels. The United
States, as member country of the APN, is considered a crucial partner in this
process providing not only financial support but also scientific leadership that
permits the region to scientifically develop and cope with the impacts of global
change. Promoting US leadership and involvement in environmental change research
in the Asia Pacific region and ensuring US participation in these activities
positively impacts the not only the US science communities, but also the science
communities in other countries. The challenges of global environmental change
are inherently international and the Asia-Pacific region not only has a great
deal of research to contribute to global change phenomena but is also one of the
most vulnerable regions to the impacts of global change. The outputs from this
proposal will enhance the capacity of developing country researchers to conduct
global change research at regional and sub-regional levels; and continued growth
of a network of young and leading intellectual researchers in the AP region
through international cooperative activities with leading US and other countries
in the Asia Pacific region.