* 1311450
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Blood meal source as an ecological determinant of bacterial community dynamics in the tick vector AMBLYOMMA AMERICANUM
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Thomas Gillespie, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 05/31/2014
* USD 20,116.00

A key obstacle to understanding the ecology of tick-borne diseases is the
identification of the specific vertebrate animals, or hosts, on which ticks
feed. Each host is potentially important because different species contain
different combinations of nutrients, immune system molecules, and microbes that
can affect pathogen transmission by the ticks. This doctoral dissertation
improvement project will adapt existing molecular techniques to amplify trace
remains of DNA from previous tick blood meals in order to determine past host
use. Gene sequencing methods will then be used to determine the effect of prior
hosts on the composition of bacterial communities in host-seeking ticks. This
information will help to explain variation in bacterial communities among ticks
and to predict the abundance and distribution of infectious ticks in the
environment. Assay development and testing will use the lone star tick, the most
common tick biting humans and animals in two thirds of the continental USA. It
is the known vector of several human and veterinary pathogens and the carrier of
many other bacteria whose significance in disease transmission is not well
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of a new approach to blood meal
analysis will provide a valuable tool to all researchers who study the ecology
of blood-feeding arthropods, such as many medically and economically important
tick species. The assay improves efficiency by exploiting recent advances in DNA
sequencing technology to establish and increase sample throughput. The project
will train undergraduate students in field and laboratory research involving
both ecological and molecular methods. Finally, the researchers present their
results to the staff and visitors to several Georgia state parks.