* 1311390
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Causes and consequences of flower color variation in Aquilegia coerulea
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Scott Hodges, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,890.00

Genetic variation between individuals is ubiquitous across the tree of life, and
a requirement for both adaptive and non-adaptive evolutionary change. Processes
that affect the genetic variation within species can affect their evolutionary
potential. Geographic differences in the strength and direction of natural
selection lead to local adaptation of populations and the maintenance of genetic
variation at a species level, even when variation would have otherwise have been
lost. Although this process has potentially dramatic consequences for adaptation
by natural selection, its relative importance in shaping the evolutionary fate
of species is unknown. Rocky Mountain columbine grows at high elevations in the
Southern Rockies, a region characterized by strong environmental gradients such
as summer precipitation (i.e. monsoonal rain in the south and almost none in the
north). The proposed research will identify variable genetic regions through
whole-genome sequencing of hundreds of individuals across the species?
distribution, and patterns of genetic variation will be used to identify those
regions that are experiencing geographically variable natural selection.
Greenhouse experiments will test whether precipitation could differentially
affect fitness of variants for one trait that shows geographic variation, flower
color.

The proposed research will provide important insight into how environmental
differences across a species range affect genetic variation at the whole-genome
level. This relationship is critical to understanding how biological diversity
originates and is maintained through time in the face of a variable and changing
environment. In light of rapid global climate change, such an understanding
takes on particular significance. Training of students will result from this
work.