* 1311145
* Dissertation Research: Effects of mating on behavioral and neuronal stress response in male and female rats
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Jenna McHenry, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 19,110.00

Mating is a socially rewarding experience that may exert protective benefits to
health and fitness and buffers against the deleterious effects of stress across
a number of mammalian and non-mammalian species. However, the neurobiological
mechanisms that underlie these effects are poorly understood, and studies
inclusive of female subjects are extremely limited. Using both male and female
rodent models, the investigators will utilize a combination of behavioral,
cellular, and neurochemical studies to better understand the impact of mating
history on stress-related systems. In-vivo neurochemical studies will also allow
for the collection and analysis of neurotransmitter release in awake and
behaving animals during mating and a stressful encounter. Mating history is
expected to dampen stress reactivity through neurochemical changes in regions of
the brain that differ between males and females, and differences may be observed
between males and females. The evolutionary advantage for the anxiety-reducing,
stress-buffering, and rewarding aspects of mating may be to increase an animal's
willingness to explore new environments to search for mating partners, and thus
facilitate reproduction and ultimately pass on its genes. This research will
advance a broader scientific field that includes our understanding of
differences between males and females and similarities in the behavioral and
neurobiological systems regulating stress and reproduction and how these systems
interact. In addition, it will have a broader impact on a number of
undergraduates who are trained in neuroscience research in this lab. These
students currently include members of groups traditionally underrepresented in
science. Further, the investigators will talk to K-12 students about the
dissertation research and teach basic neuroscience through outreach activities
including Brain Awareness Week and the North Florida Brain Bee, to promote
scientific interest in the local community.