* 1311757
* Student Travel Support To Attend International Electric Propulsion Conference
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Michael Keidar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

Subjects that will be addressed in the conference cover all areas of electric
propulsion (EP), such as: Hall Thrusters, Ion Thrusters, Field Emission and
Colloid Thrusters, MPD (magneto-plasma dynamic) Thrusters, Pulsed Plasma
Thrusters, Resistojets/Arcjets, Other electrothermal, electromagnetic or
electrostatic thruster concepts, Innovative or advanced electric propulsion
concepts, Cathode and other component and materials technologies, EP propellant
feed systems, Power and power processing for EP systems. On any of the above
concepts or systems the topics of interest include but are not limited to:
Physics, Fundamental studies, Analytical Modeling, Numerical simulations,
Laboratory and Space Testing, Diagnostics, Lifetime Characterization, Mission
Analysis, Systems Analysis, Development Application, and In-flight experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future of the research field depends upon attracting
bright young people. The IEPC has a strong tradition of encouraging and
promoting student participation from all over the world. This award will provide
partial travel support for PhD students to attend and present the results of
their work at the meeting. Student travel award competition will be announced
via the conference web site. Applicants will be asked to send their Abstract and
letter of support from the research adviser. Applications will be reviewed by
the Technical Committee. Preference will be given to women and underrepresented
minorities. Scientific and technological advances will be aided by the
interaction among students and the US and foreign participants.