* 1311290
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of rhizobial mutualisms in the establishment and colonization of non-native acacia species in California
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Kyle Harms, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2015
* USD 19,240.00

Plants that harbor nitrogen-fixing bacteria, such as alfalfa and soybean, are an
important natural source of soil fertility. The bacteria also increase the
growth of their host plants, and some wild plants with N-fixing bacteria become
highly invasive; they spread and crowd out other species when introduced by
humans to a new region. This project will test the hypothesis that the
invasiveness of these introduced plants is determined by their ability to form
relationships with the N-fixing bacteria in their new habitats, or by whether
their own N-fixing bacteria have been introduced along with them. Researchers
will compare the species of trees and shrubs in the genus Acacia that have been
introduced to California from Australia. Some of these species have spread
widely, while others have not become invasive. The project will use molecular
genetic techniques to distinguish native, Californian, N-fixing bacteria from
introduced, Australian bacteria, and test whether the more invasive species are
more able to harbor Californian bacteria, have more Australian bacteria, or
depend less upon N-fixing bacteria for their own
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Australian Acacias have become invasive in the U.S.
and around the world, threatening agricultural lands and areas of conservation
concern, and reducing water supplies. Results from this project will help
managers control the spread of these trees and of other N-fixing, invasive
plants. Researchers will actively disseminate results to habitat restoration
programs near San Francisco and San Diego. The project will also train a Ph.D.
student and two undergraduates and develop presentations for K-12 students in
Louisiana.