* 1311002
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Page Quinton, Quinton                 Page           C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Page Quinton of The University of Missouri to conduct a
research project in Geoscience during the summer of 2013 at the Geological
Survey of New South Wales in Sydney. The project title is "Constraining Global
Sea Surface Temperatures Trends during the Late Ordovician Period in New South
Wales Australia." The host scientist is Dr. Ian Percival.

This project establishes the first high-resolution sea surface temperature
record of the Australian continent during the Late Ordovician (a time period
from 454 to 443 million years ago) using conodont elements (the teeth-like
structures located in the gills of a small marine animal, referred to as
conodonts) collected from New South Wales, Australia. Previous work along these
lines has largely been conducted on rocks from North America making it difficult
to determine if observed patterns were global or regional. These results have
implications for the role atmospheric carbon dioxide on climate evolution, the
timing of Ordovician glaciation, and the relationship between glaciation and the
mass extinction event at the end of the Ordovician Period. Furthermore,
knowledge of the global climate has societal relevance. Mechanism which governed
past changes in global climate, continue to do so today. A better understanding
of them will contribute to better predictions of possible changes going forward
especially on a long time scale.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. In addition, the knowledge and experience gained by the
Fellow will inform and enrich educational experience of the students in the
courses she teaches with an emphasis on uprooting misconceptions and
misunderstandings about the behavior of climatic systems.