* 1311077
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Maxwell Wilson, Wilson                  Maxwell        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Maxwell Christopher Wilson of Arizona State University to
conduct a research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Beijing
Normal University in Beijing, China. The project title is "Gauging the Impacts
of China's South-to-North Water Transfer Project." The host scientist is Dr. Li
Xiaoyan.

The North China Plain (NCP), home to more than 25% of China's population and
served by three rivers (Hai, Huang, and Huai), faces per capita water scarcity
as acute as any region of the world. Exacerbated by the NCP?s critical place in
China's food supply, this scarcity has long lead the Chinese government to seek
alternative measures for alleviating water stress. First conceived in the 1950s
by Chairman Mao, the South-to-North Water Transfer Project (SNWTP) represents
the grandest attempt to permanently solve the NCP's water woes. Started in 2002,
after a 50 year feasibility study, currently one of three planned routes is
completed, delivering 9 billion cubic meters per year of water to the NCP.
However, while construction is ongoing, the impacts of the SNWTP on ecosystems
are unknown. This project aims to close two main knowledge gaps, taking lessons
from similar water transfer projects in Arizona and applying them to the SNWTP.
Specifically this research quantifies both water lost to evaporation and the
impact of habitat fragmentation along the canal route. To assure that the data
are actionable, this project focuses on the middle route of the SNWTP which is
currently under construction.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this research will act as a seed project,
enhancing collaboration between Beijing Normal University and Arizona State
University. Lastly, upon the completion of this project the Fellow and host plan
to share the results directly with policy makers in a formal report as well as
to the broader scientific community though publication in internationally
recognized journals.