* 1311156
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Microbial mediation of polliator performance
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Rebecca Irwin, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2014
* USD 8,909.00

Floral nectar is a fundamental resource important for mediating interactions
between plants and pollinators. As the primary energy source for most
pollinating animals, nectar not only fuels their flight, but also can be an
important determinant of pollinator reproduction. Considering its nutritional
value, it should be of no surprise that microorganisms such as yeasts often
colonize nectar. Yeasts may exploit nectar at the potential expense of plants
and pollinators. For example, yeast metabolic activity has the potential to
modify the taste and nutritional value of nectar, which may affect pollinator
attraction, behavior, and subsequent plant reproduction. Given that yeasts may
affect the nutritional value of nectar, they may also have effects on the
performance and reproduction of pollinators. This research project will
experimentally test the degree to which yeasts in floral nectar affect bumble
bee pollinator behavior and reproduction, and also examine the mechanisms
involved utilizing laboratory experiments. Results from this research will
highlight a previously unstudied factor in plant-pollinator interactions, yeast,
whose growth in nectar may mediate the mutual benefits received by plants and
pollinators from one another.

Bumble bee pollination is a critical ecosystem service that facilitates both
native plant reproduction and agricultural crop yield, as approximately 90% of
flowering plants rely on insects or other animals for pollination. This research
project will identify interactions and mechanisms that may limit bumble bee
development and reproduction, insight that may be important for conservation and
commercial enterprises seeking to preserve or develop species for pollination
services. Moreover, by conducting this research with a commercially important
pollinator for agricultural services, our results may have application to
mechanisms that affect its success. Understanding mechanisms through which
microbial organisms affect plant-animal systems will fill a void in our
knowledge of the ecology of microbial organisms and the role they play in
ecological communities.