* 1311473
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Plastic Worker lifespan and the influence of demand, demography and death on labor economics in the Florida harvester ant (Pogonomyrmex badius)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,03/31/2015
* Walter Tschinkel, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 03/31/2015
* USD 14,649.00

Although a social insect colony may persist for decades, the sterile workers
within it may live only a fraction of a year. Much like cells in a body, the
rate at which workers in a colony senesce should trace the lifespan imposed on
them by their environment. If the death rate in their environment is high,
selection for inexpensive, short-lived, "disposable" workers is predicted. In
workers of the Florida harvester ant (Pogonomyrmex badius), a 5-fold difference
in the rate of cuticle darkening, age at first foraging and lifespan occurs
seasonally. When removed from field mortality factors, longevity in both types
of workers increases greatly, indicating that an individual's potential lifespan
is much greater than its realized lifespan. In social insects, differences in
larval nutrition often yield adults of different size and correlated
characteristics, but in adults of identical body size (as in P. badius), factors
influencing longevity are less clear. This study will investigate how
development rate and longevity are influenced by colony production of workers
with two distinct lifespans and behavioral trajectories. To do so, feeding
profile, metabolic rate, fat content and queen investment will be compared for
short-lived summer workers and long-lived autumn workers in normal and
reciprocal environmental conditions. These findings will help untangle how
division of labor is related to developmental-age in social insects, and how
selection has shaped labor allocation by acting on worker development rate.
These findings will help illuminate lifespan plasticity and regulation of aging
across biological hierarchies. It may also challenge the perception of foragers
in social insects as physiologically depleted and disposable. By engaging
students of all ages in meaningful work in a local ecosystem, this project will
also support public understanding of science and increase awareness of the
unique and charming inhabitants of the Apalachicola National Forest. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data from this study will be
stored electronically at The Florida State University in Tallahassee Florida,
and will be available upon request.