* 1311193
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Carry-over effects in space: Beyond single species studies and towards metacommunity dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Benjamin Van Allen, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2014
* USD 10,435.00

Understanding what factors determine the distribution and abundance of species
across a landscape is a central challenge in ecology. While much progress has
been made, little attention has been paid to the history of individuals. Yet,
where individuals come from and what conditions they have experienced in the
past often strongly affects their current traits and performance. When
interacting with other species, such carry-over effects can have the potential
to alter the dynamics of populations and species interactions. However, the
consequences of these effects for long-term dynamics of communities and the
spatial distribution of species are largely unknown. This research project will
conduct a combination of experiments using the classic model laboratory system
of flour beetle, and apply computational modeling to investigate how carry-over
effects influence the dynamics of communities across variable landscapes. By
explicitly linking variation at the individual level to spatial variation, this
research will provide novel insight into how variation at different
organizational scales interacts to determine community dynamics and species
coexistence in nature.

This research will contribute to society by improving our understanding in
applied areas such as conservation biology and invasive species ecology.
Conservation biology already recognizes that more high quality individuals
improve population persistence, but how individual quality interacts in a
community setting is poorly understood. Determining whether complex community
interactions are important for how carry-over effects alter population dynamics
could open new venues to investigation into conservation program success.
Increased understanding of carry-over effects has implications for predicting
the successful establishment and spread of invasive species as well, since it
explores how habitat quality can combine with species interactions to promote or
stop the movement of a species across a landscape. This project will provide
multiple undergraduate students with research experience and career mentoring,
and will support the dissertation research of a doctoral student.