* 1311037
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Stephanie Bolyard, Bolyard                 Stephanie      C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Stephanie C. Bolyard of University of Central Florida (UCF) to
conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Tongji
University in Shanghai, China. The project title is "Evaluation of Proactive
Treatment Processes to Reduce the Long-Term Pollution Potential of Landfills."
The host scientist is Dr. Pinjing He.

This project investigated the Pump and Treat Aerobic Flushing Bioreactor
Landfill (PTAFBL) as a novel approach to sustainable solid waste management.
This completion phase is a method of immediate pollution removal of releasable
carbon and ammonia-nitrogen as opposed to the traditional method of entombment.
The goal of this innovative approach was to reduce the long-term risk of
landfills by eliminating significant sources of pollution. Outcomes of this
project advance the current understanding of how and when functional stability
of a landfill is met through the characterization of solid waste residuals and
leachate at the molecular level over time.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture, and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal of promoting international collaboration early in the career of scientists,
engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific
workforce. Additionally, as the PI disseminates the results of this research and
the technology is adopted by the waste industry, society will benefit from the
reduced long-term adverse impacts of landfills on human health the environment.
Undergraduate students working in the host researcher's laboratory were involved
in this research and upon return to the U.S. the PI will discuss her experiences
with undergraduate engineering students at UCF. Results from this research will
also be shared through participation in ICubed, a NSF funded project, which is
aimed at informing the UCF community and public about engineering and science
concepts. The PI will specifically participate in the Science, Technology,
Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics (STEAM) activity which encourages STEM
researchers and visual art and design students to create STEM inspired artifacts
(sculptures, paintings, illustrations, and posters). The PI's contributions to
this activity helps promote a greater appreciation and understanding of STEM
fields and their importance in society.