* 1311238
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Behavioral type - environment correlations in three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Simon Pearish, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,569.00

Consistent individual differences in behavior, analogous to personality in
humans, are ubiquitous throughout the animal kingdom. Animals can serve as
models to study the evolutionary and ecological causes and consequences of
personality in ways that are not possible in human psychology. For example,
researchers interested in differences in boldness, aggression, and exploratory
behavior have studied a fish, named the three-spined stickleback, that has a
relatively short lifespan and is easy to care for. Previous studies have shown
that different personalities of three-spined stickleback occur in different
habitats and social environments in nature. The goal of this project is to
determine 1) whether the personality of an individual is shaped by their
environment, i.e. via plasticity; 2) if certain personalities consistently use
certain environments over time (for example, if bold individuals always occur in
large social groups); and 3) whether individuals tend to occur in environments
for which they are well-suited. The project comprises an intensive laboratory-
based experiment and a large-scale study of three-spined stickleback in their
natural environment to provide a complete understanding of why some
personalities are more likely to occur in certain habitats or social
environments. This work has important implications for understanding why
animals, including humans, show such marked variation in behavior that is
consistent across time or context. This project provides ample training
opportunities for undergraduates to become future scientists. The topic of the
research, especially the field component, is highly accessible to a general
audience and will be presented as science-in-action to local citizens and
vacationers throughout the field season in rural Mendocino County, CA.

Data from this project will be made available in the Dryad Digital Repository
(datadryad.org).