* 1311102
* A detector upgrade for OSIRIS: Doubling the sensitivity of the near-IR diffraction limited integral field spectrograph
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2013,09/30/2017
* James Larkin, California Association for Research in Astronomy
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 09/30/2017
* USD 967,848.00

An exciting benefit of the semiconductor revolution that has had tremendous
impact on astronomy at optical and infrared wavelengths has been the development
of ever more sensitive array detectors. These arrays are delivering hitherto-
unimagined improvements in observing efficiency and enabling new and exciting
science projects. This project plans to carry out an upgrade to the array
detector in the OSIRIS instrument deployed on the 10 meter Keck telescope on top
of Mauna Kea. The current science detector, called a Hawaii-2 (H2), will be
replaced with a Hawaii-2RG (H2RG), which has a number of technical features that
significantly enhance its performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OSIRIS
instrument is an integral-field spectrograph (IFS) fed by adaptive optics (AO);
there are only a few such combinations in operation worldwide at the moment. The
non-common-path error is low, less than any other IFS, preserving the
diffraction-limited point-spread-function delivered by the Keck AO system. This
has been a very productive combination scientifically. The older array detector
may be at some risk for failure simply due to its age; the newer array will
offer higher sensitivity (twice as high at many wavelengths) and reduced
detector artifacts. It will have improved multiplexer performance that will
greatly reduce channel-to-channel crosstalk and eliminate a reset anomaly that
degrades some of the readouts in a commonly-used mode of
observing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Keck telescopes have had a major impact on
astronomy education, as evidenced by the 240 PhD theses (now averaging 20/year)
produced as of early 2012 using Keck data. Many leaders in U.S. astronomy are
included in this number. The WMKO (Keck Observatory) provides many graduate
students and post-doctoral fellows direct access to state-of-the-art
instrumentation, including adaptive optics. The OSIRIS upgrade project in
particular will involve a graduate student at UCLA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being provided by NSF's
Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.