* 1311006
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenetic community ecology and diversification of hyperoliid frogs in the Afrotropics
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Jimmy McGuire, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 20,254.00

The lowland rainforests and montane forests of Africa are rich with
biodiversity, but little is known about the ecological processes that have
produced this high diversity. There is considerable debate about whether these
different forest habitats are generating or maintaining diversity, and what
ecological factors limit the number of species found in a given area. It has
been proposed that the historically stable lowland rainforests of West Africa
act to sustain old diversity, whereas the environmentally fluctuating montane
forests of East Africa promote speciation and the generation of new diversity.
This project tests that hypothesis using Hyperoliid frogs, which are Africa?s
most diverse frog family, exhibiting the highest species richness in forested
regions. The research will examine the factors promoting diversity by studying
the number of species of hyperoliid frogs found in a given forest community,
quantifying how ecologically similar those species are to one another, and
determining the evolutionary relationships and ages of the species in the
community. Comparing hyperoliid frog communities distributed across similar
biogeographic regions as well across different kinds of forests, such as high
elevation mountain forests and lowland rainforests, can uncover large-scale
patterns of diversification in tropical Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frogs have
been used as indicator species, whose presence or absence in an environment
provides an assessment of the environmental integrity. The threat of large-scale
deforestation is immediate for most African countries, and habitat alteration
will negatively impact the large numbers of forest dwelling species. By
characterizing communities of hyperoliid frogs in different biogeographic
regions in Africa, this study will establish a baseline for future monitoring
and conservation efforts. Large-scale research across many African countries is
both logistically and financially demanding, and therefore it is critical to
establish and facilitate interactions within the community of researchers
working in Africa. This project is the result of a major collaborative effort
among over 22 researchers working in research institutions or universities
located in the US, Europe, and Africa, and brings together a diverse group of
researchers that will facilitate future cooperative efforts on similar projects.