* 1311194
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms of receiver psychology in acoustic communication
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Katrina Schrode, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 06/30/2015
* USD 19,502.00

Humans and other animals often communicate acoustically in noisy social
environments. These environments present serious challenges to effective
communication when multiple individuals signal simultaneously. A fundamental
goal of auditory neuroscience is to understand how nervous systems group
together the different sounds produced by one source in the presence of multiple
competing sources. This research investigates auditory grouping in an animal
model that communicates acoustically in large social groups and has a unique
auditory system. The work uses behavioral assays and neural recordings to study
how anurans (frogs and toads) use frequency cues to group the discrete sound
elements comprising communication signals. Preliminary studies suggested that
use of frequency cues by anurans is supported by two mechanisms, one similar to
that of mammals and birds and one resulting from the unique physiology of anuran
inner ears. Further study will investigate these mechanisms at various levels of
the anuran auditory system. It is expected that low levels of the auditory
system will use mechanisms similar to those that have been observed in other
animals, but that there will be two distinct variations, again reflecting the
anuran ears' unique physiology. At higher levels of the auditory system, a new
mechanism is expected to manifest which combines frequency cues with temporal
cues to produce a neural "readout" of the perceptual state of the animal. This
research will contribute to a broader and more general understanding of how
auditory systems perceive acoustic communication signals in noisy environments.
Such data are essential for understanding the potential diversity of ways that
evolution may solve common problems in diverse groups of animals. This basic
biological knowledge, in turn, could one day benefit people with impaired
hearing. The project also integrates research with the training and teaching of
undergraduate and graduate students and additionally will foster an
international collaboration.