* 1311685
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Cryptogramma acrostichoides complex--phylogeography at the crossroads of Beringia and other refugia
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Stefanie Ickert-Bond, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,402.00

Anthropogenic climate change will dramatically impact the world?s plants and
animals through higher projected extinction rates and sizable range shifts,
especially in high-latitude boreal regions. Responding to these dangers requires
a deeper understanding of how species react to fast-moving, large-scale climate
shifts. Similar impacts from rapid climate change during the Last Glacial
Maximum (approx. 18000 years ago) can serve as a model for predicting the
impacts of present-day anthropogenic climate change. This research will use the
responses of parsley ferns (Cryptogramma species) growing in eastern Asia and
western North America to rapid climate change during the Last Glacial Maximum as
a model for predicting how today?s flora will survive anthropogenic climate
change. These parsley ferns today span the area known as Beringia, which
stretches from northeastern Asia across the Bering Sea into central Alaska and
was subject to rapid climate change during the Last Glacial Maximum. By using
large amounts of DNA sequence data, researchers will quantify patterns of
genetic diversity across the landscape and examine the relative importance of
surviving in a small number of refugial regions that can serve as sources for
recolonization or migration versus surviving on numerous isolated mountaintops
during the Last Glacial Maximum for these parsley ferns. Populations that are in
particular danger of extinction from present day climate change will be
identified for special conservation attention. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The
public and broader scientific community will benefit from this research in many
ways. This project will help train the next generation of scientists as a
graduate student and undergraduate student will become efficient in state of the
art DNA sequencing methods and in executing an extended research project,
including overseas field work. High school students, including Alaska Natives,
will benefit from involvement in the collection and analysis of data. The
international scope of the project will also develop research infrastructure
beyond America?s borders through collaboration with Russian and Chinese
researchers. The public will be able to access all of the data generated,
including high-resolution images of preserved specimens, in online databases.
This project will also reach out to the public through the production of an
online identification key to the parsley ferns and through the publication of an
outreach article on the impacts of climate change on the northern flora.