* 1311027
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kristen Nolting, Nolting                 Kristen
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Kristen Nolting of Michigan State University to conduct a
research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at the University of
Waikato in Hamilton, New Zealand. The project title is "Exploring the Past to
Understand the Present: Investigating the Historical Radiation and Current
Distribution of a Widespread New Zealand Plant Genus, Pittosporum
(Pittosporaceae)." The host scientist is Dr. Chrissen Gemmill.

Identifying and quantifying the processes that underlie species distributions
remains an important challenge for biologists today. Although it is generally
understood that species distributions are the result of ecological interactions
operating over evolutionary time scales, most studies to date have failed to
fully address how the evolution of these interactions acts to govern changes in
species distributions across space and time. This study outlines a conceptual
and analytical framework that describes how we can use ecologically informative
functional traits in conjunction with phylogenetic and spatial modeling
techniques to evaluate how the relationship between ecological and evolutionary
processes acts to govern species distributions. Specifically, the study
evaluates the evolution of the diverse, widespread New Zealand plant genus,
Pittosporum (Pittosporaceae), along various climatic and functional trait axes.
This integrative analysis will allow for a better understanding of how the genus
evolved as it radiated throughout New Zealand, and how this evolution along
ecological axes acts to structure present day species distributions and allows
for species co-existence.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the research statement on species
distributions described above is pertinent to the question of how biodiversity
may respond to anthropogenic pressures. Communicating the outcomes of the
Fellow's research to policy makers and the general community can help protect
this biodiversity. The Fellow plans to work with other members of the Graduate
Women in Science organization at Michigan State University to develop a website
that provides access to interactive lesson plans for K-12 classrooms related to
biodiversity and its global importance. This website will be shared with
teachers in the local school districts with whom the organization already works
and/or will be presented by the Fellow and other graduate students in the
classrooms themselves.