* 1311405
* Dissertation Research: Resolving bipolar phylogeographic histories in dispersal limited mosses: a RAD-Seq approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Bernard Goffinet, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,753.00

The geographic distribution of many plants is shaped by long distance dispersal
(LDD) across oceans and unsuitable habitats, typically by wind currents.
Geographic distributions that do not correlate with wind paths and the
occurrence of widely distributed species not suited for wind dispersal suggests,
however, that dispersal may be accomplished by other means, such as by migratory
birds. Our knowledge of LDD and thus its affect on shaping global floristic
diversity is limited to model cases where wind paths are available for organisms
with high dispersal ability. Lewis and Goffinet will use revolutionary genome
sequencing techniques, to reconstruct non-model global dispersal histories and
assess the frequency and significance of these events on the biodiversity of
pristine high latitude regions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
processes that shape biodiversity allow us to better understand how the
ecosystems we know have come to be, and how they may change. High latitude
regions represent some of the world?s most pristine ecosystems, but also the
most vulnerable ones to global climate change. In conjunction with the Cape Horn
Biosphere Reserve of Southernmost Chile, Lewis and Goffinet are integrating
scientific investigation, in-situ conservation, community education, and
ecotourism to introduce the public to high latitude bryophyte diversity and
contribute to our understanding of these organisms, their ecosystems, and global
plant dispersal.