* 1311085
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Daniel Brenner, Brenner                 Daniel         S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Daniel Brenner of the University of Arizona to conduct a
research project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences in Beijing. The project
title is "Mandarin Tone Perception in Conversational and Read Speech." The host
scientist is Dr. HU Fang.

In Mandarin, words are distinguished not only by segments ([ba] 'to pull out'
vs. [pa] 'to climb'), but also by tone, the pattern of vocal pitch overlaid on
the syllable ([pa] with rising pitch, 'to climb'; [pa] with falling pitch, 'to
fear'). This project describes the relationship between tones as produced in
conversation to those in careful speech, and how those differences affect
listeners' perception of tones in the two speech styles. In the first phase of
the project, recordings are made of Mandarin speakers in conversation and
reading a list of words, and the acoustics of the two kinds of tone productions
will be compared. In a second phase, Mandarin-speaking subjects perform a
perception task on those words, either with full acoustic information, or with a
filtered version that removes segmental detail from the recordings. In this way,
a measurement of the contributions of tone and segmental information to the
identification of words can be made. Further understanding of tone and
conversational speech enable developments in second language Mandarin pedagogy,
where a great deal of emphasis is placed on learning to produce and detect
tones, an endeavor that does not come easily to many American students. The
details of tonal realizations are also vital for progress in human language
technologies such as automatic speech recognition, where the ultimate goal is to
program computers to understand naturally produced speech, as in conversation.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, publication of the results following
completion of the study will disseminate the findings widely to linguists and
researchers in related fields.