* 1311501
* Dissertation Research: Linking microbial ecophysiology to soil organic matter abundance and stabilization
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,09/30/2014
* Andrew Grandy, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 19,002.00

Terrestrial ecosystems depend on soil organic matter (SOM) for sustaining
agricultural productivity and other vital ecosystem services, yet global SOM
stocks are threatened by environmental change. Currently, the ability to
mitigate SOM losses is limited by our understanding of the processes regulating
SOM formation and long-term persistence. In recent years, new concepts of SOM
formation and persistence have emerged suggesting that SOM is largely derived
from soil microbes. Contrasting sharply with older concepts that emphasize the
importance of complex plant-derived compounds in SOM formation, the new emphasis
on microbial processes might dramatically improve SOM management if only the
mechanisms were better understood. Specifically, there is relatively little
known about the microbial physiological traits that regulate microbial
production and the fate of microbial products in different soil types. To
address this knowledge gap, the broad objective of this research is to link
microbial physiological traits to SOM formation and persistence. This objective
will be met using a long-term laboratory study to track newly formed SOM derived
from microbial processes in different soil types. The soils vary in their clay
mineralogy and carbon inputs from plants and, as a result, will select for
different microbial communities and physiological traits, which together will
presumably lead to differences in the long-term stability of the newly formed
SOM. Throughout the experiment, measurements will be made of microbial
physiological traits that can be linked to biomass synthesis, rates of SOM
formation, SOM chemistry, microbial biodiversity, and SOM
persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this work will lead to
improvements in current models of SOM formation and stabilization and will
characterize the important relationships among microbial physiology, carbon
input quality, and the soil environment. This study will make fundamental
contributions to microbial ecology and soil and ecosystem science and could
change how we mitigate the adverse effects of land-use conversion and climate
change on SOM losses. Specifically, this research could encourage new approaches
for land-use conservation, restoration, and agricultural management that
emphasize the indirect building of SOM by managing microbial biomass production.