* 1311862
* Type Ia Supernovae in the Near Infrared - Clearing a Path through the Dust
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* William Wood-Vasey, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,608.00

Type Ia supernovae (SNeIa) have enjoyed a remarkable decade as the premiere tool
for measuring cosmological distances in the Universe. But precision measurements
of dark energy with SNeIa in rest-frame optical light are currently limited by
systematic uncertainties stemming from an incomplete understanding of SNIa
colors, dust, and host environments, as well as the calibration of astronomical
measurements. Recent work has demonstrated that SNeIa are superior distance
indicators in the near-infrared (NIR), with more standard peak H-band
magnitudes, and a relative insensitivity to dust. This presents us with the
timely opportunity to exploit NIR SNIa observations and new methods in SNIa
cosmology to free SNeIa from their systematic shackles and fully exploit their
potential in current and future dark energy missions. &lt;br/&gt;NIR
observations to date have been largely limited to z &lt; 0.03 where distance
measurements have suffered from significant peculiar velocity uncertainties.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will support an approved 72-night three-year NOAO Survey
on the WIYN 3.5-m telescope to observe 144 SNeIa in the NIR from 0.03 &lt; z
&lt; 0.08.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NOAO Survey program focuses on SNeIa in the
Hubble flow to obtain reliable NIR luminosities free from peculiar-velocity
confusion and the uncertainties of dust. This effort includes a particular focus
on accurate calibration incorporating recently demonstrated techniques for
characterization of telescope systems and the Earth?s atmosphere. The results of
this work will (1) extend the NIR Hubble diagram past currently available
samples, (2) quantitatively demonstrate the degree to which SNeIa are robust
standard candles in the NIR, (3) provide key insights about the color evolution
and intrinsic properties of SNeIa and their host galaxies, and (4) establish a
well-calibrated low-redshift anchor for future NIR supernova surveys from JWST,
Euclid, and WFIRST/NEW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of this proposal will
involve a strong undergraduate component to involve the next generation in
active large astronomical research projects. This project will provide training
and mentoring to a graduate student and postdoctoral researcher, who will in
turn work with the undergraduates to enable them to make significant
contributions to the success of the research and outreach missions of this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;The underlying theme of this proposal is using the variable
sky to explore the cosmos. This theme will be shared with the public of all ages
and backgrounds through public displays of the results. To communicate the new
time-domain nature of astronomy this project will create portable sky
projections and movies based on Pan-STARRS, SDSS, and WIYN supernova images in
near real-time. These will involve both continuous unattended displays visible
in public places as well as more targeted displays at specific public events
with students and astronomers on-hand to directly engage with the public. An
integration of cutting-edge astronomical surveys into the daily experience of
citizens, particularly younger members, will spark a lifetime of interest across
a diverse spectrum of the population. These efforts will be undertaken in
partnership with the Pittsburgh Carnegie Science Museum to bring the dynamic sky
to the public's eye.