* 1311016
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Ming Tai, Tai                     Ming           E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Ming Eric Tai of Harvard University to conduct a research
project in the Math and Physical Sciences area during the summer of 2013 at
Academia Sinica in Taipei, Taiwan. The project title is "Quantum Simulation of
Persistent Current in an Ultracold Atomic Gas." The host scientist is Yu-Ju Lin.

Ultracold atomic systems have proven to be a powerful platform for the study of
strongly correlated many-body phenomena, such as superconductivity,
superfluidity, and quantum magnetism. This project extends the experimental
toolbox of these systems by investigating Raman coupling techniques for
implementing artificial magnetic fields in neutral atoms and performing
benchmark experiments on persistent current and non-classical rotational
inertia. The mastery of these techniques provides a direct avenue for studying
non-Abelian gauge fields, the quantum Hall effect, and topological insulators in
ultracold atoms. The investigation of methods to create artificial magnetic
fields is crucial to extending the field of quantum simulation with ultracold
atoms. Advances in this field have the potential to simulate and further the
understanding of a whole host of exotic materials, such as high-Tc
superconductors and spintronic materials-- materials that are not just of
scientific curiosity, but instead have already seen use or have proposed
applications in computer storage, medical devices, and green energy.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this experience in Taiwan also further equips
the Fellow as an ambassador for science and allows him to speak to the truly
global and collaborative nature of science. The Fellow plans to share these
experiences not only in the weekly graduate student seminar held in his
department, but also to the aspiring high school students that he meets at the
science competitions for which he volunteers as a science judge.