* 1311823
* Addressing Privacy Online: A Study of Privacy in Context
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kirsten Martin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 205,786.00

Notice and consent have become the dominant standard in addressing online
privacy, yet notice and consent may be immaterial to individuals' assessments
about the appropriateness and inappropriateness of the information transmitted
within a particular context. Therefore, while an increasing amount of social
activity and commerce is performed online, consumers, organizations, and
regulators struggle to address privacy expectations across a diverse set of
activities. The proposed project's goal is to better understand privacy
expectations across contexts online. The study will test the hypotheses that (a)
individuals hold different privacy expectations based on the context of their
online activity and (b) notice and consent varies in its effectiveness in
addressing online privacy expectations across different contexts. Since
addressing online privacy expectations is the goal of organizations and
regulatory bodies, understanding how those values change in different contexts
would help managers and regulators identify which contexts require different
privacy protections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study empirically examines
privacy norms across online contexts and the role of notice and consent within
each context. The researcher will conduct a nationwide survey using factorial
vignette methodology in which respondents answer questions based on a series of
hypothetical vignettes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will
identify privacy expectations and values across online contexts and explain the
appropriate role of notice and consent policies in addressing online privacy
expectations. As such, this study is responsive to pressing government needs and
societal concerns around online privacy and has direct implications for
researchers, business leaders, policy experts, and customers/users.
Specifically, the results will inform government policy, self-regulation
guidelines, and industry best practices by (1) identifying important online
contexts with similar privacy expectations (e.g., shopping, banking, etc.), (2)
prioritize the role of notice and consent in addressing privacy expectations
within different contexts, and (3) identify the factors and their relative
importance in developing privacy expectations for specific contexts online.