* 1311974
* Mathematical modeling and Computational Analysis of Cell Tissue Movement
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Hans Othmer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,001.00

Cell locomotion plays an essential role during embryonic development,
angiogenesis, tissue regeneration, the immune response, and wound healing in
multicellular organisms. The major problems to be addressed in this project are
(i) movement by shape changes, (ii) modeling of the intracellular mechanics, and
(iii) integration of signaling, actin dynamics and mechanics in an integrated
computational model of cell movement. Heretofore mathematical modeling has
primarily focused on the mesenchymal mode, but the investigators first address
the other end of the continuum. The overall objective is to produce a unified
description for locomotion in a three-dimensional extracellular matrix that
integrates signaling and mechanics. Movement by shape changes has not been
studied in the context proposed, but it has recently been shown to be important
in the movement of a number of cell types, and understanding the factors that
affect the speed and efficiency of such movement is a challenging problem. This
project develops mathematical models that can be used to study and quantify the
importance of various factors, such as properties of the surrounding medium,
that affect the efficiency of movement. The third component continues previous
work by the principal investigator on signaling and will integrate a model of
the control networks with the mechanical components that comprise the first
topics. This will lead to the first model that incorporates both signaling and
mechanics, and will result in a computational tool that should be very useful to
the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell movement is a very complex
process that involves the spatial and temporal control and integration of a
number of subprocesses, including the transduction of chemical or mechanical
signals from the environment, intracellular biochemical responses, and
translation of the intra- and extracellular signals into a mechanical response.
While many single-celled organisms use flagella or cilia to swim, there are two
basic modes of movement used by eukaryotic cells that lack such structures--
mesenchymal and amoeboid. The former, which can be characterized as ?crawling?
in fibroblasts or ?gliding? in keratocytes, involves the extension of finger-
like pseudopodia and/or broad flat lamellipodia, whose protrusion is driven by
actin polymerization at the leading edge. In the amoeboid mode, which does not
rely on strong adhesion, cells are more rounded and employ shape changes to move
--in effect 'jostling through the crowd' or 'swimming'. However, recent
experiments have shown that numerous cell types display enormous plasticity in
locomotion, in that they sense the mechanical properties of their environment
and adjust the balance between the modes. Thus pure crawling and pure swimming
are the extremes on a continuum of locomotion strategies, but many cells can
sense their environment and use the most efficient strategy in a given context.
This project uses innovative mathematical approaches to better understand the
dynamics of cell locomotion, combining novel models with experimental data.
Additionally, the research team includes postdoctoral researchers and graduate
students, with the project providing an opportunity to work in an inherently
interdisciplinary field.