* 1311833
* Mathematical problems from materials science
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Robert Kohn, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,121,590.00

Kohn 1311833

This project has three main scientific thrusts: (a) The first and broadest
thrust concerns elastic-energy-driven pattern formation in thin elastic sheets.
The investigator studies stress-driven patterns involving wrinkles, folds,
delamination, and other defects, with particular emphasis on situations where
the energy-minimizing pattern develops fine-scale structure as the sheet
thickness tends to zero. His approach is to focus on how the minimum energy
scales with respect to the sheet thickness and other relevant physical
parameters. (b) The second thrust concerns surface-energy-driven coarsening of
two-phase mixtures. The investigator studies a family of nonlocal evolutions
from the physics literature, which generalize the relatively well-understood
model of "Cahn-Hilliard dynamics." The focus here is on understanding the large-
time coarsening rate. (c) The third thrust concerns prediction with expert
advice (a topic from the machine learning literature). The investigator's goal
is a fresh perspective on some regret-minimization-based algorithms for
prediction. He views regret minimization as a robust control problem and
considers a suitable scaling limit in which the associated value function solves
a differential equation.

The investigator studies three interdisciplinary topics. The first two lie at
the interface where mathematics meets physics and materials science, while the
third lies at the interface with machine learning. In each area, challenges from
applications drive the development of new mathematical methods. For example, the
work on thin elastic sheets is helping develop a theory of energy-minimizing
patterns, in much the same way that consideration of soap bubbles and soap films
led to the theory of minimal surfaces a generation ago. It is of course a
familiar fact that thin sheets often wrinkle or fold: our skin wrinkles and our
clothes wrinkle; leaves, flowers, and hanging drapes have folds. Physical
experiments in controlled settings can quantify such phenomena, and numerical
simulations can demonstrate within a model how the patterns develop. But neither
experiment nor simulation can tell us "why" a system chooses a particular
pattern. The project provides a valuable complement to other methods, by showing
that elastic energy minimization requires types of patterns. The project
provides training opportunities for graduate students.