* 1311551
* The Origins of Equid Domestication
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Benjamin Arbuckle, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2018
* USD 361,891.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Benjamin Arbuckle will direct
three years of multi-disciplinary, international field and lab research at four
sites in central Turkey. This project brings together an international team of
researchers from the US, Canada, Turkey, France and Germany with specialties in
archaeology, zooarchaeology, paleogenetics, isotope biochemistry and paleobotany
to provide the first comprehensive picture of the history of Asiatic ass and
wild horse hunting and the subsequent emergence of domestic horses in the Middle
East.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The domestication of the horse represents one of the
most important technological achievements of the ancient world and
revolutionized strategies of subsistence exchange, interaction and warfare
across the Old World. Although the history of horse domestication in the steppic
regions of western Eurasia is slowly coming into greater focus, the origins of
the domestic horse in the Near East continues to represent a major
archaeological puzzle. Although it has long been acknowledged on geographic
grounds that ancient Turkey may have played an important role in the
transmission of domestic horses into the Middle East, few data have been
available to adequately test these hypotheses, and the social and biological
processes responsible for the origins of domestic horses in the Greater Near
East remain obscure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an innovative combination of
archaeological, genetic and isotopic datasets this project will build a detailed
interpretive framework that will 1) define the nature of the newly discovered
patterns of intensive wild horse and Asiatic ass hunting on the Anatolian
plateau, 2) evaluate the roles of local domestication versus importation in the
appearance of domestic horses in the region, and 3) understand the social
processes responsible for the origins of domestic horses. By applying a powerful
combination of methods to newly available archaeological assemblages rich in
horse remains, this project has the potential to provide a radically new
perspective on the origins of the domestic horse, one of the most important
innovations of the ancient world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the research is multidisciplinary in scope. It will significantly impact
research addressing the process of animal domestication and the transmission of
innovative technologies, both major topics of archaeological and anthropological
inquiry. It will also provide new insights into the history and origins of
equines, and will add to the understanding of the biodiversity of an important
livestock species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the study are
that it will support international cooperation and collaboration between
American, French, German, Canadian and Turkish researchers across multiple
disciplines. It will also provide support for training a graduate student and
will help support the development of innovative research methods in
paleogenetics as well as archaeology. Results will be made accessible via open
access web publications, ensuring the broadest possible impact.