* 1311644
* Dissertation Research: Effect of Evolutionary History on Reproductive Isolation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Michael Rose, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2014
* USD 16,621.00

Biologists have long sought to discover how one species can evolve into two
species, a process known as speciation. Some have argued that adaptation to
different environments drives the evolution of new species, which is called
ecological speciation. Others propose that speciation involves evolutionary
change that is not related to environmental adaptation, which can be called null
speciation This study will use long-isolated laboratory populations of the fruit
fly, Drosophila melanogaster, some showing incipient speciation. Groups of these
populations have been kept in identical environments, with some groups adapted
to different ecological regimes. This is an ideal system for testing both null
and ecological speciation. Mates that come from different populations produce
offspring called hybrids. The inability to produce hybrids that are viable and
fertile provides a measure of incipient speciation between two populations.
Studying hybrids between many lab populations, some ecologically differentiated
and some not, will test quantitatively which of the two speciation mechanisms,
ecological or null respectively, is relatively more
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its fundamental importance for
evolutionary biology, this research also has agricultural significance, because
it will suggest how readily long-separated plant varieties and animal breeds can
be hybridized to yield useful new agricultural stocks. The project will also
provide opportunities for several undergraduate students to participate in
scientific research.