* 1311309
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Pheromone signaling and molecular dissection of olfactory neurons in red-legged salamanders
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Richard Feldhoff, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 06/30/2015
* USD 17,769.00

Courtship and mating in animals involves intricate sets of behaviors that often
involve sensory cues. When pheromones are utilized, the receiver of the
pheromone signal must detect and interpret the signal - usually relying on a
sensory organ that in turn connects to areas of the brain involved in
reproductive behavior. To sense and recognize protein pheromones, most
vertebrates have a specialized olfactory organ, the vomeronasal organ (VNO). The
VNO is composed of thousands of neurons that are finely tuned such that each
neuron only recognizes a small number of possible pheromones by using a set of
molecular receptors. In mouse models, nearly two decades after these receptors
were first identified (and a Nobel Prize awarded), only a small number of
specific pheromone:receptor pairs have been reported. In the red-legged
salamander (P. shermani), as part of a unique courtship ritual, male salamanders
deliver protein pheromones to females in order to enhance female receptivity.
These protein pheromones were among the first to be biochemically characterized
and this salamander has served as a valuable model system for studying how
pheromones affect mating behavior in vertebrates. However, the specific
molecular receptors in the salamander VNO that bind these pheromones remain to
be identified and characterized. Using two state-of-the-art techniques - laser
capture microdissection and high throughput DNA sequencing - the aim of this
project is to identify the receptors that bind male pheromones in P. shermani.
This study will provide novel insights into understanding the molecular
mechanisms of pheromone:receptor interactions in salamanders and possibly all
vertebrates (including humans). Additionally, the methodologies to be employed
have never been applied to studying olfactory neurons, and may significantly
advance the rate of research progress in this area of the neurosciences.
Undergraduate research training is a key goal, and students will be actively
included in all elements of the project.

Gene date will be made available at: NCBI Genbank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank)