* 1311388
* Dissertation Research: Linking shifts in microbial community composition and N cycling to multiple global change factors in a California grassland
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Stephen Hart, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,063.00

Human-induced changes in the environment have the ability to alter soil nutrient
cycles, thereby affecting the many ecosystem services on which humans rely.
However, despite the fact that these changes often occur simultaneously, few
studies have investigated their interactive effects on the important belowground
components of an ecosystem. Because nitrogen (N) is the limiting nutrient for
plant growth in most terrestrial systems, it is essential to understand how N
cycling responds to both biotic and abiotic changes. This project will
contribute to global change ecology by assessing how soil microorganisms that
mediate N cycling respond to the interaction of three primary changes in the
environment: elevated N deposition, cattle grazing, and invasive plants. Soil
has been sampled from beneath plant communities that were subjected to simulated
N deposition, cattle grazing and experienced the invasion of an exotic plant
species. Microbial DNA will be extracted from the soil to understand how
N-cycling microorganisms respond to the treatments. Changes in the microbial
community will then be related to changes in N cycling processes. Results from
this project will contribute new insight into community level changes in
microorganisms that are responsible for key steps in the N cycle, ultimately
helping to advance current knowledge of nutrient dynamics in terrestrial
ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results will be presented at national
and international conferences, such as the International Society of Microbial
Ecology, in order to ensure widespread dissemination across the scientific
community. Workforce development will occur through the training of two
undergraduates by their full participation in the research project.
Additionally, the results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
findings will be presented to the local community via seminars. Because the
University of California, Merced, is located in the Central Valley, a large
proportion of the students who receive outreach will be from underrepresented
groups.