* 1311553
* Dynamical Systems Methods for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Clarence Wayne, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 03/31/2019
* USD 599,497.00

Abstract for DMS-1311553

Professor Wayne will study how methods such as invariant manifold theory and the
Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) theory, which were originally developed to
understand finite dimensional dynamical systems, can be adapted to yield insight
into the qualitative and quantitative behavior of solutions of partial
differential equations. He will concentrate primarily on equations arising in
physical applications such as fundamental fluid equations, e.g the Navier-Stokes
equation, the equations for vortex sheets, and equations from nonlinear optics.
His research will focus on four main problems: (A) Metastable behavior in two-
dimensional fluids; (B) Periodic solutions of the vortex sheet equations; (C)
Breathers in periodic media; and (D) Normal forms and invariant manifolds in
dispersive Hamiltonian systems. Dynamical systems methods have yielded many
insights into the qualitative behavior of finite dimensional systems for which
no closed form solutions exist. The existence theory of many of the infinite
dimensional systems to be studied is now well established and this research will
attempt to derive more detailed information about the behavior of the solutions
on various physically relevant time scales, as well as illuminating the origin
of these time scales.

The differential equations that Professor Wayne will study arise in a variety of
different physical contexts and are characterized by the fact that while the
equations themselves are well known, they are too complicated to solve
explicitly except in very special or physically unrealistic cases. Nevertheless,
applications require at least a qualitative understanding of the behavior of
their solutions and this research project will aim to develop such an
understanding for the systems described above. As an example related to point
(C) in the preceding paragraph, consider light pulses of the types that are used
in fiber optic cables currently used for telecommunications. In a homogeneous
medium, such as glass, such pulses rapidly spread out or disperse. However, in
periodic media, like certain crystals, such pulses may become trapped. Trapped
pulses are of great current interest because of the hope that they might serve
as the basis for a purely optical computational system. Professor Wayne's
research will examine the conditions that the medium must satisfy in order to
support these ``trapped'' pulses as well as investigating how common such media
are likely to be. The other three projects will also aim to develop new
fundamental insights into these important physical systems.