* 1311302
* Dissertation Research:  Anaerobic oxidation of methane coupled to denitrification in the Choptank Basin (MD USA)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Thomas Fisher, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2016
* USD 19,565.00

Methane is a potent greenhouse gas that contributes to global climate change,
and excess nitrogen in coastal waterways can cause a decline in water quality. A
newly discovered microbial process could reduce the amount of methane reaching
the atmosphere and nitrogen reaching waterways. This microbial process converts
methane into the less potent greenhouse gas carbon dioxide and toxic nitrite
into unreactive nitrogen gas. However, it is not known if this microbial process
occurs in nature. This study will investigate whether this process occurs in
nature, and if so at what rate, in agricultural groundwater on the Eastern Shore
of Maryland. This study will provide information on the rates of anaerobic
oxidation of methane coupled to denitrification in agricultural systems, which
tend to have high nitrogen levels. Unlike all previous work on this process that
has occurred only in the laboratory, this project will investigate this
microbial process using experiments conducted in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If this microbial process is better understood, it could
potentially be used as a remediation tool to reduce the leaching of nitrogen
into surrounding waters and methane emissions. Results from this study will be
shared with local farmers and stakeholders in an effort to implement best
management practices that would stimulate this new microbial process to reduce
nitrogen and methane losses from farm fields. Scientific training of graduate
and undergraduate students will be supported by this project through providing
experience with biogeochemical methods and instrumentation.