* 1311907
* AIR Option 2:  Research Allianace Polymer, Polymer-Ceramic and Natural Polymer Based Systems for Soft Tissue and Bone Repair and Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Cato Laurencin, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2017
* USD 864,000.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of bone and soft tissue regeneration technologies to new products for
musculoskeletal repair. Autograft and allograft based products are currently
used for repair purposes and have several limitations including suboptimal
strength, possible negative immune effects and risks of disease transmission.
The new technologies and proposed products overcome the drawbacks posed by
autografts and allografts. These new product technologies are potentially
stronger, bioactive, more biocompatible and completely degradable while being
ideally suited for load-bearing bone healing and soft tissue repair and
regeneration applications. There are estimated to be over 1 million bone graft
implants performed each year throughout the world. Production costs for the
proposed technologies will be in the range of $500 per implant, yielding a $2000
net profit per implant. Our objective in the first 3 years is to achieve a 2%
market share of bone grafts (20,000 grafts) which would provide $40 million in
revenue per year. Every year, 400,000 rotator cuff repair procedures performed
in the US require the use of a tendon augmentation device. Production costs are
$1,000 per implant, yielding a $4000 profit per implant. We conservatively
believe that 30% of repair operations would benefit from our soft tissue
regeneration system (120,000 repairs) and that a 10% market share would be
12,000 repairs. This translates to a profit of 48 million per year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to move these technologies to commercialization,
we have categorized different products into short-term, mid-term and long-term
time frames spanning 1 to 5 years. Short-term products include grafts fabricated
from the materials alone without inclusion of any biologics. The short-term
products, classified as devices or implants, create a short route to 510k FDA
clearance (approval). An ample financial base from the aforementioned products
will allow re-investment of R &amp; D efforts toward the commercialization of
subsequent products or to pursue an out-license or acquisition exit after
subsequent 510k approvals. The strong patent portfolio and constant revenue from
the initial product commercialization will create a self-sustainable academic
centered innovation ecosystem. All these activities will ensure workforce
development, create new jobs and businesses, and foster economic development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third party partnerships engaged to transfer the
technologies to the market domain include technology niche analysis, business
plan development, and initiation of new startup ventures for existing products
and new products. The potential economic impact is expected to approximate 100
million per year in the next 2 to 3 years which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in the orthopaedic device fixation, repair, and regeneration
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Societal impact short term, the proposed devices
successfully address issues and drawbacks related to biological grafts currently
used and will improve treatment efficiency/cost, enhance patient compliance and
contribute to a better quality of life. The developed products will be used as
alternatives to current grafts. Identified material compositions and designs may
find application in the delivery of growth factors, antibiotics and pain
medications for treating a variety of musculoskeletal ailments in the long term.
This proposed project has immense economic potential as well as a broad impact
in education by bridging the interfaces of chemistry, biology, medicine and
materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, the proposed research
will focus on the recruitment and training of underrepresented minorities at the
undergraduate and graduate levels, thus ensuring a competitive and diverse
dissemination of scientific knowledge. Students and fellows will be engaged in
business plan development and encouraged to complete an internship with the
third party investors to enhance their entrepreneurial skill sets.&lt;br/&gt;