* 1311834
* Geometry of Teichmuller Space and Mapping Class Group
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Jing Tao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2016
* USD 141,356.00

Most of this research proposal is dedicated to the study of the geometry and
topology of Teichmueller space, moduli space, and mapping class groups. Some
specific projects involve solving some generalizations of the conjugacy problem
for mapping class groups, investigating the properties of the systole-length
function on moduli space, and finding a coarse description of the geodesics in
the Thurston metric on Teichmueller space. The PI also proposes to study the
homology growth of irreducible automorphisms of a free group in finite covers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surfaces are two-dimensional spaces like the surface of a
ball or a doughnut. Their topological and geometric properties have captured the
minds of mathematicians for centuries. The study of surfaces is not only
interesting and beautiful, but has generated entire fields of mathematics and
arguably lies at the intersection of all fields of mathematics. One way to
understand a surface is to study the various ?natural? geometric structures on
the surface and how the different structures relate to each other. The parameter
space all geometric structures on a given surface is a fundamental mathematical
object called the moduli space. This is usually a higher-dimensional space that
itself naturally carries many rich and interesting geometric structures. The
study of moduli space is part of the guiding mathematical principle that, in
order to understand one particular structure on a space, one must try to
understand the structure of the meta space comprised of all structures. The work
of the PI is dedicated to expanding our knowledge about moduli space and some
related spaces.