* 1311455
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Fitness tradeoffs in animal personalities across life stages
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Nicholas Ballew, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2015
* USD 19,947.00

A seemingly simple but significan question is, whether in responses to drug
treatment or behavioral interactions, why do different individuals respond
differently? Research on fish and other vertebrates has demonstrated consistent
inter-individual differences in behaviors such as boldness and aggression. These
inter-individual differences in behavior have been termed animal personalities.
The work conducted under this award examines the ecological consequences of
individual behavioral variation in largemouth bass, an important North American
sport fish. To date, only a handful of studies have investigated the
relationship between personality traits and various components of fitness in the
field, and even fewer studies have investigated whether inter-individual
differences in behavior are consistent across life stages. Fish are excellent
study organisms to investigate the impact of personality traits on growth,
survival, and reproductive success at different life stages. The work conducted
under this award will use DNA-based paternity analysis to examine how variation
in shy/bold behavior affects various components of fitness in largemouth bass
under field conditions. These field studies focus on juvenile growth and
survival, adult male and female reproductive success, heritability of
personality types, and the fitness tradeoffs of shy/bold personality types
across life stages. Bass are one of the most economically important sport fish
in North America and the results of this research will help inform decision
makers on how to better manage these and other fish species. Although the
evolutionary impacts of commercial harvest on fish populations are well-
recognized, the effects of recreational angling (including catch and release
fishing) on fish population are largely unknown. Research conducted under this
award will directly address how recreational angling affects bass behaviors and
reproductive success. Results from this research will be communicated through
presentations and publications to scientific and non-scientific audiences,
including secondary school students through K-12 education programs at the
Kellogg Biological Station.

Data used in publications from this project will be deposited into DRYAD
(http://datadryad.org)