* 1311810
* Visualization Basics: Using Gaming to Improve Computational Thinking (UGame-ICompute)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Farhad Jafari, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,199,963.00

This ITEST Strategies project is developing, implementing and studying an
intervention for students and teachers in ten middle schools in Wyoming that
includes computational thinking and spatial visualization in the contexts of
gaming and robotics. It is impacting 42 teachers and their students. The project
is delivering the content using culturally responsive pedagogy (CRP). The CRP
emphasis is being implemented in the proposed intervention and is strongly
reflected in the project personnel, which includes representatives from African
American, Mexican, and Native American cultures, as well as in the recruitment
plan, which also includes females and disabled persons. The lead institution is
the University of Wyoming, with cooperation from the National Center for
Atmospheric Research and evaluation by MER Associates. Alexander Repenning of
the University of Colorado is providing teacher professional development in
computational thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research questions are
investigating: 1) the strategies most likely to develop student skills in
computational thinking and spatial visualization; 2) the strategies most likely
to develop student interest, readiness, and participation in STEM careers; 3)
the strategies teachers use to infuse culturally responsive pedagogy and develop
student understanding of computational thinking in math and science courses; and
4) how the project leverages the social and cultural capacity of the cultural
and STEM communities. The evaluator is primarily responsible for collecting and
analyzing the data, with oversight from the Advisory Board. Data sources include
document review, surveys, interviews, and student performance data. Analyses are
being conducted to exam variances associated with gender, ethnicity, and English
proficiency.