* 1311283
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:The Propagating Response of the Inner Shelf to Wind Relaxations in a Coastal Upwelling System
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mark Moline, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 322,438.00

The project is a comprehensive observational and analytical program to examine
the dynamics and source waters of the relaxation flows in a coastal upwelling
system on the central California coast. Autonomous vehicles, high-frequency
radars, moorings, and drifters, will be used to acquire pressure, density, and
velocity data relevant to the relaxation flows. The data will be used to
determine spatial scales of the flows, cross-shore density structure, cross-
shore and alongshore velocity fields, pressure gradients, and the region of
contact with the sea floor. Aspects of the research include: 1) to evaluate the
roles of barotropic and baroclinic pressure gradient forcing, 2) to identify
regions where ageostrophic flows dominate the cross-shore and alongshore
momentum balances, 3) to determine source waters for the relaxation flows, and
4) to examine the inner shelf circulation response to wind relaxations over an
extensive coastal region (the northern part of the Southern California Bight) by
analyzing extensive regional data sets collected over many
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind relaxations are common features of coastal
upwelling systems worldwide, and have impacts on alongshore and cross-shore
transport of water-borne materials such as larvae, nutrients, terrestrial
runoff, and buoyant pollutants like oil. This study will clarify the role of
relaxation flows in the recruitment of intertidal and sub-tidal organisms by
revealing details of the near-shore flow structure. The observational plan
advances capabilities of state-of-the-art autonomous and Lagrangian platforms
and sensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A post-doc and undergraduate students will be
trained. Opportunities will be created for marine ecology graduate students to
conduct field experiments focused on the ecological consequences of relaxation
flows. This research will build on, and leverage, existing regional ocean
observing infrastructure and it will increase the capacity for oceanographic
studies at two universities.