* 1311686
* Dissertation Research: The roles of ecological and genomic divergence during incipient speciation in Mimulus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Matthew Streisfeld, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 18,843.00

New species form when characters evolve that reduce or prevent mating between
populations. This process of speciation is critical to understanding the origins
of biodiversity, yet little is known about the evolution of reproductive
barriers at the earliest stages of divergence. While early models of speciation
stressed the importance of geographic isolation to initiate divergence, recent
theory suggests that ecologically-based natural selection is capable of driving
isolation in the absence of geographic barriers. By focusing on a diverse
complex of classically described, closely-related plants that remain distinct
despite apparent hybridization, this research will utilize greenhouse,
laboratory, and field experiments to investigate the evolutionary mechanisms and
genomic changes that drive the early stages of speciation. Moreover, results
from the experiments outlined in this proposal will generate novel insight into
the role of ecologically-based divergent natural selection during speciation.
The broader impacts of this research lie in its mentorship and educational
opportunities. The broad array of techniques that will be employed, including
field work and newly developed population genomic methods, will provide students
with considerable experience in plant evolutionary research. Students from the
UO Summer Program for Undergraduate Research, a program committed to recruiting
and mentoring students from traditionally underrepresented backgrounds, will be
a critical component for this research. In addition, this research will also be
shared through public lectures with the California Native Plant Society, of
which the co-PI is a member.

