* 1311107
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Amy Truitt, Truitt                  Amy            M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Amy Truitt of Portland State University to conduct a research
project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Griffith University in Brisbane,
Australia. The project title is "The Role of Symbiotic Bacteria in Providing
Viral Resistance in Butterflies; the Potential Implications on Conservation in
the Face of Climate Change." The host scientist is Dr. Jeremy Brownlie.

This project investigates tripartite interactions among bacteria, virus, and
Lepidopteran hosts to determine how this interplay will affect management
decisions, especially in light of climate change, of imperiled pollinators. The
project co-infects caterpillars with either nuclear polyhedris virus (NPV) or
flock house virus (FHV) and a series of Wolbachia strains to garner a better
understanding the role of Wolbachia in the ecology of its host. This project
uniquely evaluates the fitness benefits provided by different strains of
Wolbachia to its Lepidopteran host. It also adds to the potential uses of
Wolbachia as a bio-control agent or as an influence on bio-control agents, such
as the viral-based bio pesticides, employed to control lepidopteran pest
species.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Upon completion of this project the Fellow will continue
to work with the Oregon Zoo and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to integrate the
findings about Wolbachia with the management plan of the imperiled Oregon
silverspot butterfly. The findings from this research will be used to develop
inquiry-based science projects for K-12 and informal education as well as
university classes and will be disseminated to citizens, managers, and
scientists. To disseminate the results of these studies, Dr. Browlie and the
Fellow will submit teh results of their research to a highly ranked journal and
will present the findings at both national and international conferences.
Interesting advances will be communicated to the wider community via Griffith
University and Portland State University marketing and communications offices,
and via mechanisms such as publication in the publicly available magazine
Australasian Science. The Fellow will also continue presentations at community
center seminars in the United States.