* 1311063
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Seema Ehsan, Ehsan                   Seema          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Seema Ehsan of the University of California, Irvine to conduct
a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the Osaka Medical
Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases in Osaka, Japan. The project title
is "Development of a Personalized Anti-Cancer Drug Screening Platform." The host
scientist is Professor Masahiro Inoue.

Precise replication of complex biological environments is necessary to more
accurately mimic the human response to drugs. The development of anti-cancer
compounds has become dependent on either animal models or in vitro systems that
use established cells lines, both of which have diminishing relevance to actual
patient outcomes. Primary cultures derived directly from patient biopsies may
enable the development of more individualized anti-cancer therapies. Combining
these cultures with a tissue-engineered model of the tumor microenvironment
enables the creation of an experimental platform that is able to manipulate
patient-specific "living" solid tumors. Experimental testing with such a
platform enhances the efforts of personalized cancer therapy, whereupon the
results could be used to individualize treatment for the patient from whom the
cells were derived. The system could be used as an anti-cancer drug-screening
platform that is faster, more cost-effective, and a better prediction of
clinical response compared to current methods. Understanding the causes of
cancer, and developing coordinated efforts to prevent and manage the disease,
has enormous impact on public health across the country and the world. Exploring
models that investigate the mechanisms of cancer biology will allow for the
development of more targeted and effective treatment strategies, and may
ultimately enhance the quality of care and quality of life of patients.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the experience of conducting research abroad
will be shared with both undergraduate and graduate students via informational
sessions and student group activities. The results of this research will be
disseminated to the scientific community through both domestic and international
conferences, as well as through peer-reviewed publications.