* 1311150
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Extending anchored phylogenomics into plants with a case study of beaksedge (tribe Rhynchosporeae; Cyperaceae) diversification in the New World
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Austin Mast, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,110.00

The beaksedges (ca. 375 spp. in tribe Rhynchosporeae; Cyperaceae) are ideal for
understanding patterns of diversity and diversification in the three American
centers of subtropical/tropical grasslands and savanna because they are one of
the most diverse groups in each area. For example, Rhynchospora has the greatest
number of taxa (49) endemic to the SE North American Coastal Plain of any plant
genus. This study will use 'anchored phylogenomics' (identifying and sequencing
100s or 1000s of highly conserved anchor regions flanked by more variable
regions scattered throughout the genome) to produce a robust phylogeny for ca.
100 beaksedge species that will be used to the timing of diversification of the
group and the evolution of fruit morphology, habitat specificity, and C3/C4
photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate a 'toolkit' for
anchored phylogenomics in the monocots, a group of 65,000 species that provides
the great majority of the human diet (e.g., rice, maize, and wheat). Better
knowledge of the relationships among these crop plants and their wild relatives
is useful in crop improvement. The project will also enable more precise
identifications of beaksedge species, which are often only identified to genus
in ecological and conservation studies because of difficulties in
identification. This is especially significant because 81 beaksedge species are
recognized as wetland indicators in the United States and under-representation
of the tribe's diversity reduces the accuracy of conservation assessments and
makes the study of some ecological interactions impossible. The project will
also train a graduate student in phylogenomics, which is emerging as an
increasingly important skill set in systematics, biogeography, ecology, and
evolution.