* 1311251
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Larval stress and immunity of adult mosquitoes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Steven Juliano, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 10/31/2014
* USD 18,720.00

Pathogenic bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasitic worms are often transmitted
by vectors, commonly biting insects such as mosquitoes. Environmental stressors
acting on mosquito larvae, including high density, food shortage, and extreme
temperatures, can have lifelong impacts on adult biology; common manifestations
are reduced survival, longevity, and body condition. Stressors may also enhance
the physiological ability of adult mosquitoes to harbor and spread pathogens.
This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement project pursues the mechanisms underlying
the surprising result that stress during the larval stages of yellow fever
mosquitoes actually enhances some aspects of general immunity, and produces
adults with lower probability of spreading pathogens due to lower infection
intensity and impaired body condition. The researchers will initiate laboratory
experiments that manipulate larval density in order to quantify adult immune
function, as red blood cell abundance and differentiation, vector susceptibility
to parasite infection, and pathogen success. Results will elucidate general
mechanisms by which stress alters insect immune systems and modifies
interactions between insects and parasites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diseases
transmitted by mosquitoes include some of the most important human health
threats in the world. Understanding the effects of environmental stress on
larvae may be of practical importance, as the container mosquitoes in this study
are vectors of human disease and are widely distributed in urban environments
where the probability of contact with humans is high. This project will
contribute to ongoing dissertation work that relies heavily on both
undergraduate and graduate-level research assistance; undergraduates will gain
valuable experience and may contribute to published research. Further, in-
service high school math and science teachers from the Professional MA program
in Environmental Science Education at Bradley University (Peoria, IL)
participate in this body of work as a summer research immersion component of
their degree program.