* 1311562
* Dissertation Research:  Mechanisms and consequences of flexibility in mutualistic relationships
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Mary Alice Coffroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2017
* USD 18,624.00

At the foundation of many biological communities are mutualisms in which a
relatively large, long-lived host organism provides habitat to symbiotic
partners in return for reproductive, energetic and/or defensive resources. With
many partnerships available, flexibility in partner selection can provide the
host organism the versatility to associate with the optimal partner for a
particular environment. However, it also introduces the potential for cheating
and competition among different symbiont types, which may draw essential
resources away from the host and cause a breakdown of the host-symbiont
mutualism. Corals and their genetically diverse but functionally similar algal
symbionts provide an exceptional model system to better understand the
ecological balance of these processes. This research will measure resource
acquisition and exchange for a variety of laboratory induced coral-algal
combinations to determine whether hosting multiple symbiont types has a
positive, negative or null affect on the amount of resources provided to the
coral host. The proposed research encompasses methods from multiple disciplines,
molecular biology, carbon chemistry, photochemistry and statistical modeling to
advance our understanding of a fundamental ecological interaction. These
ecological models will be broadly applicable to host-symbiont mutualisms that
are essential to terrestrial, freshwater and marine communities, aiding in the
management and conservation of these areas. In addition, through mentorship and
collaboration with two undergraduate students, the importance of mutualism
ecology will be communicated through scientific, classroom and public platforms.
This includes attendance at scientific conferences, developing teaching
materials for K-12 classrooms and outreach efforts through the Aquarium of
Niagara.