* 1311935
* RUI:  Beads, Knots, and Gems:  Star Formation Processes in Interacting Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Beverly Smith, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 133,715.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
how our Universe evolved and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. One important aspect of understanding galaxy formation and evolution
is to decipher how galaxies merge and interact and how such processes affect the
formation of new stars.

This project is a multi-wavelength study of 42 nearby strongly-interacting pre-
merger interacting galaxies. Building on extensive prior data collection, this
project will utilize GALEX UV, ground- and space-based optical, Spitzer and
Herschel infrared, and VLA 21 cm HI radio observations, and it will compare with
a matching control sample of normal spirals. This study will address questions
of star formation triggering in interacting galaxies and in tidal features,
compared to those of spiral galaxies. The PI will use both numerical and
analytical models of the interactions and population synthesis models. The main
goal is to study the nature of star formation and its triggering mechanisms in
interacting galaxies, and to compare observations with simulations.

The project will support undergraduate student researchers who will be
encouraged to present their results at local and regional conferences. The PI
has a strong history of involving undergraduate students in her research,
including a high proportion of female students. The institution is located near
the heart of the southern Appalachian region; so, another broader impact of this
award will be to expand high quality science education opportunities to
underserved students.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the
Office of the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).