* 1311179
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Hydrological characteristics, trophic interactions, and fish assemblage structure in temperate stream systems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Qian Niu, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,419.00

The volume and variability of water flowing through rivers and streams are
primary regulators of freshwater biodiversity, particularly for fishes. This
regulation is partially due to energetic constraints imposed by particular flow
conditions. For example, some species are better adapted to fast currents for
food resource acquisition, while others require slower currents. In addition to
energetic constraints, species are also influenced by biological interactions
such as predation and competition with ecologically similar species.
Consequently, fish populations will persist given suitable amounts of food
resources and reasonable levels of interactions with other species, two factors
which are also regulated by flow conditions. Nevertheless, the combined effects
of flow characteristics and biological interactions in determining fish species
diversity are not well understood. This project addresses this issue by
collecting food web data from multiple sites in the Meramec River system in
southeastern Missouri and relating these measurements to stream flow
characteristics. Investigating factors influencing food web structure in the
context of various flow regimes will provide novel information on the primary
factors regulating biodiversity in freshwater stream ecosystems. The Meramec
River watershed is located in the Ozark Highlands and represents a freshwater
biodiversity hotspot in North America. Over 120 species of fishes are found in
the Meramec River and its tributaries. At the same time, the Meramec River
supplies drinking water to approximately 250,000 people. Although the drainage
area remains relatively pristine, some stream sections are experiencing ongoing
degradation due to human modifications of the landscape. Consequently, the
Meramec River watershed is a primary focus of collaborative conservation efforts
by the Missouri Department of Conservation and The Nature Conservancy due to its
biological importance and the dependence of humans on the water resources in the
drainage. Results from this research will be of practical use for these
conservation agencies during their attempts to balance human activities and the
conservation of biodiversity in this unique aquatic ecosystem. In addition,
several undergraduate students will be trained in research techniques as well as
exposed to issues focused on the conservation of aquatic resources.