* 1311339
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Effects of Ecology and Evolution on Avian Flight Morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Christopher Witt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 14,742.00

Birds on small islands have smaller flight muscles and longer legs than their
close relatives on larger islands. How do these differences affect function?
Birds on small islands might experience less predation, and do not need to take
off as rapidly. They are able to save energy by reducing the size of flight
muscles, and the longer legs could compensate for smaller muscles during
takeoff. This might lead to a slower overall takeoff for birds on small islands.
This study aims to test these hypotheses about how differences among island
populations affect takeoff. The take-off mechanics of five bird species on the
islands of Trinidad and Tobago will be studied. A perch instrumented with strain
gauges and a high-speed video camera will be used to measure force generated by
the leg thrust as well as flight velocity, acceleration, and wing movements.
These data will be used to calculate: (1) the timings of leg thrust, wingbeat,
and peak acceleration; (2) total forces produced by the leg thrust; (3)
velocities at the end of the leg thrust and of take-off; and (4) percent leg
contribution to take-off velocity. &lt;br/&gt; This study aims to assess the
functional consequences of island evolution and to test how small-island species
differ functionally from their close relatives in ways that directly affect
their abilities to compete and escape predators. These functional biomechanical
differences might help explain why island species are so vulnerable to human
disturbance and introduced species. This project will involve training
undergraduate biology students in research skills.