* 1311118
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Sarah Tynen, Tynen                   Sarah          E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Sarah Tynen of University of Colorado to conduct a research
project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area during the summer
of 2013 at Nanjing University in Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. The project title is
"(In)Visible Boundaries: Socioeconomic Identity in the Urban Landscape of
China." The host scientist is Professor Wang Hongyang.

Variegated types of neighborhood governance and markedly differentiated urban
landscapes are growing trends that geographically separate the lower, middle,
and upper classes in China. In this way, striking differences in the landscape
between low-income and high-income neighborhoods mark visible and invisible
boundaries in the built and social environments. The study takes a spatial
science approach to examining urban redevelopment using Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) combined with ethnographic research methods in order to most
appropriately address the uneven geographies of housing development. For the GIS
analysis, the project combines an analysis of land-use change with a study of
urban zoning, neighborhood, and demographic data layers to examine socioeconomic
segregation. The ethnographic research methods, especially semi-structured
interviews, explore how the urban landscape exacerbates class insecurity and
reinforces residents' efforts to establish socio-spatial identity. This research
examines the popular rhetoric that justifies social stratification through the
personal narratives and experiences of gated community and dilapidated
neighborhood residents. The research is based on the hypothesis that the
inclusion and exclusion of residents are created by interactions among many
actors, not as a unidirectional process between individuals but instead on
multiscalar institutional and societal levels. The intellectual merit of this
research is significant in advancing the conventional boundary studies found in
political geography by looking at the contradictions between various actors in
the construction of class and social boundaries on a local level as reflected in
the urban landscape.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the broader impacts of the proposed research
include promoting increased knowledge of the connection between economic
development and inter-group tensions on a local scale. The research is
contextualized in the broader global processes of increased mobility of capital
to engage with debates that address questions of political economy in a world
with increased globalization. This is relevant to both urban U.S. and urban
China, where the research will build on the existing literature on economic
development in the contestation between social classes for urban space. Chinese
urban development is following the American model of the entrepreneurial city,
but China's unique regulatory climate of political economy creates a built
environment that is not yet fully understood. By addressing questions of
segregation, economic development, and identity formation on the local scale in
urban China, the research contributes to a broader academic understanding of the
impacts of income inequality and uneven spatial development. The broader impacts
of this research therefore illuminate the effect of institutionalized
development efforts to simultaneously regulate and deregulate various urban
spaces based on social status and household income. Furthermore, the research
will be submitted to a peer-reviewed journal for publication.