* 1311111
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Multi-locus molecular phylogenetics of the genus Buddleja and insights into inflorescence evolution and historical biogeography
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Richard Olmstead, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,062.00

The genus Buddleja, commonly called the butterfly-bushes, is a group of
flowering plants that includes approximately 110 species of shrubs and trees.
They exhibit great diversity in the architecture of inflorescences, the
structures in which groups of flowers are arranged, which has been hypothesized
to be adaptations to different habitats and pollinators. Also, the group has a
wide distribution, including areas of Africa, Asia, North America, and South
America. Hypotheses concerning the geographic origin and dispersal history of
the group and its relationship to past geologic and climatic events have been
proposed but remain untested. The PIs will conduct a molecular phylogenetic
study of the genus, using DNA sequences from multiple loci to infer evolutionary
relationships among species. A novel high-throughput method of gathering genetic
data will be developed. The inferred phylogenetic tree will be used in further
analyses to test hypotheses about inflorescence architecture evolution and
biogeographic history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reproductive architecture, including
inflorescence form, is an important component of the success and diversification
of flowering plants, and this project will contribute to elucidating patterns in
its evolution and adaptive significance. The study of biogeographic history is
important for understanding the formation of modern floras and current
distributional patterns. Buddleja includes many species of conservation,
ethnobotanical, and horticultural interest. Understanding species relationships
will help guide future research in this group.