* 1311034
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Tea Visnjic, Visnjic                 Tea
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Tea Visnjic of University of California at Berkeley to conduct
a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Tongji University
in Shanghai, China. The project title is "Earthquake Response of Tall Buildings
Equipped with Seismic Damper Devices." The host scientists are Prof. Xilin Lu
and Prof. Ying Zhou.

The project aims to assess the dynamic response of tall reinforced concrete
frame-type buildings equipped with seismic dampers. Damper devices help mitigate
earthquake-induced movement of buildings, which can potentially lead to smaller
damage. Tall reinforced concrete frames are particularly vulnerable to high
post-earthquake reparation costs and prolonged disruption of occupancy due to
repairs. The use of damper devices in these buildings may be able to
significantly improve seismic performance, but such applications have been
limited partly due to limited understanding of the effects of supplemental
damping in seismic applications to tall concrete frames. Because tall reinforced
concrete frame buildings are commonly constructed in both China and the
seismically active parts of the United States, an improved understanding of
supplemental damping effects on seismic behavior of such systems is beneficial
to design practices in both countries. The planned study quantifies the effects
of damper application on structural response of these buildings and identifies
damper systems that most effectively achieve improvements in earthquake
performance.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the proposed collaboration between
researchers from the two universities with established records of intellectual
contribution to seismic hazard reduction is motivated by the value in exchanging
diverse ideas, complementing research and invaluable experience from past
earthquakes. The study opens the door for future partnerships between the two
institutions and contributes to global advancement in efforts to protect human
life and economic well-being from natural disasters.