* 1311440
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Genetic Architecture and Evolution of Phenotypic Plasticity for Chemical Defenses in a Wild Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Margaret Wagner, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 20,407.00

Many complex traits?those controlled by multiple genes?are often influenced by
the environment, a phenomenon called phenotypic plasticity. In many cases, the
relative importance of genes and environment (i.e., ?nature? and ?nurture?) is
unclear. Furthermore, species, populations, and individuals often differ in
their sensitivity to various environmental cues. Theoretical work has shown that
such genetic variation for plasticity should have profound implications for the
evolution of complex traits in complex environments. However, both the adaptive
value of plasticity and the genes underlying plastic responses are poorly
understood, largely due to a lack of empirical research on the subject. This
project will measure natural selection on plasticity of glucosinolates, an
important chemical defense against insect herbivores, in a wild herb.
Glucosinolates and reproductive fitness will be measured in multiple lineages
planted in four natural habitats and a variety of controlled conditions in the
greenhouse. The PIs will then map genomic regions containing genes that affect
the response of glucosinolate content to various environmental
stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ?nature vs. nurture? debate is not only
fundamental to the field of evolutionary genetics, but also directly relevant to
current research in applied fields such as agriculture, medicine, and
biodiversity conservation. Examples of partially plastic complex traits include
crop pest resistance, human susceptibility to diseases such as cancer, and
wildlife health and behavior. Understanding the genetic architecture and the
evolutionary significance of plasticity will be especially important as the
natural world adapts to a rapidly changing climate. Training of students will
occur.