* 1311475
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Environmentally-driven coupling of selection and heritability in a wild insect population
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Edmund Brodie, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,439.00

Environmental variation can dramatically alter trait evolution in wild
populations because it affects two drivers of adaptive evolution: natural
selection and heritability (the resemblance between parents and offspring).
Variation in selection among environments is common; intriguingly, recent
studies demonstrate that the environment also affects heritability.
Consequently, environmental variation may generate a systematic association
between these two forces, which could accelerate evolution if selection is
strongest in the same environment that produces high heritability. The proposed
work will examine environmental coupling of selection and heritability in a male
trait (horns) in wild populations of forked fungus beetles (Bolitotherus
cornutus). The proposed work will measure selection on horn length in ten beetle
populations from three different fungal environments and estimate the
heritability of horn length in the same populations. These data will be used to
measure the correlation between selection and heritability and quantify its
effect on the predicted response to selection. Understanding factors that
constrain adaptive evolution under varying environmental conditions is
particularly important in the context of climate change. In addition, the
project involves training of a graduate student and mentorship of undergraduate
students. Components of the project will be used in workshops for the Mountain
Lake Biological Station partnership with local educators in rural southwestern
Virginia. The research results will be disseminated in scientific journals,
academic conferences, and interdisciplinary symposia, such as the Jefferson
Scholars Foundation?s Forum for Interdisciplinary Dialogue.