* 1311313
* On three different manifestations of instability of fronts in parabolic and partially parabolic systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Anna Ghazaryan, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 105,524.00

Traveling waves are solutions of partial differential equations that preserve
their shape while moving in a preferred direction. Traveling waves are basic
coherent structures in partial differential equations and they often serve as
building blocks for complex patterns. This project is about traveling waves in
parabolic and partly parabolic systems (in partly parabolic systems some
quantities diffuse and others do not). More precisely, this project is focused
on the investigation of three phenomenologically different manifestations of
instability of traveling waves: (1) If a system supports waves that move with
different speeds, what kind of instability can cause a transition from one wave
to another? In such systems of coupled equations, will the preferred wave speed
be defined by linear or nonlinear dynamics? (2) How to analytically prove or
predict that instability is convective? For a convectively unstable wave small
perturbations are moving away from the interface of the wave faster than they
grow. (3) An instability sometimes manifests itself in the appearance of new
structures. These can be patterns in a neighborhood of an asymptotic rest state
of the wave, or new global structures such as modulated waves which are
composite waves that consist of a wave and periodic patterns. Modulated waves
are known to exist in parabolic systems. A component of this project is devoted
to the study of modulated waves in partly parabolic systems. Traveling waves are
abundant in nature and human activities. They arise in applied problems from
different fields: optical communication, combustion theory, biomathematics,
chemistry, population dynamics, to name a few. Information about whether
traveling waves exist, how many of them are there in the system, and their
resilience under perturbations assists in understanding of complex phenomena.
Proposed work will help to identify situations when multiple waves exist and
when the transition between them can be anticipated and controlled. Traveling
waves that are observed in real life are usually stable (resilient under small
perturbations). Stable waves withstand inhomogeneity of the medium that carries
them and perturbations that may be caused by a variety of factors. Scientists
and engineers who study traveling waves are interested to know in what parameter
regimes waves are stable, but it is equally important to know what to expect
from an unstable wave. The proposed work will allow detailed and rigorous
conclusions to be drawn about how different perturbations to a wave behave and
what the outcome of an instability is.