* 1311901
* ITEST Strategies - SportsLab:2020 - Bringing Sport Research and Design Challenges into the 21st Century
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,001,529.00

This project is developing and testing a collaborative game-based interactive
environment where students, ages 12-18 form a product design team to create a
concept model and pitch for a sport product design challenge. Participants,
sport researchers, and product experts determine the best pitches with awards
for top designs. SportsLab:2020 brings together pedagogical frameworks from
game- and project-based learning together with design challenge curriculum that
foster learning and understanding of 21st Century skills and STEM concepts.
Participants have access to embedded resources to help as they role-play, learn,
and tryout skills necessary for success in real world careers. A team
collaborative space for planning and tracking progress together with available
apps for real world data collection, evaluation, and presentations are used to
extend the game beyond the classroom. SportsLab:2020 is modeled after Nike's
Innovation Kitchen and Sport Research Lab with an emphasis on creative risk-
taking grounded in sound scientific inquiry and engineering design processes.
The project engages industry partners including Nike and Vernier Software &amp;
Technology for expertise and resources for content as well as awards for the
best designs. Ultimately SportsLab:2020 tests the effectiveness of a game-based
STEM and ICT-infused sport product design challenge sponsored by industry
partners as a way to motivate disengaged youth in ways that lead to potential
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of SportsLab:2020 is
iterative with research on the impact of SportsLab:2020 on participants'
learning, engagement, and disposition, as well as perceptions of their
experience in both formal and informal settings. Across pilot and implementation
phases, approximately 30 teachers and 200 to 300 students will participate in
the challenges. Evaluation includes pre/post tests using established items such
as those from NAEP for STEM-content related to the SportsLab:2020 activities and
items related to 21st century skills. Using artifacts from the competition, the
research examines variation in content knowledge, innovation, and creative
problem solving by the participants. NKO, the project evaluator, is conducting a
qualitative study of science teachers to explore assumptions and perspective on
the use of design challenges to enhance STEM learning. NKO will conduct an
external independent peer-review of the research methods, replicate data
analysis for validity testing of the findings, and comment on decisions,
interventions, and supporting theory to ensure that the work accurately
represent the data and conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SportsLab:2020
project has the potential to serve as the launching pad for a unique nationwide
sport design challenge demonstrating the type of learning called for in numerous
reports that emphasize scientific and engineering practices and crosscutting
concepts. SportsLab:2020 can serve as a model to help educate and motivate the
disengaged learner to become the skilled employee in a quickly changing world.