* 1311605
* Dissertation Research: Fog and the fire regime in southern California shrublands
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Carla D'Antonio, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 16,766.00

For many Mediterranean regions around the world fire disturbance is important
and can have important ecological and economic consequences. One of the primary
controls on fire occurrence, behavior and size is the amount of water present in
plants (called ?live fuel moisture?). When live fuel moisture is low, fires
spread more. Although rainfall is thought to be the main determinant for plant
water content, coastal California experiences seasonal fog during the late
summer when drought is strongest. Plants in this region may be able to use fog
as a water source which could alter their water content. This project seeks to
understand this potential connection between fog and fire disturbance for
coastal California. The first objective is to determine whether or not coastal
shrubland plant species are using fog water. The proposed research utilizes
natural differences in water isotopes between rain and fog to determine what
type of water plants are using, and when. By tracking different sources of water
uptake, this project can establish a link between fog and flammability of
coastal ecosystems in California.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding fire disturbance in
Southern California is a high priority for science and industry alike. Live fuel
moisture is a critical component of the National Fire Danger Rating System as
well as numerous fire modeling efforts. This project will effectively inform the
greater fire science community about the controls on fire disturbance in coastal
California. It may also demonstrate the use of a novel water source for
California shrub ecosystems. This is important for the field of plant ecology as
fog water use in plants is a relatively new discovery. Overall, this study will
be the first attempt to connect a rarely studied climatic event, fog, to local
and regional scale disturbance patterns. The results from this study will enter
the scientific discourse through publications and conference presentations at
the local and international levels. The researchers have a strong commitment to
involving undergraduates in research and mentoring them, especially
underrepresented groups, through their college careers. In addition to mentoring
undergraduates the investigators will continue to work with outreach programs
for mentoring young scientists and with UCSB?s programs such as CAMP (California
Alliance for Minority Participation) and the Research Mentorship Program, a
program for exposing high school students to scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;