* 1311866
* Materials World Network:  Nanostructured Materials for High-Efficiency Solar Energy Harvesting
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Edward Yu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Division of Materials
Research, scientists at the University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin) will
collaborate with the Clausthal University of Technology (TU Clausthal) to
explore materials, processing, and device technologies for high-efficiency
photovoltaic devices and solar cell assemblies that can provide optimal
performance under a broad range of spectral illumination conditions, as required
for applications such as concentrating photovoltaics. Concepts for materials and
band-structure engineering to realize high open circuit voltages simultaneously
with high photocurrent in quantum-well solar cells using GaAs/InxGa1-xAs1-ySby
and GaAs/InxGa1-xAs1-y-zSbyNz heterostructures will be combined with the use of
sub-wavelength-scale metal/dielectric structures for long-wavelength light
trapping in thin-film semiconductor layers, enabling increased absorption in the
quantum-well regions. Epitaxial growth and basic structural and optical
materials characterization at TU Clausthal will be combined with heterostructure
modeling and design, materials and device processing, and optical and electrical
characterization at UT Austin to develop a comprehensive understanding of
epitaxial growth, material quality, optical properties, and carrier transport
processes, enabling optimization of both optical absorption and photogenerated
carrier collection as required to realize the very high power conversion
efficiencies predicted for such devices. In addition, "metasurface" structures
based on multiple layers of metal nanostructure arrays will be designed,
fabricated, and characterized at UT Austin using chemically synthesized metal
nanoparticles and solution-based deposition and assembly techniques developed at
TU Clausthal. Appropriately designed, these structures will provide wavelength-
selective reflectance and transmittance robust to variations in polarization and
angle of incident light, and are expected to enable powerful approaches for
spectral splitting of sunlight in high-efficiency solar cell assemblies. The
synthesis and fabrication approaches used will enable large-area fabrication on
non-planar and flexible surfaces as required for applications such as
wavelength-selective focusing of sunlight. Photovoltaics and renewable energy
concepts will be incorporated into undergraduate education at levels ranging
from a required freshman introductory course to senior-level design projects at
UT Austin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at
the University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin) will collaborate with the
Clausthal University of Technology (TU Clausthal) to explore materials and
manufacturing technologies for high-efficiency conversion of solar power
(sunlight) to electrical power. Emphasis will be placed on technologies that
enable large-scale conversion of solar into electrical power by focusing
sunlight from a large area onto a small, very efficient solar cell. This
approach will allow the use of nanoscale quantum semiconductor structures to
increase the efficiency of the solar cell, and by concentrating sunlight onto a
small area. it can dramatically reduce the usage of rare and expensive elements
and energy-intensive manufacturing processes in solar power systems. A strong
educational component, incorporating freshman electrical engineering pedagogy
and mentoring as well as early introduction to concepts for solar and renewable
energy, development of senior-level design projects relevant to the proposed
research, and involvement in research of undergraduates, particularly from
groups traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering, will be
implemented at UT Austin. The collaboration between UT Austin and TU Clausthal
will provide graduate students with direct involvement in international research
activities and exposure to the increasingly international context of scientific
research.