* 1311257
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of phenology in plant-pollinator interactions and plant reproduction
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Rebecca Irwin, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 15,032.00

Phenology, the timing of natural history events, is important to all organisms.
Each spring, for example, butterflies and bees emerge to forage on freshly
blooming flowers ? all examples of phenological events. Synchrony in these
events is typically determined by changes in temperature or day length.
Increased temperatures due to climate change have altered phenologies of plants
and animals, in some cases causing "mismatches" between organisms that have
historically emerged in abundance at the same times. These mismatches can have
dramatic consequences for survival and reproduction, especially when one species
depends heavily on another species for its success. An example of this is the
emergence of spring wildflowers before emergence of the insects that pollinate
them. The proposed experiment targets the mechanisms behind changes in plant
reproduction due to altered phenology, and will contribute to the current
understanding of how altered phenology affects pollination of native plants.

Phenology is one of the most sensitive ecological responses to climate change,
and changes in phenology are well documented. However, in the face of climate
change, the lack of information on the effects of altered phenology on
pollination is troubling. The vast majority of flowering plants, including many
food crops, rely on insects or other animals for pollination, and pollinators
provide an estimated $112 billion/year in ecosystem services; therefore,
investigating how climate change could affect plants, pollinators and their
interactions is critically important. The results of this study will provide
insight into how a key ecosystem service will respond to variation in phenology
associated with climate warming. In addition, the proposed research integrates
teaching, mentoring, and field investigation and provides a field research
opportunity for an undergraduate student.