* 1311751
* Conference:  Seasonal to Interannual Hydroclimate Forecasts and Water Management, Portland, OR, July/August 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Sankarasubraman Arumugam, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 49,998.00

1311751 (Arumugam). This conference will convene climate scientists,
hydrologists, forecasting agencies, water utilities, reservoir operators and
water management agencies together to advance understanding of the challenges
and opportunities in developing hydroclimate forecasts relevant to water
resources management. The conference will be held in Portland, OR during the end
of July-begining of August, 2013. Over four days, the participants will focus on
various issues related to hydroclimate forecasts and water management by
addressing the following science questions: (1) What are the key sources of
uncertainties that challenge development of skillful hydroclimate forecasts at
daily, seasonal and interannual time scales? (2) How best do we reduce the
uncertainty and improve reliability in downscaling largescale climate
information for developing regional hydroclimate forecasts? (3) What are the key
challenges in using probabilistic streamflow information in operational water
resource management models and decision tools? (4) What are the limitations in
applying streamflow forecasts for real-time applications? (5) How can we bridge
the gaps between forecast producers (agencies, research institutions) and
forecast consumers (water resource managers, operational agencies) for improving
forecast applications in water management? These questions will be addressed in
oral and poster sessions with invited and contributed talks. Also included will
be a panel discussion for each day of the conference to discuss the critical
points from the day?s oral and poster sessions. The conveners will prepare a
monograph on ?Seasonal to Interannual Hydroclimate Forecasts for Water Resources
Management? based on the invited talks and panel discussions. NSF funds will be
used primarily to support participation of young faculty, students and
minorities from the US.