* 1311144
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Using Anchored Phylogenomics to Test the Validity of Suture Zones and Refugia Through Comparative Phylogeography of Amphibians
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Emily Lemmon, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2016
* USD 19,110.00

The processes that promote species diversity are of central importance in
evolutionary biology. Suture zones are defined as geographic regions of overlap
between multiple pairs of species or lineages that may hybridize in the zone.
These areas are of great interest as natural laboratories to study speciation.
The leading hypothesis explaining the formation of suture zones is that past
changes in climate caused lineages to be isolated in refugia and subsequently
expand into areas of overlap. It is unclear, however, whether suture zones are a
general phenomenon across all species. This project will combine recent advances
in sequencing technology and geographic information systems to: (1) test whether
predicted patterns of suture zones exist across multiple frog species in the
Southeastern U.S., and (2) test the leading hypothesis explaining their
formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will apply a novel method of data
collection, anchored phylogenomics, to sequence hundreds of genetic markers
across four co-distributed species. This will develop the foundation for future
studies to build on a comparative dataset by including the same genomic regions
for additional species, providing a powerful way to test the factors underlying
spatial genetic variation. The project provides opportunities to promote
training of graduate and undergraduate students, assist state wildlife agencies
with monitoring amphibian populations, and contribute knowledge to issues of
societal concern such as the organismal response to climate change.