* 1311183
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: FORECASTING GLOBAL WARMING EFFECTS ON DEVELOPMENTAL PERFORMANCE OF PRAIRIE STREAM FISHES ALONG THE RIVER CONTINUUM
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Keith Gido, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2014
* USD 12,695.00

Predicting where species occur on a landscape is a fundamental aspect of ecology
and an essential step in the conservation of biological diversity. Environmental
niche modeling is a common tool for predicting species distributions, but
limited understanding of causal relationships between the occurrence or
abundance of a species and environmental variables limits the generality of
these models. Improved understanding of how individual performance varies along
environmental gradients is necessary to develop mechanistically-based
environmental niche models. This research is motivated by the observation that
the distribution of many stream fishes varies along a stream size gradient, but
little is known about the mechanistic relationship between stream size and
species distribution. The project will develop niche models to predict
distribution of fish species in streams draining the Flint Hills of the central
United States, which exhibit a strong temperature gradient from headwaters to
large rivers. Given the universal importance of temperature as an environmental
factor constraining metabolic, survival, and growth rates of individuals and
vital rates of populations, it is predicted that temperature-dependent
performance varies among species and determines among-species differences in
distributional patterns. This study will test that hypothesis by quantifying
inter- and intraspecific variation in egg developmental rate as a function of
temperature to see if it explains differences in stream size - abundance
relationships among four fish species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
provide mechanistically-based environmental niche models for four temperate
freshwater fish species, which will inform conservation planners about current
distributions and distributional changes in response to anthropogenic climate
change. The project will also advance a broadly-applicable framework for
developing environmental niche models for other temperate freshwater fish
species, particularly threatened and endangered species. These models will be
disseminated to state natural resource agencies and will be incorporated into
planning tools used to inform conservation efforts in the Great Plains. This
project will provide an undergraduate student with practical research experience
in field and laboratory settings and support the dissertation research of a
doctoral student.