* 1311790
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: New Insights on the Evolution of Flight in Dinosaurs Using CT and PET Technology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Mark Norell, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2015
* USD 20,127.00

Birds are living theropod (carnivorous) dinosaurs and the suite of plumage and
wing features that enable bird flight are well known to have evolved first in
non-avian dinosaurs. Because brains do not directly fossilize, however, our
evolutionary understanding of the neurological control system for flight has
lagged far behind. Fortuitously, advanced imaging techniques, such as
Computerized Tomography scanning ? which images the interior of bone and fossils
for digital recreation ? and Positron Emission Tomography scanning ? which
measures brain activity during prescribed behaviors ? now make it possible to
pair anatomical changes in the size and shape of the brain with behavioral
patterns of brain use. This project will adapt these tools to address how the
evolution of flight-active parts of the modern avian brain contributed to the
dinosaurian transition to flight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly integrative
nature of this research will be transformative as it addresses a major
transition in vertebrate evolution, and impacts neuroscience and paleobiology.
Dissemination will occur in both English and Spanish through the researcher?s
website, designed as a platform for encouraging young women and minorities to
pursue scientific careers. Additional, broad outreach will take place through
the American Museum of Natural History and collaborating institutions (Columbia
University, Brookhaven National Laboratory).