* 1311414
* Spatiotemporal pattern formation in some nonlocal and local dynamical systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Gregory Faye, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 11/30/2014
* USD 71,333.00

This proposal aims at understanding the spatiotemporal patterns of some
spatially extended systems that are organized around a bifurcation. More
specifically, this research will study patterns emerging spontaneously and in a
self-organized fashion for problems related to visual cortical activity and
convections patterns. Model systems are nonlocal and local equations defined on
unbounded spatial domains. An approach is to use a neural fields setting
(nonlocal) to study the spatiotemporal dynamics of the visual cortex and the
Swift-Hohenberg family (local) to analyze the formation of domain boundaries in
convection patterns. It is proposed to focus on three mains projects. The focus
of the first project is to give some new insights into the spatiotemporal
dynamics of visual hallucinations and ongoing cortical activity in the presence
of hexagonal symmetry close to different types of bifurcations. A second project
is to provide existence and stability results of different types of two-
dimensional cortical waves such as planar traveling waves, concentric traveling
waves and spiral waves. Finally, the last project is to extend the analysis of
grain boundaries into three directions: i) study small angle grain boundaries,
ii) show the existence of asymmetric grain boundaries and iii) investigate
hexagonal grain boundaries. From a phenomenological perspective, it is proposed
to investigate the role of the different parameters of the models in a
systematic fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods that are develop have a
wide applicability in neurosciences, fluid and crystal dynamics. Visual
hallucinations, two-dimensional cortical waves and convection patterns are most
of the time organized around spatiotemporal coherent structures. A detailed
theoretical and conceptual analysis of their structure, stability properties,
and bifurcations is essential.