* 1311354
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny and Biogeography of Hyaenodontidae (Mammalia, Placentalia)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Erik Seiffert, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 05/31/2015
* USD 16,349.00

In modern ecosystems, the mammals at the top of the food chain are members of
the order Carnivora, such as dogs, cats, and hyaenas. But for the much of the
Age of Mammals, carnivorans shared the meat-eating niche with an extinct family
of mammals called Hyaenodontidae. Species from this diverse family could be
found across Eurasia, North America, and Africa. In Africa, these mammals were
the primary predators in the ecosystems where our early ancestors evolved.
Despite their carnivorous habits, hyaenodontids might not have been closely
related to carnivorans, and their place in the mammalian family tree has not yet
been established. This research project will clarify the relationships between
hyaenodontid species and test the family?s position within the mammalian family
tree using molecular and anatomical evidence and sophisticated techniques for
reconstructing relationships between species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better
understanding of the earliest land-based carnivores is essential for
understanding the evolution of modern mammalian ecosystems, the evolution of
meat-dependent diets, and the biological connections between Eurasian, African,
and American ecosystems through the early Cenozoic Era (65 to 10 million years
ago). This research has already generated collaborations with high school
students, undergraduate students, and has formed part of a course offered to
Women in Science and Engineering at Stony Brook University. It has also
generated online resources for late elementary and high school teachers who want
to use paleontology to teach New York core-curriculum objectives.