* 1311795
* Mean curvature flow, minimal surfaces and Ricci flow
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Niels Moeller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2018
* USD 157,897.00

The three topics in the title of the project enjoy strong connections and
analogies between them, which for some aspects are also directly useful in a
rigorous setting. Thus, a large portion of the proposed project concerns the
further extension of gluing techniques for solutions of the nonlinear partial
differential equations of minimal surfaces and constant mean curvature surfaces,
to study important existence and uniqueness questions for singularities and long
time behavior of the two curvature flows. Such transplantation of techniques has
already proven successful, also in the previous work of the
P.I.&lt;br/&gt;Firstly, in the project the P.I. will, in collaboration with
Prof. Nicos Kapouleas (at Brown University) and Dr. Stephen J. Kleene (at MIT),
continue their joint work on gluing constructions for minimal surfaces and mean
curvature flow singularities for surfaces in 3-manifolds, and applications to
solitons in the curvature flows. Secondly, the PI will, in collaboration with
Dr. HÃ¶skuldur P. Halldorsson, establish existence results for new types of long
time solutions under mean curvature flow in Euclidean space. Thirdly, the P.I.
will, alone or in collaboration with others, study time-dependent gluing
constructions in mean curvature flow, and explore an analogous problem for
3-dimensional Ricci flow, which will further help guiding the on-going study of
properties of this flow by many other researchers. Fourth, alone or in
collaboration with others, initiate the study of gluing constructions for other
nonlinear geometric PDEs. For example in relation to conformal geometry, complex
geometry and constraints on Ricci
curvature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minimizing the area of an interface
between two regions is a fundamental problem which arises in many scientific and
engineering applications. Mean curvature flow, being defined as the fastest way
to locally decrease the area of a given surface, is formulated as a partial
differential equation, very similar in nature to that which governs the flow of
heat in a material. While key foundational results are known, many of the basic
questions remain unanswered. Already, many very striking applications, lauded by
experts across the sciences, have in recent years followed from the study of
these particular flows. Many more are expected to arise both within and outside
of mathematics, such as in astronomy, to black holes and the large-scale
structure of the universe, and in chemistry, to complex molecules. The proposal
involves research problems at varying levels, and so there is rich opportunity
and concrete plans to include as well undergraduate students as graduate
students, postdoctoral and faculty researchers across institutions in the
project. Given the manifest geometric and physically motivated nature of the
material, the ideas and results of the project are also very suitable for an
inspiring communication, visually and otherwise, to a broad audience.