* 1311088
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Gloria Guy, Guy                     Gloria         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Gloria Guy of the University of California, Los Angeles to
conduct a research project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area
during the summer of 2013 at Meiji University in Tokyo, Japan. The project title
is "Comparing Ideological Narratives of Japanese State Formation." The host
scientist is Professor Ken'ichi Sasaki.

Archaeological investigations into state formation processes advance not only
our understanding of the origin and development of individual nation-states, but
also the ideological underpinnings of the global nation-state system. Modern
citizens' understanding of their nation's history affects contemporary
international politics, and this understanding is largely constructed through
presumably objective archaeological research. Due to the difficulty of the
Japanese written language, the unavailability of Japanese archaeological
research findings abroad, and the restrictive Cultural Protection laws governing
archaeological sites, the state of the Japanese archaeology field is extremely
difficult for American researchers to ascertain, thus necessitating on-site
collaborative research. This project compares the fieldwork practice, site-
reports, museum displays, and popular history texts, for their presentation of
kofun burial mounds and their relation to the formation of a complex, state-
level society in 4-7th centuries CE, with particular attention to the role of
ideology in each narrative.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of Japanese archaeological practice in an
otherwise restrictive field; and an orientation to the society, culture and
language. These activities meet the NSF goal to educate for international
collaborations early in the career of its scientists, engineers, and educators,
thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific workforce. Furthermore, this
research will illuminate how scholarly research on the past is re-packaged for
popular consumption, with implications for how museum displays are crafted to
best engage a viewing public.