* 1311844
* COMPLEXITY AND RIGIDITY IN LOW DIMENSIONAL GEOMETRY
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Yair Minsky, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2016
* USD 343,950.00

The PI plans to investigate aspects of the interaction of topology and geometry
in 2 and 3 dimensions, focusing in particular on the relations between
topological and geometric complexity. A primary feature in this investigation is
a certain localization of complexity that occurs in maps of surfaces, and has
deep relations to the theory of 3-manifolds and their hyperbolic structure, as
well as to the geometry of the Teichmuller and moduli space of conformal
structures on a surface. The structure of the complex of curves on a surface
plays a role in all these settings, which the PI plans to continue investigating
and refining. Particular goals include genus-independent versions of existing
theorems on the complex of curves, or versions where genus dependence is
explicit; quantitative control of Thurston's skinning map; and better
understanding of other settings where gluing maps determine the structure of
hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Particular attention will be paid to the compressible-
boundary case. In Teichmuller theory, the PI will investigate the behavior of
Weil-Petersson geodesic flow and its relation to combinatorial invariants
arising from the complex of curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometry and
topology play a fundamental role in mathematics. Geometric spaces arise in many
settings, either as explicit objects we visualize directly, or via abstractions
such as configuration spaces of systems or parameter spaces. The topology of a
space is the way it is combinatorially put together without regard to geometry,
but often these topological descriptions suffice to determine the geometry
uniquely. This phenomenon is called rigidity and plays a central role. In low
dimensions there is a confluence of many different aspects of mathematics which
interact with rigidity, including analysis, complex analysis and dynamics.
Moreover, the visualizability and accessibility of the low-dimensional setting
brings many subtle phenomena into focus and serves as a testing ground for new
mathematical ideas. Within this setting we propose to investigate a number of
quantitative aspects of rigidity, particularly ways in which complexity in the
topological description translates to features of the geometry.