* 1311637
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Variation in tick host preference and its epidemiological impact
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Lauren Meyers, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 18,566.00

Ticks feed on many different host species, including humans. While doing so,
they can contract and spread infectious diseases but it remains unclear which
hosts and which ticks drive the prevalence of tick-borne diseases. This research
focuses on the bacterium, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, which is carried by the Lone
Star tick and is known to cause disease in humans and to infect white-tailed
deer. Lone Star ticks also feed on a variety of other species, including
raccoons and Virginia opossums, whose role in E. chaffeensis outbreaks is
unclear. The aim of this project is to advance our understanding of the multi-
host transmission of E. chaffeensis, with a particular focus on how ticks choose
their hosts. Using a combination of experiments on tick behavior, studies of
tick genetic variation, and mathematical modeling of disease transmission, this
project will identify how tick feeding preferences and the variety of host
species contribute to the spread of E. chaffeensis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work is relevant to public health and wildlife management, and may lead to the
development of effective tick-borne disease prevention and control strategies.
Some of the field work will be conducted on state- and federally-owned land, and
the findings will be shared with the managers of these properties. Several
undergraduate students will participate in the research, and will be trained in
cutting-edge molecular laboratory techniques that will both enhance their
studies and advance the goals of this project.