* 1311958
* Formation of Molecular Hydrogen and Water on Warm Grains
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Gianfranco Vidali, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2017
* USD 703,586.00

This investigation will study the formation of molecular hydrogen and water on
warm (T&gt;50 K) analogs of grains in the interstellar medium (ISM). The
researchwill use state-of-the-art techniques to recreate in the laboratory the
processes associated with the formation of these molecules on dust grains in
space environments. Over the years, the Principal Investigator (PI) has built a
group of collaborators who will: 1) provide characterized analogs of dust
grains; 2) build ab-initio potentials to study the radical-surface interaction;
and 3) implement stochastic methods to use laboratory derived quantities in
models of the chemical evolution of space environments. This project is about
the formation of two molecules: hydrogen (H2) and water. Molecular hydrogen -
the most abundant molecule in space - is made almost exclusively on dust grains.
The PI's laboratory conducted the first studies of hydrogen formation on dust
analogs (amorphous and crystalline silicates, amorphous carbon and water ices)
at low (5-30 K) temperature. But it is known that molecular hydrogen is also
formed in environments where the dust temperature is higher (such as in
protoplanetary disks) and that different mechanisms operate in these conditions.
This project will extend the previous work by targeting the formation
(mechanisms and efficiencies) of H2 formation on surfaces of amorphous
silicates, polycyclics aromatic hydrocarbons, and graphitic carbon. There are
currently no comprehensive studies of H2 formation on dust grain analogs at high
(T&gt;50K) temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water is a well-recognized pre-
requisite for the complex chemistry linked to the emergence and sustainability
of life; Interactions of atoms in the gas-phase cannot explain its abundance in
the interstellar medium so it is hypothesized that water forms on the surface of
interstellar dust grains. This research group is currently completing an NSF-
sponsored study of the formation of water via the reaction of hydrogen and
oxygen atoms with amorphous silicates and graphite at low temperature. This
project will extend the investigation to water formation on grains at higher
temperature (as, for example, in protoplanetary disks. This topic is important
in understanding the delivery of water to and its incorporation in planets.