* 1311610
* WORKSHOP: The 2013 HRI Pioneers Workshop at the 2013 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Peter Kahn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2014
* USD 34,575.00

This is funding to support a Young Pioneers Workshop (doctoral consortium) of
approximately 20 graduate students and post-docs (including 15 U.S.
participants) from diverse research communities (e.g., computer science and
engineering, psychology, cognitive science, robotics, human factors, human-
computer interaction design, and communications), along with distinguished
research faculty. NSF funding will be used solely to cover travel, housing, and
subsistence for eligible U.S. attendees. The event will take place on Sunday,
March 3, 2013, immediately preceding the Eighth Annual Human Robot Interaction
Conference (HRI 2013), to be held March 3-6, 2013, in Tokyo, Japan, and which is
jointly sponsored by ACM and IEEE. HRI is a single-track, highly selective
annual international conference that seeks to showcase the very best inter- and
multi-disciplinary research in human-robot interaction with roots in social
psychology, cognitive science, HCI, human factors, artificial intelligence,
robotics, organizational behavior, anthropology and many more, and invites broad
participation. The theme of HRI 2013 is "Holistic Human-Robot Development."
Robotic solutions are increasingly applied to real world problems such as our
aging society, renewable energy, climate control, emergency response, education
and exploration. These societal problems require a holistic approach to the
design and development of robots that meet human needs, address technical
challenges, and foster acceptance in everyday settings. More information about
the conference is available online at http://humanrobotinteraction.org/2013.

The Young Pioneers Workshop is designed to complement the conference, by
providing a forum for students and recent graduates in the field of HRI to share
their current research with their peers and a panel of senior researchers in a
setting that is less formal and more interactive than the main conference.
During the workshop, participants will talk about the important upcoming
research themes in the field, encouraging the formation of collaborative
relationships across disciplines and geographic boundaries. To these ends, the
workshop format will include oral presentations from 2 student attendees, poster
presentations from all student attendees, a hands-on breakout session with group
presentations, a keynote, and a panel presentation by senior researchers who
will share their expertise and insights on how to address the interdisciplinary
challenge of HRI. The afternoon breakout session will involve small groups of
3-5 attendees with diverse backgrounds, working to design an integrative HRI
project, thereby encouraging group participation and the cultivation of cross-
disciplinary ideas. The presentation session afterward will allow each breakout
group to present a summary to the entire workshop; the organizers anticipate
that the discussions will continue during dinner.

Broader Impacts: This workshop will afford a unique opportunity for the best of
the next generation of researchers in human-robot interaction to be exposed to
and discuss current and relevant topics as they are being studied in several
different research communities (including but not limited to computer science
and engineering, psychology, robotics, human factors and ergonomics, and HCI).
This is important for the field, because it has been recognized that
transformative advances in research in this fledgling area can only come through
the melding of cross-disciplinary knowledge and multinational perspectives.
Participants will be encouraged to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development, to form collaborative relationships, and to generate new research
questions to be addressed during the coming years. Participants will also gain
leadership and service experience, as the workshop is largely student organized
and student led. The PI has expressed his strong commitment to recruiting women
and members from other under-represented groups. To further ensure diversity,
the event organizers will consider an applicant's potential to offer a fresh
perspective and point of view with respect to HRI, and no more than one
applicant will be accepted from any given institution.