* 1311908
* Collaborative Research: Marine Technology for Teachers and Students (MaTTS)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Ivar Babb, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2017
* USD 322,897.00

The Marine Technology for Teachers and Students (MaTTS) program provides
opportunities for teams of teachers and students from southern New England to
experience new technologies related to exploring the global ocean, discover
pathways in marine careers using these new tools, and develop leadership
capacity. These interventions are being evaluated to determine their impact on
the skills, knowledge, practices, and attitudes of the teachers and students
that are related to the STEM workforce. Partner school districts include high-
need schools. Each year, a cohort of 12 teacher leaders is selected to
participate in 99 hours of face-to-face professional development. In addition, a
minimum of 15 hours of virtual contact using Information and Communication
Technology occurs through monthly webinars and live broadcasts from the Inner
Space Center (ISC) at URI. MaTTS doubles the number of direct contact hours
found to tip the scales toward improved practice in traditional teacher PD. The
teacher professional development contains ocean science and technology training
to prepare them for working with student leaders during an intensive summer
institute. Twenty-four high school student leaders join each year's teacher
cohort, two students from each of the participating teachers' schools. The
teacher/student teams are in residence at the ISC, where they will build,
calibrate, and deploy sensor-based instruments; participate in field exercises
and collect and analyze data; and meet with ocean scientists, engineers, and
technicians from academia and industry. The project engages the teams over a 14
month period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project cultivates innovative thinking
among its student participants by exposing them to marine technologies that
allow scientists to reach the extremes of the deep sea environment and collect
near shore data that helps us to better manage coastal resources and monitor
conditions that affect every day life. Students and teachers gain new skills as
they stand watches in the ISC during ocean research explorations that expose
them to open-ended, real-world problem solving. They interact with ocean
scientists and engineers, both on the ground and at sea. Teacher leaders mentor
colleagues at their school. They share content and marine technology, its
applications, and associated classroom activities. They also develop plans for
integrating more technology into their classes. The teacher teams keep an
electronic mentoring journal on the project's website, which allows for sharing
activities and results. The student leaders assist their teachers in introducing
new marine technologies to their classmates and conduct activities with middle
school students in their district.