* 1311451
* Dissertation Research:   Ecological causes and consequences of intraspecific trait variation in an aquatic consumer
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Bradley Carlson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2014
* USD 19,370.00

Individuals within populations often differ in traits such as size, behavior,
morphology, and physiology. Ecologists have only recently begun realizing the
importance of this trait variation to understanding the functioning of
ecosystems. Advancing this area of research requires not only that we understand
how trait variation within a species affects broader ecological interactions,
but also how the origins of trait variation and their ecological context
determines the magnitude of trait variation that is sustained within
populations. This project seeks to clarify that relationship, so as to enable
prediction of the conditions under which trait variation will develop. These
fundamental issues will be tested using an experimental system of tadpole
populations established within artificial ponds. Two experiments will be
conducted to test how ecological factors in experimental pond communities
affect, and are in turn affected by, morphological and behavioral variation in
tadpoles. Important ecological variables, including predation, competition, and
spatial variation in food quality, will be manipulated in the ponds in order to
quantify the effect on tadpole trait variation. Conversely, the amount of trait
variation in tadpoles will be experimentally altered in order to determine how
the variation itself affects ecological components of the pond ecosystem.

This research will provide insight into the value of biodiversity, and the
consequences of biodiversity loss, for ecosystem functioning. Results will be
disseminated through outreach activities targeted at farmers and others
attending Penn State's Agriculture Progress Days, and involving inmates at a
local correctional facility, thereby enhancing science literacy in diverse
groups. Results of this project will be further shared with the public by
creating engaging and easy-to-understand videos made available to interested
individuals around the world and for use in classrooms via the Internet. This
project will provide several undergraduates with field research experience, and
support the doctoral research of a graduate student.