* 1311735
* In Situ Sensing System for the Selective and Sensitive Detection of Biological Toxins in HABs
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Sungyong Jung, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2016
* USD 386,190.00

The increasing frequency of harmful algal blooms (HABs) in marine and freshwater
environments worldwide is a significant public health and environmental science
concern because of the potential release of biological toxins -- in particular,
microcystins (MCs) produced from cyanobacterial HABs. Current monitoring methods
employing on-site sampling followed by in-lab analysis of HAB toxins (direct
micro-observation) are neither sustainable nor practical to meet the vast
spatial and temporal measuring need. Alternatively, remote sensing approaches
based on identifying standard color products from satellite images (indirect
macro-observation) are useful for monitoring general algal bloom activities.
However, such color products are neither specific to HABs nor necessarily
indicative of toxin release. As a result, it is important to determine the
toxic/non-toxic nature of algal blooms and even identify the species of HAB
toxins in a more effective, sustainable, and responsive manner. In our efforts
to find a complementary approach to the two different observing methods, the
overall goal of this proposed study is to real-time monitor the level of MCs in
situ using an innovative wireless sensor network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, researchers at the University of Texas at Arlington, New Mexico State
University, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute will explore: (1) novel
approaches to monitor toxin release during HAB activities, (2) innovative ideas
to qualify and quantify various MCs at trace levels, and (3) integrated ways to
realize the sensor network suitable for field applications. The proposed sensing
system will utilize a surface-customized optical antenna to assay MCs
selectively and sensitively. The antenna, consisting of arrays of resonant
nanostructures with various transducer layers specific to multiple MCs, detects
specific bindings of MCs to the transducer layers by analyzing the spectral
characteristics of the subwavelength surface plasmon. A wireless sensing network
to communicate assay data and operation command between sensing nodes and remote
authorities will be developed. Most of the components necessary for executing
the sensing protocol, including array chip, optical sensor, photo-detector
array, and circuitries, are incorporated into a chip-size single substrate for
system automation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results of this
project are expected to have significant impacts on the design and development
of sensor networks and on scientific studies in the area of in situ
environmental monitoring. The in situ real-time monitoring approach benefits
immediate decision-making and timely response, which are crucial elements for
establishing an early warning system as an environmental infrastructure.
Educational impacts include students training by participating in the project,
research integration with curricula, and hands-on research experience using the
in situ sensor network testbed. Software tools and simulators developed during
this project will be made available via the internet to research and education
communities. Team members will take advantage of the existing organizations and
programs in the participating universities to recruit and mentor students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JOINT FUNDING BY NSF AND NIEHS:
The original proposal on which this project is based (R01 ES021951-01) was
submitted to the National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences
(NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding Opportunity Announcement RFA-ES-11-013 ,
"Oceans, Great Lakes and Human Health (R01)", an opportunity jointly sponsored
by NSF. This project is cooperatively funded through separate awards from NSF
and NIEHS.