* 1311326
* Testing Claims of Different Stellar Initial Mass Functions
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Dennis Zaritsky, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2017
* USD 318,997.00

They will study whether stars form in the same manner throughout the Universe.
Their specific question is whether stars form in nearby galaxies follow the same
distribution of star birth weights as is found in our galaxy. Some stars in our
galaxy are born as massive giants and others are small dwarfs, but astronomers
have found a pattern in the sizes of stars, called the Initial Mass Function
(IMF). They have devised an experiment to determine whether this pattern is
universal. The answer to their question is important for understanding how
galaxies form and whether these galaxies contain dark matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional wisdom, based on extensive studies of
Galactic star formation regions, is that the IMF is invariant. However, indirect
evidence based on observation of starburst galaxies, elliptical galaxies, and
the high redshift universe suggests that some variations exist. Neither argument
is convincing. Galactic studies do not constrain the IMF in all environments
because they probe a limited parameter range (interstellar radiation field,
density). On the other hand, the extragalactic arguments are based on highly
simplified stellar population modeling, with few constraints on star formation
histories and the luminosities of evolved stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zaritsky
has previously uncovered straightforward evidence for IMF variations within the
Local Group of galaxies, where it is possible to study the stellar populations
in detail and over a wider range of environments than found near the Sun. In
mostly older stellar clusters, the inferred IMF is consistent with distribution
of stars in the local neighborhood near our Sun. They will attempt to prove the
significance of the variations in birth weights using a remarkable new camera
system for observing distant star clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their project
will train a graduate student and prove the capabilities of the new high
sensitivity camera system. In addition, they plan to use their research results
as the basis for a set of public lectures to illustrate how scientific thought
develops.