* 1311408
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing Alternative Dispersal Routes for Neotropical Lowland Freshwater Fishes: Integration of Phylogeny, Physiology, and Geology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Caleb McMahan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,240.00

The diverse freshwater fish fauna of Middle America (the region that includes
(Mexico, Central America, and the Greater Antilles) has been tied to a myriad of
notable biogeographic patterns; however, many of these patterns have not been
rigorously examined. In cases where biogeographic patterns cannot be tied to
geological events (e.g. the movement of tectonic plates) researchers often fall
back on the untested hypothesis of marine dispersal. However, these freshwater
species may not be crossing marine habitats or surviving in them for any length
of time. This study will test marine dispersal hypotheses (by examining salt
tolerance in these species) and raise a novel hypothesis for long distance
dispersal in Middle America, namely river dispersal (a hypothesis that
freshwaters and their fauna are periodically interconnected by periods of
flooding). This study will take a new and integrative approach to unravel the
biogeographic history of Neotropical lowland freshwater fishes with similar
distributions in Middle America. Methods and data from physiology and geology
will be used to vigorously test and distinguish between competing hypotheses.
The river dispersal hypothesis could offer a new alternative explanation for the
distribution of these fishes via dispersal through lowland rivers, and the
results of this work could be used to explain and test the distributions of
tropical freshwater species around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
and underrepresented minority training is a major aspect of this work. Students
will be involved in all aspects of this project from fieldwork, to publication,
to presentation of these analyses at national and international meetings. The
work will largely be conducted at the Louisiana State University Museum of
Natural Science (LSUMNS), a research museum with numerous outreach activities
through the university and local community. This study also has a large
international component and participating scientists and students in these
countries will be active participants in the research. In addition, all
specimens and field data from their work will be deposited in the LSUMNS and
will be readily available to researchers globally.