* 1311513
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Disentangling phylogenetic relationships in an explosive bird radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Mark Holder, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2015
* USD 19,256.00

Rapid evolutionary radiations allow tremendous insights into speciation and
biogeographic history. However, reconstruction of evolutionary relationships in
such radiations has often been challenging owing largely to short periods of
time between lineage-splitting events. Preliminary simulations show that using
DNA sequence data from hundreds of gene regions helps improve estimates of
genealogical relationships between species in rapid radiations. This study aims
to resolve relationships within the bird family Zosteropidae, a group
characterized by the fastest speciation rate known among land vertebrates.
Investigators will use next generation sequencing technology to collect DNA
sequence data from hundreds of genomic regions to illuminate evolutionary
relationships among members of the family.&lt;br/&gt;Resolution of genealogic
relationships within Zosteropidae is vital to opening novel research avenues in
historical biogeography across several archipelagos in the Old World. More
broadly, this research can provide methodological insights into paths toward
resolving relationships in other rapid evolutionary radiations. This study
provides an excellent training opportunity for undergraduate students supported
by KU?s Office of Diversity in Science Training. Through this project the
investigators will help prepare undergraduates from underrepresented groups for
careers in science through mentoring in collecting and analyzing data, as well
as in presenting and publishing research.