* 1311123
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Stephanie Crockett, Crockett                Stephanie      D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Stephanie Crockett of University of California Davis to
conduct a research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Nanyang
Technological University in Singapore. The project title is "Novel
Chemotherapeutic Agent Delivery and Imaging System Using Nanoparticles and
Photothermal Therapy." The host scientist is Dr. Yanli Zhao at the School of
Materials Science & Engineering.

The goal of this project is to test the novel delivery system designed by Dr.
Yanli Zhao of multifunctional mesoporous silica nanoparticles with the
therapeutic potential of sulfasalazine and curcumin and for the targeted
treatment of cancer cells. The intellectual merit is in the design to combine
fields: targeted drug delivery/photothermal therapy and advanced therapeutic
imaging of novel therapeutic anti-cancer agents. Through the use of human glioma
cells expressing red fluorescent protein (U251-RFP) in embryos zebrafish, this
project is able to visually track targeting, and quantitatively measure the
effective kill effect of the system using a whole body system. This technology
can be used for non-invasive cancer treatments that in the near future may be
used to save thousands of lives

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow anticipates that the discoveries
of this research will provide the foundation for future collaborations with a
broad range of international scientists in this multidisciplinary field of
study.