* 1311467
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding the hidden roles of parasites in ecosystem processes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Pieter Johnson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 16,379.00

Parasites comprise a large fraction of biodiversity within most ecosystems and
can exert strong effects on individuals, populations and communities of their
hosts. Despite their ubiquity, the roles of parasites in ecosystem processes,
such as fluxes of energy and matter, remain largely unknown due to the rarity of
integration between ecosystem ecology and disease research. The central aim of
this proposal is to examine the influences of parasites on two fundamental
ecosystem processes in freshwaters ? nutrient cycling and primary production.
The proposed research will first quantify the effects of infection by trematode
parasites on two functional traits of snail hosts (grazing and nutrient
excretion) and then use a realistic outdoor mesocosm experiment to quantify the
direct and indirect mechanisms through which trematodes influence nutrient
cycling and primary production. Collectively, this research will help to advance
a conceptual understanding of the roles of parasites in ecosystem processes,
which is a pressing topic in light of changes in parasite communities driven by
ongoing disease emergence, losses of free living biodiversity, and introductions
of novel hosts.&lt;br/&gt;The Co-PI will build upon a proven track record of
community education and outreach by implementing an effective K-12 science
curriculum that focuses on freshwater ecology and global change. The curriculum
is novel in its use of a classroom mesocosm experiment utilizing 1 L glass jars
containing field-collected pond organisms to create miniature freshwater
ecosystems that are subsequently impacted by two widespread forms of global
change: nutrient pollution from fertilizer and invasive species in the form of
non-native snails. The students will closely track the development of their
mesocosms while gaining knowledge on both global change issues and science
standards at the elementary and middle school levels (e.g., hypothesis testing
and critical thinking). In conjunction with outreach, the Co-PI will enhance
ongoing efforts to serve underrepresented students by providing research
opportunities to four undergraduates during the summer field seasons at the
Hopland Research and Extension Center in Mendocino County, California.
&lt;br/&gt;