* 1311597
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Factors Influencing the Coevolution of Peromyscus maniculatus and its Ectoparasites on the California Channel Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Paul Durst, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,002.00

The evolutionary success of a species is greatly influenced by its interactions
with other species sharing its environment. One of the best examples of
evolutionary patterns strongly influenced by interspecific interactions is the
relationship between hosts and their parasites. Studies examining host-parasite
interactions have found that similar evolutionary histories are most often
shared between highly host-specific parasites and their hosts, while generalist
parasites evolve almost independently from their hosts. This raises an important
question: What factors drive patterns of coevolution between hosts and their
parasites? Using the deer mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus, and its ectoparasites
on the California Channel Islands as a model system, this study will investigate
how differences between parasites affect their evolution on and with their
hosts. The study will also examine how the availability of alternative hosts on
different islands affects the relationship between deer mice and their
parasites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a novel system in which
to study host-parasite interactions. Comparing the coevolution of parasites and
their hosts on the Channel Islands will help tease apart the basic factors
influencing evolution in host-parasite systems, which will be important for the
study of both wildlife conservation and the ecology of diseases. Additionally,
this work will provide valuable population genetic information for Channel
Islands deer mice, a species of special concern in California, and it will
provide field research training opportunities for a local undergraduate.