* 1311169
* Dissertation Research: Investigating the Role of a Cryptic Life Stage in Fern Evolution and Community Assembly
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Charles Davis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2015
* USD 21,970.00

Ferns represent a successful and diverse lineage, unified by a unique life cycle
that has persisted for hundreds of millions of years. Unlike bryophytes or seed
plants, the haploid gametophyte and diploid sporophyte of ferns are capable of
occurring largely independent of one another, and thus represent distinct
ecological entities. Current knowledge of fern ecology is based almost
exclusively on the larger, easily observable sporophyte stage; fern gametophytes
in contrast have been mostly ignored by ecologists due to their small size
(typically &lt;1 cm) and lack of morphological characters for reliable species
identification. The gametophyte represents the sexual phase responsible for
reproduction, however, and is thus critically important to understanding fern
ecology. Recent advances in DNA barcoding methods now allow for the reliable
identification of fern gametophytes, and have opened new avenues for research
into this neglected area of plant biology. This study will leverage an extensive
DNA barcode library of the ferns of Moorea, French Polynesia to identify field-
collected gametophytes and compare the distribution and ecological adaptations
of fern gametophytes and sporophytes in a broad evolutionary context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide benefits to multiple groups
including both the local community on Moorea and university students in the
U.S., and will have important implications for fern conservation. Outreach
activities including a multilingual museum display on fern biodiversity are
planned for the Atitia community center on Moorea. In addition, data for this
research will be partially generated by undergraduates trained at Harvard
University. Knowledge of biodiversity will be increased by adding to museum
holdings and describing new species. Finally, investigations into species?
gametophyte distribution will reveal distribution patterns that will be
important to consider when designing conservation programs for endangered fern
species.