* 1311781
* Studies of Topological Order and Real Time Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* S. Sondhi, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2017
* USD 276,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on two significant themes in contemporary materials research. The
first is the study of topological phases which can be broadly defined as phases
of matter characterized by emergent gauge fields. These are to be contrasted
with broken symmetry systems which exhibit emergent local order parameters in
the sense of Landau. The second is the study of real time dynamics in quantum
systems in and out of equilibrium. A significant set of topics involve
ingredients from both themes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is organized in
four clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first cluster involves non-equilibrium
dynamics near thermal and quantum critical points: the so called Kibble-Zurek
problem first introduced into statistical mechanics with a cosmological
motivation. The PI will build on the recent systematization of the Kibble-Zurek
scaling limit and range over a set of model studies of the universal content
using more traditional techniques as well as the newly introduced ideas of
gauge-gravity duality or holography, detailed modeling appropriate to
experimentally promising contexts, conceptual questions such as the relationship
between linear response and fluctuations out of equilibrium and the
identification of slow dynamics in topologically ordered
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second cluster involves the quantum Hall
system which continues to be interesting as the primary source of topologically
ordered states. The research involves the physics of the non-abelian Pfaffian
state that is observed at filling factor 5/2, a new field theory for the quantum
Hall effect which is identified with proximity to a nematic instability and the
physics of localization in a magnetic field in a long range correlated
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third cluster involves a relatively new
system produced by the search for qubits: superconducting circuit arrays. These
allow for the creation of many-body systems where the particles are dressed
photons or polaritons but necessarily involve an out of equilibrium element due
to photon losses. The PI will study their many body physics in a regime not
addressed to date, one which could allow the creation of topological states of
photons. This work will also engage with the non-equilibrium aspects in order to
make sense of the experiments that are envisaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fourth cluster involves magnetic systems. The PI will develop a hydrodynamics
for topologically ordered spin liquids thus paralleling the development of
hydrodynamics for broken symmetry systems. This is particularly interesting in
the context of searches for sharp signatures of spin liquids in experimental
systems that are believed to such states. It is also proposed to examine a new
frustrated magnetic Hamiltonian on the highly frustrated pyrochlore lattice
which has been the source of much interesting physics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education on two frontier topics in
theoretical materials research. The first is the study of new electronic states
of matter in materials and the second is the study of quantum mechanical systems
which are not in equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental frontier
activity in the physics of condensed matter is the identification and analysis
of new phases of matter. Historically, most phases like these were understood to
be examples of spontaneously broken symmetries, where the microscopic entities
arrange themselves in particular static patterns that are less symmetric than
the underlying forces between them. More recently, it has become clear that
matter can exhibit a different family of phases where the symmetry remains
unchanged but instead the constituents arrange themselves into fluctuating
arrays of loops or more complex geometrical arrangements. Such phases also
exhibit the phenomenon of fractionalization wherein their excitations manage to
carry fractions of the quantum numbers, such as electrical charge, of the
microscopic entities, such as electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of such
actual and potential phases is interesting for their intellectual challenge, to
help make sense of an increasing set of laboratory realizations, and most
recently, because a set of them have the potential to serve as a basis for the
construction of a quantum computer which operates through the manipulation of
quantum mechanical states. Such a computer can in principle be many times faster
than the fastest supercomputers for certain algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental theoretical research to
advance the general theory of topological phases. Three experimental systems
will be studied in detail; two of these are also of interest in the context of
quantum computation. The second activity supported by this award is the study of
quantum dynamics out of equilibrium. This is a difficult enterprise as the
mathematical complexity is considerably greater than when systems are in
equilibrium. Recent advances in the laboratory realization of cold atomic
systems which can be readily prepared and studied out of equilibrium have
present opportunities to advance understanding. The work supported by this award
will focus on these and other experimental systems and is a direct descendant of
some seminal work inspired by Cosmology by Kibble and Zurek and thus has
intellectual connections to out of equilibrium behaviour of the universe itself!