* 1311319
* Dissertation Research: Quantifying the role of denitrification as a mechanism for inorganic nitrogen removal in Midwestern rivers
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Jennifer Tank, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2015
* USD 19,710.00

Agricultural and urban development has resulted in increased nitrogen (N)
loading to streams, lakes, rivers, and oceans across the globe. Excess N in
water bodies causes rapid algal growth and these algae eventually die and
decompose, with the decomposition removing oxygen from the water column,
resulting in ?dead zones.? In addition to algal blooms, excess N contaminates
drinking water and can decrease freshwater biodiversity. Denitrification is a
microbially-mediated process that converts dissolved nitrate-N (NO3-) to N
gases, and permanently removes N from ecosystems. The bottoms of streams are
ideal locations for denitrification, where it has been shown to be an important
mechanism for permanent N removal. In contrast, less is known about the role of
denitrification in rivers; this N removal process has been overlooked mainly
because of the challenges associated with field work in systems of this size.
This study will quantify denitrification rates in the water column and river
bottom of 5 rivers in the agricultural Midwest. Using a new technique developed
in estuaries, this project will compare denitrification rates across an
agriculturally induced gradient of NO3- . Additionally, this study will compare
the N removal due to denitrification with other temporary N removal mechanisms
like the incorporation of dissolved N into biomass (e.g. plants and algae).
Small streams have been identified as "hotspots" for water quality improvement
and have thus been the focus of many restoration projects. Rivers, on the other
hand, have been treated as pipes, with their major function being to export
water (and pollutants) downstream. We predict that rivers are similarly
bioreactive, like streams, and play a significant role in improving water
quality and should be managed to maximize bioreactivity to reduce the
environmental effects of N pollution downriver.