* 1311582
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics and Biogeography of the Trypanosoma cruzi Clade
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Susan Perkins, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2014
* USD 20,766.00

Trypanosoma cruzi is the parasite that causes Chagas disease, which infects 8-9
million people in rural Latin America, and the Southern U.S. Despite its
importance, little is known in terms of how and where this parasite evolved.
There are competing hypotheses pointing either to marsupials or bats as original
hosts of T. cruzi and its closest relatives before jumping to other mammals,
including humans. However, no definitive data have been gathered to favor one
hypothesis over the other. This project will dissect the evolutionary
relationships among mammalian trypanosomes to clarify the host and geographic
origins of these parasites through the generation of DNA sequence data from both
museum specimens and contemporary samples followed by molecular phylogenetic and
biogeographic analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will promote
awareness of the importance of museum collections to research efforts. Also, a
new website "PhyloTryp" will be implemented, which will provide standardized
tools and data to facilitate evolutionary research on trypanosomes. Finally, the
training of an undergraduate student will be accomplished through the AMNH REU
program. By the end of the program, the student will have gained basic
laboratory and analytical skills, and a peer-review publication will be prepared
with the mentee.