* 1311165
* US-German Collaboration: Strategy Change in Cognitive Biological and Technical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Robert Kozma, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 09/30/2018
* USD 428,744.00

The ability for strategy change, i.e., the change in action selection and action
planning while an overarching goal is maintained is a fundamental, but still
barely understood capability of cognitive systems. Sudden transitions are well
documented in neurophysiological and cognitive experimental data, but
application of the underlying theory of the spatio-temporal neurodynamics is yet
to be done. Current physiological and theoretical frameworks of learning focus
on incremental learning (as exemplified the reinforcement learning). This
project aims at improved understanding of the nature and functional role of
abrupt, large-scale state transitions in complex neuronal systems as the basis
of cognitive strategy change. We exploit our experimental and theoretical
understanding of a particular rodent learning model to simulate the neuronal
mechanisms of instantaneous strategy change. The investigators will develop an
algorithmic formulation of the neurocomputational principles, and apply it in
the engineering example of autonomous vehicle control. This interdisciplinary
project is based on the complementary and synergistic expertise of the team
members in optimization theory and both theoretical and experimental
neuroscience.

This project arises from our deep understanding of the rapid biological and
cognitive processes displayed by strategy changes in coping with changing
environments. This research on decision making in human and animal brains
provides a platform for developing robust decision support systems that operate
in dynamically changing scenarios in the style of brains. Detailed analysis of
the mechanisms underlying rapid strategy change in brains will allow both this
research team and other groups to equip various man-made systems with the
fundamental property of insightful cognition. This work addresses important
societal needs by creating the foundations of cognitive engineering systems
supporting emergency response to natural disasters and cyber security threats by
adversaries, as well as optimized control of autonomous vehicles under complex
operating conditions.

This award is being co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering. A companion project is being funded by the German Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF).