* 1311464
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing the effects of climate change on biotic interactions structuring herbivore communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Deron Burkepile, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,294.00

Climate change is likely to increase average temperatures by 2 ? 6&#730; C over
the next century. Unfortunately, scientists lack the data necessary to make
accurate predictions about the effects of this increase on biological
communities. Most experiments on warming have focused on single species. In
contrast, this project will test effects of increasing temperatures on multiple
plant, herbivore, and predator species. To examine whether temperature alters
effectiveness of how plants defend themselves against insect pests, plants will
be grown under different temperatures and exposed to insect herbivores at
different times. To examine whether rising temperatures can increase the rate at
which the same insects are eaten by their predators, entire communities of
plants, herbivores and predators will be reared under current and future
temperature conditions. The ability of predatory insects to control populations
of herbivorous insects will then be measured. These two experiments will
identify how climate change might affect complex interactions between plants and
insects, which will aid researchers in developing predictive models. Invasive
insect species are responsible for considerable damage to economically important
crop species. Importantly, many of the herbivores used in the two experiments
described here are agricultural and horticultural pests or are closely related
to such pests. The results of the first experiment will determine whether
economically important plants will be able to adequately defend themselves
against insect pests under warmer climates. Likewise, the second experiment will
determine whether predators can control population sizes of agricultural pests,
which could be important in preventing pest outbreaks.