* 1311876
* Memphis Virtual STEM Academy at East High School
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Alfred Hall, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,342,970.00

Memphis Virtual STEM Academy at East High School&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Memphis Virtual STEM Academy at East High School project investigates the
implementation of a virtual STEM curriculum that utilizes self-paced modules,
face-to-face STEM laboratory projects, and field experiences designed to help
students (grades 9-12) understand pre-engineering concepts and principles as
well as develop an interest in and motivation to pursue STEM and ICT careers.
The four project objectives are to: 1) increase Virtual STEM Academy students'
use and integration of technology into their learning experiences; 2) increase
Virtual STEM Academy students' STEM learning as compared to students in other
district STEM-focused programs; 3) decrease gaps in achievement and technical
skills among student populations by gender, racial/ethnic background, and
economic level; and 4) increase the Virtual STEM Academy students' STEM career
awareness and interest. The Academy establishes a single site, centrally located
in the district, which provides a state-of-the-art laboratory facility and well-
trained teachers with engineering degrees. Students from the district's more
than 40 high schools are able to access high quality lab facilities and teachers
not typically available to local high schools. Approximately 100 freshmen will
enroll in the Academy each year, selected on the basis of qualifying scores on
the ACT Explore assessment, completion of a statement of interest for
engineering or engineering technology, and a letter of parental support. Primary
partners in the project are Shelby County Schools (formerly Memphis City
Schools) and the Herff College of Engineering at the University of
Memphis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project design is a hybrid model that permits
students to remain at their geographically assigned school for a program of
study that incorporates Internet-based curriculum intended for flexible use
based upon national best practice implementation and integration strategies. All
students will take Introduction to Engineering and Principles of Engineering,
providing students with the opportunity to link content and apply it to solve
real-world problems. Students then choose an elective track from the focus areas
of civil engineering &amp; architecture, biotechnology, manufacturing or energy
and participate in corresponding laboratory exercises and projects as they
attend the lab facility during the evenings or on Saturday. ITEST strategies to
enhance student interest include student support, teacher support, STEM interest
development, and partnership development. Capacity-building includes training of
STEM teachers at home schools, tutoring from engineering undergraduates, and
engagement of local industries for site visits and internships. The evaluation
plan utilizes a quasi-experimental design with formative and summative analyses
of data sources that include enrollment and retention figures, student
performance (GPA, ACT, AP, End of Course Tests, observation, interest
inventories, graduation rates), and professional development participation. The
method of analysis will include both descriptive statistics and inferential
tests, including associated effect sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
deliverables and products will include a detailed description of the model and
the implementation plan as well as research articles, reports, and presentations
regarding the effectiveness of the project model and its impact on improving
student interest, identity, and persistence in STEM. Approximately, 400 students
(in grades 9 - 12) and 70 STEM teachers will be directly targeted during the
project period. However, the project will also reach and serve middle school
students who express initial interest in STEM careers. The Virtual STEM Academy
is designed to create broader impacts locally, regionally, and nationally in
K-12 and higher education environments by addressing some of the challenges
faced by large, urban school districts in their efforts to offer STEM programs
of study with limited resources (human and fiscal) and/or student interest at
one particular school. The model developed will demonstrate how an innovative
approach that leverages existing resources can be used to create a unique
learning opportunity for students without having them transfer to a magnet
school. The findings from this project will not only support the efforts of
large, urban districts but may also be relevant to small, rural school districts
that face similar challenges.