* 1311043
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Samuel Dodge, Dodge                   Samuel         F
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Samuel Fuller Dodge of Arizona State University to conduct a
research project in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering area
during the summer of 2013 at Peking University in Beijing, China. The project
title is "Biologically Inspired Computer Vision: Using Attention to Efficiently
Process Visual Entities." The host scientist is Dr. Yizhou Wang.

This project studies the usefulness of biologically inspired visual attention
models in computer vision applications. The human visual system is able to
process a large amount of information using relatively few physiological
resources by selectively focusing attention on the most salient areas of a
scene. This same manner of information processing can be useful in computer
vision systems that are under similar computational constraints. To this aim,
this project investigates the relative influence of simple bottom-up attention
and more complicated top-down attention for the applications of object
recognition and scene understanding. Bottom-up attention is formed from low-
level features that attract our attention such as a red dot in a sea of blue
dots. Top-down attention stems from higher level cognitive processing, such as
detecting a face in the scene. Together these two factors can yield a more
appropriate attention model for use in computer vision recognition tasks.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the results of this research will be
disseminated in a top computer vision conference, so that this research can find
use in practical application areas such as automation, healthcare, and
intelligent systems. The fellow is working with Chinese graduate and
undergraduate students to improve their professional English, so that they will
be more prepared for conferences.