* 1311680
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:Evolutionary flexibility of hormone systems and behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Kim Hoke, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 07/31/2015
* USD 19,273.00

Biologists still don't understand the mechanisms by which genetic and
environmental influences interact to produce well-functioning organisms. This
project takes advantage of the wealth of research on stress hormones in the
Trinidadian guppy (Poecilia reticulata) to ask how differences in stress
hormones coordinate favorable changes in traits influenced by these hormones
such as behavior, color, and body size. To address these questions, the project
measures hormone levels and various behaviors in fish reared in the laboratory
using a breeding design that distinguishes the effects of genetic background and
rearing environment. The project will reveal how long- and short-term
environmental differences alter hormone levels and the consequences of changes
in hormone levels on traits that influence guppy survival. The results will
reveal the hormonal mechanisms by which genes and the environment interact to
shape multiple traits. In addition, hormone levels - in particular stress
hormone levels - are often used to predict health and fitness in wild and
domestic animals, and understanding how genetics and environment interact to
modify levels in natural populations will improve predictions of how animals
respond to novel or changing environments, such as habitat degradation, invasive
species, and climate change. This dissertation improvement grant will support
the training of a graduate student and research involvement of multiple
undergraduate students. The project will also reach out to local middle and high
schools using guppies as a model for inquiry-based science in the classroom.