* 1311082
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Morgan Churchill, Churchill               Morgan         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Morgan Churchill of the University of Wyoming to conduct a
research project in Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at University of Otago
in Dunedin, New Zealand. The project title is "The Systematics and Biogeography
of Southern Hemisphere Fur Seals and Sea Lions." The host scientist is Dr. Ewan
Fordyce.

This research focuses on re-examining the fossil sea lion Neophoca palatina.
Previously, this sea lion has been considered closely related to the living and
highly endangered Australian sea lion, a species currently restricted to Western
Australia. However, rigorous comparisons of the skull of Neophoca palatina were
not made to other fur seals or sea lions. This study re-examines the
relationships of this species by rigorously comparing it to other southern
hemisphere fur seals and sea lions using phylogenetic and morphometric
techniques. This provides important insights into the former distribution of
Neophoca as well as the evolution of sea lions in the Southern Hemisphere and
provides important data for future research on seal and carnivore evolution

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, fossil collections at the University of Otago
preserve important early whale fossils, and will help improve the design of an
exhibit currently being put into place at the University of Wyoming Geology
Museum on whale evolution. This research will result in publications to Journal
of Vertebrate Paleontology, Frontiers in Zoology, and Systematic Biology.