* 1311792
* ADVANCE Stevens: Creating a Sustainable Culture that Facilitates Recruitment, Retention and Advancement of Women Faculty in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,10/31/2021
* Susan Metz, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 10/31/2021
* USD 510,908.00

ADVANCE Stevens: Creating a Sustainable Culture that Facilitates Recruitment,
Retention and&lt;br/&gt;Advancement of Women Faculty in STEM Stevens Institute
of Technology located in Hoboken, NJ, was founded in 1870 as an all male,
mechanical engineering degree granting institution, situated in a diverse urban
area ten minutes from New York City. Stevens has three Schools, all of which
will participate in the project: Charles V. Schaefer Jr. School of Engineering
and Science; Wesley J. Howe School of Technology Management; and School of
Systems&lt;br/&gt;and Enterprises. Stevens is a primarily technological
university with a diverse student body (2549 undergraduates include 25% women
and 11% underrepresented minorities-URM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ADVANCE Stevens
utilizes a social ecological perspective, which views the interaction between
organizational and individual factors as collectively influencing recruitment,
retention and advancement of majority, minority and URM women STEM faculty. The
literature on change&lt;br/&gt;management informs the process by which the
strategies are implemented. Specific activities &lt;br/&gt;are based on the
conceptual framework and successful ADVANCE best practices adapted to
a&lt;br/&gt;predominantly technological university. A unique component of
ADVANCE Stevens involves adapting ADVANCE mentoring models and network enhancing
models to build professional relationships between tenured/tenure-track (T/TT)
women STEM faculty and full-time non-tenure track (FTNTT) women STEM faculty, to
the benefit of both. While we are applying best practices demonstrated to
increase hiring, retention and advancement of majority, minority and URM T/TT
women STEM faculty, this novel and ground breaking component examines how
building relationships between T/TT and FTNTT women STEM faculty can contribute
to these desired outcomes. In light of the national pattern of a decreasing
proportion of tenure-track faculty positions available and increased hiring of
FTNTT faculty, understanding more about the potential benefit of building
relationships between T/TT and FTNTT is of growing importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ADVANCE Stevens has the potential to impact nationally,
the persistence and advancement of T/TT women STEM faculty, and the career
stability and advancement of FTNTT women STEM faculty from all backgrounds. By
facilitating relationships between T/TT and FTNTT women STEM faculty, and
tracking and assessing subsequent networks, successful strategies that benefit
both groups will be identified. Locally, ADVANCE Stevens will impact
undergraduate and graduate women of all racial/ethnic backgrounds who will have
the opportunity to be taught by, mentored and collaborate with women faculty of
all backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;