* 1311594
* Dissertation Research: The Impacts of Farmer Adaptation to Climate Variability on Groundwater Salinity and Soil Health in Gujarat, India
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Meha Jain, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 14,488.00

In the face of climate change, do short-term responses of societies undermine
the long-term resilience of ecosystems and natural resources? To answer this
question, this study assesses the impacts of cropping adaptation strategies on
groundwater quality and soil health in a semi-arid agro-ecosystem in Northwest
India. Farming communities in this region employ two cropping adaptation
strategies for dealing with increasing monsoon variability attributable to
climate change: (1) intensification in irrigation or (2) crop switching. While
both of these responses are economically adaptive over the short term, they may
lead to long-term degradation of groundwater quality and soil health.
Preliminary data suggest that increasing use of groundwater may already be
leading to falling groundwater tables, the intrusion of saltwater into aquifers,
and the depletion of soil nutrients. The impacts of crop switching are less well
known. This work will identify the relationship between the intensification of
irrigation and crop switching on groundwater (quantity and quality) and soil
health (soil organic carbon, soil nitrogen, and pH). These analyses will
elucidate possible long-term impacts of adaptation strategies on ecosystem
resources, and help identify whether these adaptation strategies are sustainable
over time.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Though millions of communities have a strong
and coupled relationship with climate and the environment, few studies have
attempted to understand the feedback between human adaptation and the long-term
functioning of ecosystems; this project will address this gap. Furthermore, the
data collected for this project will provide 400 farmers with measures of their
soil health and water quality, which will help identify deficiencies in their
resource base and may allow them to tailor cropping decisions to improve yields.
The results of this work will also be shared with state-level researchers and
policy makers in Gujarat as well as the broader public via a short documentary
film.&lt;br/&gt;