* 1311755
* Architecture for robust spatiotemporal dynamics in neuronal networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Zachary Kilpatrick, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 184,937.00

A major challenge in neuroscience is to understand how the brain reliably
completes cognitive tasks, despite a great deal of intrinsic variability.
Cognitive tasks often require coordinated spatiotemporal activity, which
experimentalists can measure using multiple electrodes, voltage sensitive dye,
and optical techniques. The main goal of this research project is to develop
mathematical tools to study how spatially structured networks in the brain
produce reliable activity in the face of noise. Specifically, we will be
interested in how the spatial architecture of synaptic connections interacts
with noise on multiple scales to influence network activity. Thus, linking our
theory with experimental data will require the development of new techniques in
stochastic and nonlinear analysis, multiscale methods, and symmetric bifurcation
theory. Neuronal network models that incorporate space often assume synaptic
connectivity depends only on the distance between neurons. Such dynamical
systems tend to be marginally stable, so solutions diffuse in the presence of
noise. More realistic models of neuronal connectivity do not produce such
degeneracies. We propose to examine how spatial heterogeneity can improve or
limit the robustness of neuronal networks. We will analyze models that encode
neural activity linked to working memory, decision making, and place
localization. Our work will contribute mathematical methods to other current
research areas in math biology concerned with analyzing the effect of noise on
spatially extended systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Everyday, humans make
decisions, use memory, and navigate their environment. Spatially structured
activity in the brain underlies all these processes. Spatially localized "bumps"
of activity are thought to encode short term memories of spatial position.
Propagating waves of activity represent visual inputs and the movement of limbs.
These activity patterns must be generated in networks of the brain that are
fraught with noise. Despite the noisiness of the brain, we execute cognitive
tasks faithfully. How does this happen? We will develop mathematical techniques
to address this major question. Mainly, we will explore how neuronal networks
can be structured to support robust spatiotemporal dynamics. Insight into the
robustness of cognitive processes can be used to develop therapeutic solutions
for various mental disorders. Alzheimer's, dementia, and Parkinson's present
more commonly as human lifespans grow. Treatments are not possible without well-
developed theory. Our analysis of spatiotemporal neural coding will also help
understanding of how spatial arrays of multielectrodes should best be designed
for applications like neural prosthetics.