* 1311540
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Early Evolution of Fungi and the Transition to a Terrestrial Lifestyle: Marine Habitats, the New Frontier
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Kathryn Picard, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,357.00

Zoosporic fungi (fungi that reproduce through motile spores) represent the
earliest lineages in the fungal tree of life; unfortunately, they are also the
most poorly understood. Limited sampling of these fungi, especially from marine
and estuarine habitats, constrains attempts to reconstruct the early evolution
of the kingdom Fungi. The primary hindrance to uncovering the full extent of
zoosporic fungal diversity is the historical reliance on culture-dependent
methods, resulting in the description of only the most abundant taxa, or those
amenable to isolation in the laboratory. The recent use of culture-independent
molecular methods to characterize fungal diversity and community composition in
terrestrial, freshwater, and extreme environments has revealed novel early-
diverging fungal lineages. Additionally, these studies have found that zoosporic
fungal lineages are often the dominant fungal component of their respective
ecosystems. As environmental cloning studies have high time and supply costs,
next-generation sequencing has been promoted as a rapid, cost-effective method
for characterizing communities of cryptic microorganisms in previously neglected
habitats. Several metagenomic analysis pipelines and reference databases now
exist to assist in the clustering and taxonomic identification of molecular
sequences recovered from environmental samples. However, the available databases
are populated with large numbers of sequences from previous environmental
cloning studies outside a phylogenetic framework and without a corresponding
taxonomic classification, hindering efforts to classify poorly known groups. To
address these issues, the research proposed herein aims to: 1) use culture-
independent methods to discover novel marine fungal taxa; 2) infer the
phylogenetic relationships of these taxa with all known zoosporic counterparts,
consisting primarily of terrestrial and freshwater fungi; and 3) use the
phylogenetic dataset produced for objective 2 to date the loss(es) of the fungal
flagellum and estimate the minimum age(s) of the adoption of a primarily
terrestrial lifestyle in the evolution of the Fungi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will provide training for a motivated undergraduate student,
in addition to informing the development of child-focused interactive exhibits
on fungi and their symbiotic interactions with plants and animals for two local
science museums (North Carolina Museum of Life and Science, Durham, NC; North
Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences, Raleigh, NC).