* 1311025
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Robert Zinna, Zinna                   Robert         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Robert Zinna of Washington State University to conduct a
research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at the Niimi laboratory at
Nagoya University in Nagoya, Japan. The project title is "Diversification of
Weapon Form: Insights from Development of Horned Beetles." The host scientist is
Dr. Teruyuki Niimi.

Robert Zinna is PhD student in Entomology at Washington State University who
studies the development and evolution of insect morphology, specifically
morphology that has been adapted into weapons. Understanding the origins of new
morphologies is one of the critical challenges of evolutionary biology. Using a
combination of classical developmental biology techniques as well as new high-
throughput methodologies, this project is investigating patterning mechanisms
that contribute to weapon development using an insect model. The outcomes of
this work will advance the understanding of the proximate mechanisms of
evolutionary biology

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. The scientific results of this fellowship will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed scientific publications that involve not only
the EAPSI host, Dr. Niimi, but also the Fellow's PhD advisor, Dr. Lavine, and a
third collaborator, Dr. Emlen. This project facilitates international
dissemination of research and research techniques, and allows the Fellow to
share novel teaching methods with international science educators as well as
learn from their methods. The ability to incorporate an international
perspective when teaching science is an important step in increasing diversity
in scientific literacy. The Fellow is also heavily involved in entomological and
scientific outreach to a diverse audience at Washington State University, and
the strong pro-insect culture present in Japan allows him to develop new methods
of community outreach for Entomology, focusing on how insects can make
educational house pets for all levels of K-12 education.