* 1311398
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: How life history traits contribute to lifetime fitness and affect responses to environmental change in an endangered vertebrate
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Victoria Garcia, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2015
* USD 15,201.00

North American temperate species are increasingly impacted by climate change,
most notably by shifting their ranges north or upslope. However, some species
are too closely tied to their particular habitat and cannot shift range. For
example, Red-cockaded Woodpeckers require longleaf pine forests for nesting as
well as year-round living. Such habitat specialists will either have to adapt to
change in the place where they live, or perish, because trees are unlikely to
shift their range fast enough due to their long-lived nature and surrounding
development. Researchers have long-term Red-cockaded Woodpecker data from
multiple sites that can be used to determine how this model species is
responding to climate change, and which can then be applied to other such
species. This study examines how these birds are altering a suite of behaviors
to attempt to adapt to climate change, and how these behaviors are impacting
their overall fitness. While such studies are being conducted in Europe, they
are rare in the United States despite important differences between the two
continents local climate trends.&lt;br/&gt; Longleaf pine forests, which only
occur in the southeastern U.S., have unusually high biodiversity and endangered
Red-cockaded Woodpeckers serve as an umbrella species representing the entire
ecosystem. Recovery of this species has been greatly successful, as has been the
integration of recovery efforts with other land uses. This research will also
provide training for a graduate student and undergraduates, some from
underrepresented groups in science, as well as outreach about an endangered
ecosystem.