* 1311964
* Topics in fluid dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Walter Rusin, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2016
* USD 122,882.00

The topics addressed in the project concern partial differential equations
arising in the study of fluid dynamics. In particular, we study the
incompressible Navier-Stokes equations for the motion of a viscous liquid, the
Euler equations (and their models) for the motion of an inviscid liquid, and a
class of scalar equations arising naturally from the mentioned systems through
approximations in physically important settings. In the first part, regarding
the Navier-Stokes equations, we intend to explore the anisotropy introduced by
the oscillatory structure of solutions, in order to construct classes of large
data leading to global well-posedness. The second part of the project is geared
towards gaining a deeper understanding of the ill-posedness of a class of active
scalar equations, based on the properties of the second iterate. The analysis
focuses particularly on the equations where the nonlinearity is given by a
Fourier multiplier whose symbol is anisotropic and/or even (the porous media
equation and the magneto-geostrophic equation). The third objective of this
project is to investigate a system of PDEs simulating the fundamental features
of the vorticity-stretching phenomena in the three-dimensional incompressible
Euler equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to advance the
understanding of the dynamics described by the equations of fluid dynamics by
methods of rigorous mathematical analysis. These partial differential equations
represent a basic tool for modeling many natural phenomena and technological
applications. For instance, the equations describing fluid flow (on which an
important part of this project concentrates) are used in weather prediction,
climate research, and various technological applications, such as the design of
optimal aerodynamical and hydrodynamical shapes. The equations of fluid dynamics
are notoriously difficult to solve, even with the help of the largest computers.
Some of these difficulties constitute part of the problem, but some are due to
the fact that our mathematical understanding of the equations themselves is
incomplete. From the analytical point of view, these equations account for
interactions of a broad range of space- and time-scales in a highly non-linear
fashion. Due to this intrinsic complexity, the accuracy needed to fully resolve
the underlying phenomena via numerical computations is out of reach for the
foreseeable future. Advances in theoretical understanding of these partial
differential equations are vital for the validation of the models and for an
accurate interpretation of numerical results. In the final analysis, the main
task of the theoretical investigation is to find simple and natural parameters
that control the behavior of the solutions. Once a good set of such parameters
is known, it becomes much easier to design practical methods for calculating the
solutions numerically.