* 1311494
* Dissertation Research: Species delimitation and the evolution of dwarfism in the North American tarantula genus Aphonopelma
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Jason Bond, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 06/30/2015
* USD 19,240.00

The tarantula genus Aphonopelma ranks among the most infamous mygalomorph
spiders (tarantulas, trapdoor spiders and their kin) of the American southwest,
yet they are a group that has been woefully understudied because traditional
morphological characters are generally ineffective at consistently and
rigorously identifying species boundaries. Widely distributed throughout the
southwestern United States and Mexico, many Aphonopelma species reside within
two biodiversity ?hotspots?: the California Floristic Province and the Madrean
pine-oak woodlands in Arizona. It is of critical importance that we discover and
develop methods to accurately identify the species-level diversity within the
group before it is lost to extinction. Our project will integrate "Anchored
Enrichment" genomic data, from high-throughput next-generation sequencing, with
geospatial analyses to resolve species boundaries within Aphonopelma, while
investigating the evolution of miniaturization and subsequent diversification in
a very unique lineage of dwarf tarantula species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
generated from this project will substantially increase the molecular markers
currently available for species delimitation in spiders. This will be the first
study to employ this cutting edge genomic approach in any spider group. Project
activities will provide training in modern phylogenetic and bioinformatics
techniques, taxonomic, and organismal expertise to undergraduates from
underrepresented groups in science, while broadening international collaboration
with graduate students in Mexico and other parts of the world.