* 1311170
* Dissertation Research: Turning Vines Into Trees: A Genome Skimming Approach to the Phylogenetics of New World Milkweed VInes (Matelea, subg. Chthamalia, Apocynaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Angela Rein, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2016
* USD 18,941.00

Although plant adaptations to aridity have been well studied in a few groups,
such as cacti, relatively little is known about the diversification of most
plants in deserts and other drylands. A group of milkweeds (Matelea subg.
Chthamalia) inhabits dry or seasonally dry habitats in Mexico and the
southwestern United States, providing a useful system for investigating adaptive
diversification in arid bioregions. This group is part of a large, mostly
tropical clade of milkweed vines (Gonolobinae) and most exhibit apparent
adaptations to aridity. Many have lost their ability to twine (with stems
spreading flat on the ground), have small, bell-shaped flowers, or are covered
by an abundance of hairs. This research will use the most powerful available
techniques to reconstruct the evolutionary history of Chthamalia and to analyze
the evolution of adaptations to aridity. Next generation DNA sequencing
employing a ?genome skimming? approach will be used to obtain complete
chloroplast genomes, partial mitochondrial genomes, and complete nuclear
ribosomal gene sequences to robustly estimate phylogenetic relationships, which
will serve as a framework for evolutionary analyses of morphological
adaptations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will resolve the classification
of little-known plants that have been taxonomically controversial. Several
species of Chthamalia are exceedingly rare; resolving taxonomic questions and
greater knowledge of their evolution will contribute to future conservation
efforts of species and habitats. Integration of traditional systematic
approaches with new molecular methods is critical to address hypotheses about
evolution, adaptation, and speciation. Graduate and undergraduate students will
gain laboratory and bioinformatic training as well as the opportunity to present
research results at national meetings.