* 1311369
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Genetic Basis of Red Female Throat Coloration in Sticklebacks--to Dimorphism and Back Again
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Jeffrey McKinnon, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,120.00

Males, but not females, of many animal species possess ?ornaments,? conspicuous
traits that function mainly in a social context. In some species, however,
females also display conspicuous ornaments, resulting in reduced sexual
dimorphism. Such mutually shared ornaments have long been thought to evolve in
females mainly as a byproduct of selection on males, owing to the expression of
the same genes in both sexes?the ?genetic correlation? hypothesis. However,
little is known about the genetic basis of female ornaments. The proposed
research seeks to understand the genetic basis of a female ornament, red throat
coloration, in the threespine stickleback fish. The red throat coloration of
male sticklebacks is well studied; thus, the recent discovery of this trait in
females of some populations creates a research opportunity. In the proposed
work, Quantitative Trait Loci mapping will be used to identify genomic regions
associated with female and male throat coloration for crosses between
populations with and without red-throated females, enabling a test of the
genetic correlation hypothesis.

Sexual dimorphism is increasingly thought of as an important aspect of
biodiversity. Thus this study will improve understanding of the genetic basis of
a poorly explored aspect of animal diversity. Because sex differences are
associated with variation in the onset, prevalence, and severity of many
diseases, an improved understanding of the evolutionary genetics of sexual
dimorphism may also have medical value. This project will contribute to the
training of students from under-represented groups and will be featured in
outreach efforts.