* 1311151
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation - Advancing Microbial Fuel Cell Technology for Energy-efficient Wastewater Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,08/31/2013
* Zhen He, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating microbial
fuel cell (MFC) technology to address the need for energy-efficient, wastewater
treatment technologies. The translated MFC technology has the following unique
features: low energy consumption, low sludge production, and energy recovery
from waste organic materials in low-strength wastewater. These features provide
the advantage of reduced energy requirement and operating expense, when compared
to the leading competing activated sludge technology in this market space. The
project accomplishes this goal by establishing a transitional-stage MFC system
and improving the industry's perception of this technology. The output of this
project is a functioning prototype MFC system and identification of the key
operating parameters for designing a pilot scale system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership engages potential industrial partners such
as Veolia Water and other business partners to provide market guidance about
low-strength wastewater treatment system's competitiveness and potential
commercialization pathways to introduce new bioelectrochemical treatment systems
to translate the transitional-stage MFC technology successfully into a
competitive commercial reality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential economic
impact is expected to be $700 million in next twenty years, which will
contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in sustainable wastewater treatment. The
societal impact, long term, will be improved environmental protection, reduced
carbon footprint, creation of new business opportunities and jobs, and delivery
of qualified talent for both the water/wastewater industry and research.