* 1311119
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Benjamin Schrager, Schrager                Benjamin
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Benjamin Schrager of the University of Hawaii at Manoa of to
conduct a research project in Geography during the summer of 2013 at Sophia
University in Tokyo. The project title is "Genetically Modified Food in Japan:
the Intersection of Science, Policy and Consumer Perceptions." The host
scientist is James Farrer.

This study examines science, policy and consumer perceptions related to
genetically modified food in Japan. Data is being collected and analyzed from
scientific reports, government documents, interviews and surveys. The working
question is "What governmental frameworks regulate genetically modified food in
Japan?" This question is answered using interviews with ministry officials,
professors, consumer groups, consumers and biotech advocates. Policy documents
from the United States Department of Agriculture, Japanese ministries,
legislative documents and popular media are also consulted. Science and consumer
perceptions are contextualized within these governmental frameworks.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, outcomes of the research project have
implications for U.S.-Japan trade, as agricultural biotechnology is an important
factor in trade relations and Japan is the largest importer of U.S. soybeans and
corn of which most are genetically modified. The Fellow will explore appropriate
venues to share the findings, including conferences, public forums and
publications.