* 1311065
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Sven Nelson, Nelson                  Sven           K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Sven Nelson of Washington State University to conduct a
research project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at the RIKEN
Plant Science Center in Yokohama, Japan. The project title is "Investigating the
Roles of Two Plant Hormones, Gibberellin and Abscisic Acid, in Arabidopsis Seed
Dormancy." The host scientist is Dr. Mitsunori Seo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
balance between seed dormancy and germination is governed by two plant hormones,
abscisic acid (ABA) and gibberellin (GA). Dormancy is a period during which
seeds will not germinate, even under favorable conditions. Dormancy is released
by dry storage called after-ripening. During dry after-ripening levels of ABA
fall. GA levels rise when after-ripened seeds imbibe water, but it is unclear
whether GA levels rise during after-ripening of dry seeds. One reason for this
is that the low hormone levels in dry seeds are difficult to measure. Use of new
highly sensitive techniques employed at the RIKEN institute enables us to
investigate the roles of ABA and GA in seed dormancy release and germination.
This research will benefit society because knowledge of the hormonal control of
seed dormancy will allow better control of germination in cereal crops to
prevent problems such as preharvest sprouting and poor seedling emergence.
Knowledge of seed germination will also allow the development of crops with good
germination and seedling emergence, a major determinant of yield. It will
advance discovery in the area of seed biology while advancing learning through
teaching the Fellow new technologies for hormone
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include
providing the Fellow a first-hand research experience outside the U.S.; an
introduction to the science, science policy, and scientific infrastructure of
the respective location; and an orientation to the society, culture and
language. These activities meet the NSF goal to educate for international
collaborations early in the career of its scientists, engineers, and educators,
thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific workforce. Furthermore, the
results of this research will be broadly disseminated through publication in a
peer-reviewed journal together with Dr. Seo, and through oral presentations to
other scientists. In addition, a presentation about this research topic will be
made to the Washington State University Future Cougars of Color to encourage
high school students from underrepresented groups to pursue education or a
career in science.