* 1311626
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Settlement-Size Scaling and Economic Transformation in the Lake Titicaca Basin, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Steven Kuhn, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2015
* USD 25,200.00

Under the guidance of Drs. Steven Kuhn and Mark Aldenderfer, Randy Haas will
analyze the formation histories of five previously recorded Late Archaic Period
(7,000-5,000 B.P.) hunter-gatherer sites in the western Lake Titicaca Basin,
Peru. The Basin's Late Archaic Period has received little attention even though
the period marks the eve of an agricultural transition that led to the
endogenous emergence of the Tiwanaku state around A.D. 300. Previous work
suggests that nearly all of the hallmarks of social complexity - e.g.,
residential sedentism, food production, and craft specialization - are
represented in the Late Archaic record. However, Haas' recent settlement pattern
analyses have revealed a potential signature of social complexity: settlement-
size hierarchy. Settlement-size hierarchy refers to a statistical pattern in
site-size distribution that geographers, economists, and archaeologists have
described as the rank-size rule, Zipf's law, or a power law. Differential
erosion and burial do not appear to explain the observed site-size pattern,
supporting a behavioral model instead. The archaeological observation in the
Titicaca Late Archaic may represent a first for prehistoric hunter-gatherer
settlement pattern analysis and raises the question of how it could emerge among
mobile foragers. Several models of settlement and site-formation are considered,
and test excavations at the largest Late Archaic Period sites in the Ilave sub-
basin will generate chronometric and material data for testing model-driven
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding behaviors that drive emergent
social complexity in human societies is of paramount importance to
anthropological research. Archaeological observations provide a means for
inferring the order in which key behaviors appeared in trajectories of
increasing complexity. The Lake Titicaca Basin, one of few world regions to have
witnessed archaic state formation, offers a critical case study. Archaeologists
have shown that incipient sedentism, food-production, and pastoralism appeared
ca. 5,500 B.P. in the Titicaca Basin Terminal Archaic Period. The first clear
signs of craft specialization, social stratification, and monumental
architecture appeared subsequently ca. 3,500 B.P. in the Formative Period.
Previous settlement-pattern analyses have suggested that settlement-size
hierarchies emerged in the Formative. However, because statistically
indistinguishable site-size hierarchies appeared at least 2,000 years earlier in
the Late Archaic Period, prior to any other dimension of social complexity, one
could hypothesize that site-size scaling catalyzed incipient complexity in the
Titicaca Basin rather than the other way around as current models suggest. The
anthropological question that follows and drives the current research is, What
forager behavior generated the archaeological site-size pattern? Stratigraphic,
radiocarbon, feature, and lithic data from test excavations in the five largest
Late Archaic Period sites in the Ilave region will be used to infer the degree
to which these sites reflect comparatively long occupations, frequent re-
occupations, and/or large-group occupation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excavations and
laboratory activities will foster stronger international relations with
Peruvians - Ayamara and non-indigenous, academic and non-academic. All new data
will be curated and made available to qualified individuals by the Peruvian
Ministry of Culture and The Digital Archaeological Record. Analytical results
will be presented to Peruvian and U.S. communities in public talks, conference
presentations, and peer-reviewed publications ranging from regional to
theoretical in scope.