* 1311059
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Erik Steinmetz, Steinmetz               Erik           S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Erik Stefan Steinmetz of The University of Minnesota,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, to conduct a research project in
the Computer and Information Science and Engineering area during the summer of
2013 at The Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NIST) in Nara, Japan. The
project title is "Improving Opening Strategy in Computer Go Players." The host
scientist is Kenichi Matsumoto.

This project explores a method of improving the artificial intelligence search
technique known as Monte Carlo search. The avenues being explored in this
research allow the application of expert knowledge to a technique which normally
relies on not being restricted by contextual knowledge (to allow randomness to
properly explore a search tree). Preliminary results showed one such measure
which improved play of a computer Go engine that used Monte Carlo search, and
this project develops further measures along with discovering their
effectiveness and limitations. By studying these modifications which touch the
very nature of Monte Carlo search, this project explores the applicability and
limitations of Monte Carlo search in general and whether or not hybrid methods
offer an opportunity for their improvement. This research will be directly
applicable to other problems using the Monte Carlo search method such as
military simulation software, along with some large online simulation software
systems.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the demonstration of the results of this
project will be exceptionally helpful in a classroom setting. It shows a simple
method to increase the effectiveness of an algorithm in a topic which is
interesting to undergraduate students. By showing how key ideas such as this
research can be applied directly to these interesting topics, students can be
engaged and motivated at a very early stage of their undergraduate computer
science careers.