* 1311500
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing evolution of euryhalinity in anchialine shrimps
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Scott Santos, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 11,044.00

The molecular mechanisms of ionic/salt regulation in crustaceans have only been
characterized for a narrow range of species, mainly crabs with a marine
ancestry. Shrimp from coastal ponds and pools represent an opportunity to
address this lack of knowledge since they have a decisively freshwater ancestry
but have adapted to live in environments with drastically fluctuating
salinities. Previous research found that Halocaridina rubra, a shrimp species
endemic to Hawaii, has atypical patterns of gene expression following salinity
transfer. To examine this in an evolutionary context, the molecular mechanisms
of osmoregulation from additional shrimp species from the Ryukyus Islands, Japan
will be investigated using high-throughput measures of gene expression (RNA-
Seq). These shrimp species represent independent invasions of these habitats
(from both freshwater and marine environments) and will further our limited
understanding of the evolution of osmoregulation in
crustaceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, this project will illuminate the
evolution of osmoregulation, a critical biological process for all living
organisms. Undergraduates from underrepresented groups will be trained and
mentored during the project. Additionally, this system will be used to engage
K-12 students in a variety of biological concepts.