* 1311054
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Paul Taele, Taele                   Paul           P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Paul Piula Taele of Texas A&M University to conduct a research
project in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering area during the
summer of 2013 at Singapore Management University in the Republic of Singapore.
The project title is "Improving Computer Applications for Creative Design using
Natural Gesture Input." The host scientist is Dr. Richard C. Davis.

Advances in human-computer interaction and artificial intelligent research
enable people to interact naturally with computers through gestures using their
limbs instead of through computer peripherals such as keyboard and mouse. People
already use interactions from the gestures expressed with their limbs to convey
ideas, information, and emotional responses, and such interactions also have
great potential in expanding creative design from the virtual into the physical
world. Unfortunately, such interactions are also largely untapped by existing
creative design computer applications, which focus prematurely on design content
instead of on valuable early-stage raw design planning. This research therefore
actively explores successful techniques to combine advances of natural gesture
interactions in computer applications with the potential of producing powerful
creative design in the physical world. The core tasks of this research include
surveying target users for proposed ideas and features, developing improvements
to the existing code base of approaches, deploying the research system to target
users, observing those users' interaction with the system, and collecting
qualitative and quantitative feedback following extended trials of users'
interactions with the system.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, these aims are directly supporting techniques
for advancing discovery and understanding in novel interactive environments by
actively focusing on enhancing the creative design process--for example,
communicating ideas more clearly, summarizing information more accurately, or
provoking emotional responses. Since such tools are also highly applicable for
promoting teaching and training, the Fellow is working with teachers and
trainers on introducing these additional resources in instructional content
design, encouragingucational activities tht offer students engaging design
projects in novel interactive environments.