* 1311744
* Materials World Network: Ultrafast All-Optical Switching in Ferri-/Ferromagnetic Nanomagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Holger Schmidt, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 07/31/2017
* USD 406,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: With financial support provided by the Division of Materials
Research (DMR) at the National Science Foundation and the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, this collaborative effort between the Applied Optics
group of Holger Schmidt (UC Santa Cruz, USA) and the Magnetic Nanostructures
group of Manfred Albrecht (Chemnitz University of Technology, Germany) will
investigate techniques, materials, and applications of all-optical magnetization
switching in ferro- and and ferrimagnetic nanomagnets. Specific project goals
include (i) demonstration of all-optical magnetization switching in single-
domain nanomagnets using ferrimagnetic materials; (ii) fabrication of exchange-
coupled heterostructures using magnetic materials with adjustable magnetic
anisotropy, Curie temperature, and crystallography; (iii) demonstration of
ultrafast switching of single nanomagnets in various combinations of ferro- and
ferromagnetic materials; and (iv) investigation of the all-optical switching
process as a function of the three-dimensional nanomagnet, and the magnetic
environment in a dense array. This research is enabled through the combination
of the materials expertise of the Albrecht group and the single nanomagnet
detection capabilities developed in the Schmidt group.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Nanomagnets have been under consideration for next
generation data storage media and other spintronics applications for some time.
Recently, the discovery of ultrafast all-optical switching of magnetic
orientation in ferrimagnetic materials has received a lot of interest due to the
potential to create data storage media with unprecedented response times. The
potential combination of such an optical switching layer with an exchange-
coupled ferromagnetic storage layer is highly intriguing and raises a number of
exciting material questions. This project will systematically explore novel
combinations of such materials in the context of nanoscale storage media. In
addition, the project will provide students at different levels with a broader
and more complete education than what would be possible in a uni-national
setting by creating a unique and rewarding educational experience. Mutual visits
between the participating groups for a substantial amount of time (2-4 weeks per
year) will allow for meaningful training in the technique used by their
collaborators to broaden student knowledge, communication skills, and
professional competitiveness. Aside from one graduate student and one postdoc,
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will be recruited through
the UC LEADS or UC CAMP program, and will be given the opportunity to complete
their senior theses in collaboration with researchers from abroad.