* 1311729
* Collaborative Research: Regular synthesis for multi-input optimal control problems with applications to biomedicine
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Heinz Schaettler, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2016
* USD 174,994.00

In this project, fully interacting nonlinear multi-input control systems will be
analyzed as optimal control problems. The motivation for this research comes
from a systematic study of mathematical models for cancer treatment that combine
various structures that form the tumor microenvironment. In modern oncology, a
tumor is viewed as not just cancerous cells, but as a system of interacting
components that in various ways aid and abet the tumor (e.g., the tumor
vasculature), but also fight it (e.g., the immune system). Current treatments
therefore are multi-targeted therapies that not only kill cancer cells, but also
include antiangiogenic therapy, immunotherapy and many other options. The search
for best ways of administering these therapeutic agents naturally leads to
formulations as multi-input nonlinear optimal control problems. The aim of the
research is to develop local syntheses of optimal controls for such systems, a
difficult task even for single-input systems with only partial results known.
These new results will be developed in connection with the study of systems that
describe (i) cancer treatment within the complex context of the tumor
microenvironment and (ii) optimal strategies for the control of the spread of
diseases in epidemiology. In the latter field, mathematical models have been a
relevant tool in analyzing the underlying dynamics, whereas in this project a
much less explored optimal control approach to the problem will be pursued.
While one aim is to develop general methods and procedures that have wide
applicability, a second important aspect of the research is to provide
qualitative and quantitative insights into the structure of optimal solutions
for important real-life problems. Motivated by timely problems in biomedicine,
like how to design metronomic chemotherapy protocols, challenging problems in
optimal control theory will be considered whose solutions require developing new
tools and methods. Because of its applied and interdisciplinary character, the
project is expected to be of strong interest to students from mathematics and
engineering and consequently it contains a substantial educational component.
Efforts to attract women and minorities will be continued and expanded by
reaching out to engineering students where participation of these groups is
particularly low.

In modern oncology, a tumor is viewed as not just cancerous cells, but as a
system of interacting components that in various ways aid and abet the tumor
(e.g., the tumor vasculature), but also fight it (e.g., the immune system).
Current treatments therefore are multi-targeted therapies that not only kill
cancer cells, but also include antiangiogenic therapy, immunotherapy and many
other options. It is very difficult and expensive to test complex multi-target
protocols in medical trials. For this reason, the analysis of mathematical
models becomes of intrinsic value. The medical community has become more and
more aware that not only what drug is given, but also how it is administered,
i.e., dosage, frequency and sequencing, can have a major impact on the outcome
of the treatment. This led to a recently launched "Metronomics Global Health
Initiative". The proposed research is motivated by the biomedical ideas of this
initiative and the investigators believe that the tools of geometric optimal
control are best suited to give mathematical answers to these questions and thus
provide insights into how a metronomic protocol should be designed. Regarding a
second topic, infectious diseases continue to be one of the most important
health problems worldwide. In this project, the investigators seek theoretical
results that can give practical guidelines how to pursue joint efforts of
vaccination and treatment in an optimal way to maximize the effectiveness and
minimize the social economic cost. Because of its applied and interdisciplinary
character, the project is expected to be of strong interest to students from
mathematics and engineering and consequently it contains a substantial
educational component. Efforts to attract women and minorities will be continued
and expanded by reaching out to engineering students where participation of
these groups is particularly low.