* 1311367
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Do plants think globally and act locally?  Combining environmental niche models with intraspecific functional trait variation in a phylogenetic context
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Maria Uriarte, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 16,380.00

Long-term changes in climate are likely to alter future distributions of
species. Predicting these changes depends upon understanding the factors that
determine where species grow. This project will test whether the distributions
of species of tropical trees along gradients of rainfall and on different soils
in Puerto Rico can be predicted from the functional traits of the species, and
whether the traits that a species has are constrained by its evolutionary past.
Researchers will use herbarium specimens to quantify species distributions and
examine the correspondence between the distributions and the traits of the
species in one of the most biodiverse habitats in the U.S.

The broader impacts associated with this investigation include teaching and
training opportunities, networking and collaborations with conservation and
management agencies, and contributions to public databases. Three paid
internships to undergraduate students in Puerto Rico, New York City, and
Washington, DC, will provide scientific training and research experience to
students from underrepresented groups. Though an existing GK-12 award to
Columbia University, the research will be linked to curricula in schools in New
York City, which host a large number of students of Puerto Rican heritage.
Findings will be disseminated to the Puerto Rico and US Virgin Islands Plant
Conservation Task Force, a regional network of plant conservation practitioners
which includes representatives from the USDA Forest Service, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, the Department of Natural Resources of Puerto Rico, and the
University of Puerto Rico. Information on the specimens used in the research
will be provided directly to participating herbaria and the data on molecular
sequences and functional traits assembled for the project work will be deposited
in online databases.