* 1311117
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Ecological Divergence and Reproductive Isolation in an Amazonian Tree Species: Protium subserratum (Burseraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Paul V. Fine, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2015
* USD 20,346.00

Tropical rainforests harbor the highest tree diversity on earth, yet very few
evolutionary studies are aimed at understanding the mechanisms involved in the
process of speciation in tropical trees. This study will improve our
understanding of evolution by systematically examining the factors involved when
one species begins to diverge and become two species. The Amazonian tree,
Protium subserratum provides an ideal study system because populations on white-
sand habitats and clay habitats have different leaf characters and are easily
distinguished in the field. Genetic studies show that populations that are
specialized on different soil types mate with each other less frequently than
would be expected despite the fact that their reproductive structures are
similar and they flower at the same time. These results suggest that populations
found on different soil types are diverging and in the process of forming a new
species. A combination of field experiments, population genetics and natural
history observations will be used to determine what factors are most important
in driving the creation of new tree species in tropical environments.

In addition to being among the first studies to explicitly examine the role of
reproductive isolating mechanisms in trees, this research will foster the
training of undergraduate students in population genetic techniques and support
collaborations with Peruvian students. The results of this research will also be
disseminated widely through publication in Spanish.