* 1311091
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Sara Enders, Enders                  Sara           K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Sara Enders of the University of California, Davis to conduct
a research project in Geology during the summer of 2013 at The Japan Agency for
Marine Earth-Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) in Yokuska, Japan. The project
title is "Developing a New Biomarker-Based Proxy for Past Terrestrial Nitrogen
Cycles." The host scientist is Dr. Naohiko Ohkouchi.

This project develops a method to reconstruct how nitrogen cycles of pre-
industrial landscapes behaved in the past during periods of environmental and
ecological change. Changes in past nitrogen cycle behavior--e.g. the
availability of nitrogen to plants, and whether nitrogen losses from the
ecosystem have a dominant atmospheric or hydrologic fate--may be inferable from
information contained in the isotope ratios (delta-N-15) of nitrogenous plant
compounds that persist in soil. The project investigates the potential to
reconstruct delta-N-15 of leaves on past landscapes from the delta-N-15 of
chlorophyll degradation products extractable from soil. This research evaluates
1) the persistence of the target plant compounds in soil--duration and
mechanisms; and 2) the quality of information obtainable--whether isotope ratios
are conserved as plants tissues degrade to soil organic matter. This method
could remove significant limitations (e.g. diagenetic vulnerability, confounding
trophic effects, and availability of fossil material) to a paleoreconstruction
approach to testing major working hypotheses about how N and C biogeochemical
cycles interact over decade to millennial timescales.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this project represents a new
interdisciplinary collaboration uniting different and complementary expertise:
in terrestrial vs. aquatic ecosystems, modern vs. ancient environments, and
analytical vs. modeling methodologies.