* 1311409
* Dissertation Research: Natural and acquired immunity within Yellowstone's wolves: consequences for disease severity, survival, and reproduction
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Andrew Dobson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2014
* USD 19,343.00

The immune system plays a critical role in maintaining overall health and
keeping parasites at bay. While investment in immune function may improve
survival, it may also come at a cost to reproduction, either because of limited
resources or an over-reactive immune system attacking the body. Here, the
authors aim to explore the evidence for relationships between immune investment,
disease severity, survival, and reproduction in a wild population of gray
wolves. Gray wolves were reintroduced into Yellowstone National Park in 1995,
and within this population, researchers have studied the natural process of
parasite infections. This work has shown that individual wolves vary in their
response to infection with canine distemper virus and sarcoptic mange, despite
the high survival-costs associated with an inability to control infection. None
of this variation is explained by host characteristics such as age, sex, and
social status. This project will test the hypothesis that a tradeoff between
immune function and reproduction explains the maintenance of immune variation
among individuals. Several indices of immune investment (natural antibodies,
specific antibodies, and total antibodies) will be measured as predictors of
disease severity and survival through known disease outbreaks. This information
will be matched to reproductive fitness in order to test whether increased
immune responsiveness comes at a cost to reproduction. This work will further
test the specific prediction that costs to reproduction occur in the form of
decreased litter sizes, and that these costs may be offset during disease
outbreaks in the form of increased litter survival.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will improve our understanding
of the mechanisms by which variation in immune function is maintained in
wildlife populations, which has important applications in conservation biology
and wildlife management. The project will build on a rich, long-term public
dataset on a wild carnivore being reintroduced to national parks, and will
further our understanding of the drivers of an iconic conservation species.
Results from this study will be published on a citizen science website, and
disseminated via public lectures through the National Park Service and to school
groups. This study will also expand the research training and skill sets of a
doctoral student.