* 1311453
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The ecological and evolutionary impact of an invasive jewelweed on a native congener
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Deborah Roach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,579.00

Invasive plants often evolve in response to novel habitats. Is it also possible
that native plants may evolve in response to invasive competitors? The aim of
this project is to investigate the potential for a native jewelweed, Impatiens
capensis, to evolve in response to competition from an invasive jewelweed,
Impatiens glandulifera, in New England plant communities. In greenhouse and
experimental field settings, previous research showed that the invasive
jewelweed alters natural selection on vegetative and floral traits of the native
plant. This study will test whether this same altered selection occurs in
natural plant communities. Using removal experiments and a reciprocal transplant
experiment, the study will measure natural selection on the native plant both
with and without the invasive jewelweed present, and will test whether seedlings
from invaded communities have evolved to better compete with the invasive.

Invasive species challenge plant and animal communities throughout the world.
This project will demonstrate how the long-term evolutionary impact of invasive
species can be estimated in natural populations and should be considered when
formulating conservation and restoration decisions. Results from this study will
be shared with conservation organizations including The Nature Conservancy and
The Massachusetts Invasive Plant Advisory Group. The project will also provide
an undergraduate researcher with the opportunity to learn how to study natural
selection in the field.