* 1311358
* Dissertation Research: Acclimation of photosynthesis and respiration to temperature under climate change: Understanding variation among species and biomes to improve climate models
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Jeffrey Dukes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 06/30/2016
* USD 19,903.00

The Earth System Models (ESMs) used to make climate projections are continually
becoming more sophisticated, and now incorporate a wide range of terrestrial
processes. However, some potentially important processes are still omitted
because they are either poorly understood or not quantified well enough to
warrant inclusion. One such process is the decrease in sensitivity of
photosynthesis and respiration to temperature that occurs after plants are given
time to adjust, or acclimate, to a temperature change. This process, termed
temperature acclimation, could critically influence projections of atmospheric
CO2 increase by altering the amount of CO2 taken up by plants in a future,
warmer world. This project will support a series of field measurements designed
to quantify the potential of a variety of plant species (grasses, trees, crops)
from a variety of biomes (tropical, temperate, and boreal) to acclimate to
different temperatures. Species will be measured at pairs of sites that lie at
different latitudes and, thus, have different growing season temperatures.
Measurements at the different sites will be compared to assess the ability of
each species to acclimate to the different temperatures. These field
measurements will supplement a larger dissertation project designed to improve
climate projections through the creation of temperature acclimation formulations
suitable for ESMs. The proposed project will support the mission of research
coordination networks such as INTERFACE and FORECAST in the U.S. and TERRABITES
in Europe to promote the interdisciplinary combination of empirical research and
Earth System Modeling. The data gathered from this project will help to create
first-of-their-kind formulations for photosynthesis and respiration that include
temperature acclimation. The formulations will be designed in such a way that
they can be easily implemented into most ESMs. Data will be submitted to
multiple international databases, where it will be archived, stored, and made
available to other researchers.