* 1311579
* Dissertation Research: The Role of Plasticity of Gene Expression in the Divergence byDepth of Candelabrum Corals
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Michael Hellberg, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2015
* USD 18,615.00

The degree to which an organism can plastically modify its morphology or
physiology by changing gene expression helps set the range of environments to
which it can acclimate. As an alternative to acclimation, organisms may deal
with environmental differences by adaptive alteration of allele frequencies
across generations. However, the same genomic changes that facilitate
acclimation over ecological scales may provide substrate for change over
evolutionary time. This project will study genes involved with acclimation and
adaptation to depth in Caribbean corals. In candelabrum corals (genus Eunicea),
variation in depth generates adaptive phenotypic differences that may lead to
the formation of new species at different depths. This study will use
transplanted fragments from coral colonies collected at and acclimated to
different depths to measure plasticity in gene expression and test if two depth-
segregated species have diverged in their acclimation response to depth. The
proposed research represents an innovative attempt to evaluate the role of
plasticity in providing initial variation during adaptive divergence of closely
related species with different ecologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
organisms cope with environmental variation provides basic knowledge on how to
implement restoration plans in changing ocean. This is of paramount importance
for Caribbean reefs, where coral cover has decreased by &gt; 80% since the
eighties, coral bleaching is becoming more frequent, and the billion-dollar
income it generates in Florida alone through recreation is in peril. PIs in this
proposal will also continue engaging high school and undergraduate women with
science.