* 1311617
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms of compensatory dynamics in natural systems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Katharine Suding, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2015
* USD 20,345.00

Understanding the mechanisms governing ecological stability, such as why a
property such as primary productivity is stable in some communities while
variable in others, has long been a central focus of ecology. Interactions
between environmental conditions and species dynamics are generally thought to
be key determinants of stability at the community level over time. In variable
environments, environment-species interactions may generate compensatory
dynamics, which occur when asynchronous fluctuations at the population level
buffer against fluctuation at the community level. For example, precipitation is
a strong control of grassland productivity, and in grasslands characterized by
high precipitation variability plant species tend to tradeoff over time because
some species better tolerate drought years, whereas other species are more
competitive in wet years. This project will show whether the stabilizing effect
of compensatory dynamics in environments with variable precipitation depends on
1) the responses of species to precipitation and 2) the effects of species on
productivity. Researchers will test this with experiments in California
grasslands, where species tradeoffs are frequent, by manipulating precipitation
variability and species interactions. Results will yield one of the first
mechanistic, field-based tests of how compensatory dynamics shape community
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important to society because
many people rely on stable sources of natural resources, but global change is
likely to increase variability in rainfall and temperature. For example,
ranchers in California depend upon grasslands for forage, but the reliability of
this ecosystem service is threatened by climate change. Results will be
disseminated to such land managers via the Central Coast Rangeland Coalition and
through publications read by managers such as the California Naturalist and
Rangelands, and the sets of data from the project will be made available to the
public. The project will also train a Ph.D. student and undergraduates, five of
whom have developed honors thesis projects related to the research.