* 1311572
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary genomics of inter-kingdom host jumping in the fungal genus Elaphocordyceps
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Joseph Spatafora, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2015
* USD 18,980.00

This study seeks to use genetic data to elucidate mechanisms underlying host
specificity in a group of fungi that are either pathogens of insects or other
fungi. Through previous research, whole genome data was generated for two very
closely related species, one beetle pathogen and one truffle pathogen. In this
study, an experiment will be performed where the truffle pathogen will be grown
in conditions containing the truffle and without, and the comparison of how the
fungus responds to these conditions (measured using messenger RNA) will gives
clues as to which genes and pathways are necessary for truffle pathogenesis. In
addition, whole genome data will be produced for more species within this genus,
including a cicada pathogen and another truffle pathogen. These additional
genomes will allow larger generalizations to be made about species within this
genus parasitizing different hosts, and to identify host-specific gene sets.
Little is known about the infection of new hosts by fungal pathogens and is of
increasing importance as the climate continues to change and communities become
more global. Knowledge of the genomic differences of species parasitizing
different hosts can inform how fungi are able to switch
hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study include, but are
not limited to, the following. First, a major impact of this proposal will be
the production of an electronically available high school biology module on
fungal pathogens of insects and other fungi. This will be created as a resource
for both teachers and students, and include classroom, field, and laboratory
exercises. An integral part of this module will be 5 lessons plans, complete
with presentation slides, to comprise an entire insect pathogenic fungi unit.
This will be made publically available at the Cordyceps Electronic Monograph at
http://cordyceps.us. Second, it is of little doubt, based on all previously
sequenced genomes of related species, that the study organisms will each have a
significant repertoire of secondary metabolites, and a major impact of this
project will be the identification of these gene clusters which could lead to
the identification and development of novel natural products, with potential
applications in medicine and biocontrol.