* 1311040
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Nicholas Johnson, Johnson                 Nicholas       A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Nicholas Andrew Johnson of the University of Minnesota to
conduct a research project in the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering area during the summer of 2013 at the Australian National University
in Canberra, Australia. The project title is "Real-Time Learning in Multiagent
Systems for Ad Hoc Robot Teams." The host scientist is Professor Bob Williamson.

The capability of heterogeneous robots to work together in order to accomplish a
task is greatly improved through the use of real-time learning. Robots must be
able to learn efficiently in the presence of other robots that possess differing
capabilities. This project develops learning robots that take into account
trust, cooperation, risk, and regret in order to allow teams of ad hoc robots to
work efficiently and accurately to accomplish a task.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, impacts of this project include advancing our
understanding of the ability to coordinate teams of robots with heterogeneous
capabilities; using the cooperation of the robot teams as a teaching activity
for elementary children; and improving the speed, accuracy, and safety of
response and limiting human endangerment in emergency situations through the use
of robot teams.