* 1311007
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Walter Varhue, Varhue                  Walter
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,132.00

This action funds Walter Varhue of the University of Virginia to conduct a
research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Academia Sinica in
Nangang District, Taipei City, Taiwan. The project title is "The Development of
a Microfluidic Device for the Detection of Low Concentrations of Ribonucleic
Acid Biomarkers." The host scientist is Professor Chiafu Chao.

This projected develops a microfluidic device for the sub pM amperometric
detection of Ribonucleic acid biomarkers utilizing a redox cycle and a nano-slit
platform. The use of a nano-slit platform for this device lowers the sample to
answer assay time through the limitation of the potential diffusion lengths and
the electro-kinetic pre-concentration of the target biomarker. The signal
current produced by this device is also amplified through the use of a redox
cycle. The integration of these techniques in a single device achieves a great
improvement in the ability to detect biomarkers at a fM dilution. Furthermore,
through device characterization, the diffusion of particles confined by nano-
scale geometry and its effect on electro-chemical detection will be able to be
studied. This improved detection ability will eventually allow for faster
diagnosis of possible infections and easier detection of infectious materials in
an environment. Its inclusion on a Lab-on-a-chip style microfluidic device will
also allow for miniaturization of this process allowing for greater portability.
The development of detection methods capable of discerning the viability,
infectivity, and speciation of infectious micro-organisms is a healthcare
priority for early diagnosis of infection and routine monitoring for infectious
material. The device proposed in this research project will facilitate an
improvement of such methods through the sub pM amperometric detection of
Ribonucleic acid biomarkers. The use of such a proposed device will lead not
only to greater ability to detect and diagnosis pathogens but also may lead to
the miniaturization of such technologies. Portability will enable easier and
faster detection of potential health hazards.

Broder impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this training will expand the Fellow's
abilities as a teacher in the University of Virginias IC fabrication laboratory.