* 1311394
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:Ecological interactions mediate the effects of climatic stress on populations: dissecting the direct and indirect effects of climate on plants
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Daniel Doak, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 18,393.00

Most projections of shifts in species distributions with climate change assume
that geographic ranges are strongly determined by abiotic stresses including
temperature and precipitation. However, ecologists have generally thought that
species ranges in areas where such stresses are relatively low are strongly
influenced by biotic interactions such as predation or parasitism. Though this
long-standing hypothesis contradicts the assumptions behind most projections of
future species distributions, there are few tests of the relative strength of
abiotic and biotic interactions across meaningful portions of species ranges or
along stress gradients. This project will use field and greenhouse experiments
to assess the effect of pollination on performance of the common, understory
plant Hibiscus meyeri along an aridity gradient in East Africa, adding to on-
going studies of herbivory and interactions between plants in the same system.
The work will help develop species distribution modeling by using H. meyeri to
construct predictive distribution models that vary in their incorporation of
multiple biotic interactions. Results will help to show when biotic interactions
must be included to understand how species will be influenced by changes in
temperature and precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research include provision of scientific information for the conservation of
biodiversity and national and international training for students and outreach
to resource managers and users. Many pollinators and large herbivores are
threatened in Africa and around the globe, and this work will help show the
potential effects of their extirpation on the functioning of ecological systems.
The project will train U.S. and Kenyan undergraduate students and a U.S. Ph.D.
student, and collaborate with the National Museums and the Mpala Research Centre
in Kenya.