* 1311315
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of visual pigments in fireflies (Coleoptera: Lampyridae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,07/31/2015
* David W. Hall, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2015
* USD 19,305.00

How and why new mating signals arise and spread through a population remain open
questions in evolutionary biology. However, it has been difficult to study
signaling traits from a genetic perspective since signals, and the receptors
that enable their detection, are often complex physical and/or behavioral traits
affected by many genes. Fireflies offer an ideal system to study signal
evolution because of their conspicuous and highly variable mating signals. These
include lighted signals that range from simple glows to complex flashes, and
differ in color, from blue/green to orange. Importantly, the underlying genetic
basis of the lighted signal and signal receptor are both simple: light
production is controlled by a single enzyme (luciferase) and visual receptor
sensitivity by a single family of receptors (opsins). This work will use Next
Generation sequencing techniques to examine the evolution of opsins in
relationship to signal color and environmental light conditions.

This work will offer an unprecedented look at the evolution of visual receptors
in a nocturnal visual signaling system. Combined with ongoing work examining the
evolution of the light signal, it will allow testing of hypotheses for the
molecular evolution of genes underlying both signals and receptors. It will
revolutionize the genetic resources for fireflies and has the potential to place
fireflies at the forefront of signal evolution research. Research opportunities
will be offered for undergraduate students and resources developed for K-9
education.