* 1311298
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of a Mesoamerican Rodent Clade: Phylogenetics and Testing Biogeographic Hypotheses
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Ana Almendra, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2015
* USD 19,125.00

This research has several objectives. The first is to develop a robust genealogy
for a group of rodents (Handley?s mice) endemic to medium and high elevation
forests in Central America and northern South America. DNA sequence data from 10
different genes will be used to estimate genealogical relationships among
members of this rodent group. The evolutionary relationships recovered will be
used to examine several important biological questions. During the evolutionary
history of this group, have ecological requirements changed? Did ancestors of
this rodent group evolve in Central America and then colonize South America or
vice versa? What is/are the likely mode(s) of speciation among members of this
group? How have past (and predicted future) climatic changes impacted the
distributions of species of Handley?s mice? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly,
the results of this study can be applied to other groups of organisms with
similar distributions and evolutionary histories in order to increase our
knowledge of the biogeography of Central America. This is particularly important
because this region harbors more than its share of biological diversity and the
landscape is rapidly be altered by deforestation. Research results will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and a museum exhibit for the
general public.