* 1311032
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Connectivty and ecosystem function in experimental microcosm landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Mathew Leibold, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2015
* USD 18,582.00

In nature, ecosystem function varies extensively across space. Some ecosystems
are extremely diverse while others support only a few species. Ecological theory
suggests that dispersal of individuals across space is critical to the
persistence of functional ecosystems and predicts that, at some intermediate
level of dispersal, individuals can colonize favorable habitat patches and
maintain functional ecosystems. The proposed research will be the first to test
these theoretical predictions in complex communities. Researchers will construct
communities of micro-organisms in laboratory petri dishes to implement a robust
experimental design that includes patches of favorable and unfavorable habitats
and that measures multiple ecosystem functions (productivity, respiration,
abundance). In these controlled microcosms, the researchers can impose a wide
range of dispersal levels. The experiments incorporate the complexity common in
natural communities, will test the importance of dispersal and sorting dynamics,
and will produce data necessary to revise existing
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans are causing major changes to the movement of
organisms across ecosystems. Some ecosystems are declining in connectivity
through the fragmentation of habitat, while others are becoming more connected
under increased rates of trade and habitat homogenization. Understanding the
impacts of these changes on biodiversity and the provisioning of ecosystem
services requires the robust testing of ecological theory. In parallel, the
research will inform pest control and conservation in agro-ecosystems. The co-PI
plans interactive lectures in Austin public schools to link science with
management and will train undergraduate students in all aspects of his research.
Finally, the experiments are part of a strong international collaboration among
eight researchers who study metacommunity ecology from different perspectives.