* 1311289
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The role of natural enemies and resource availability in biological invasions by plants
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Robert Heckman, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 19,739.00

One likely reason that some of the plant species introduced by humans to new
regions are able to spread and outcompete native plants is that the introduced
plants are relatively free from natural enemies such as herbivores and
pathogens. However, the benefits to an introduced species of release from
enemies may depend on the levels of resources such as soil nutrients in the new
habitat. In more fertile habitats, many plants grow more rapidly and lower their
chemical or physical defenses against enemies. This should increase the
advantage of the absence of enemies and thus the ability of introduced plants to
outcompete native ones. This project will test this resource-enemy release
hypothesis of biological invasion through a series of experiments in which 6
introduced species and 14 native species are grown at different levels of soil
fertility and with and without protection from native insect herbivores and
fungal pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the factors that allow
some introduced species to become dominant in their new ranges is critical for
natural resource management. Invasive species cause declines in biodiversity and
cost the U.S. economy nearly $120 billion annually. Results from this project
will help managers target control to the habitats and species most at risk. The
project will also provide hands-on research experience in field and laboratory
settings to several undergraduate students, and disseminate findings to high
school biology classes and the local community.