* 1311549
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics and Diversification of the Aderidae (Coleoptera: Tenebrionoidea): Elucidating the Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Kipling Will, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 11/30/2015
* USD 17,492.00

The Aderidae is a moderately diverse beetle family containing 1,200 species that
inhabit all continents except Antarctica and are currently classified into 45
genera. Aderidae also has a rich fossil record in Baltic, Dominican, Mexican,
and Lebanese amber inclusions. Many species exhibit varying degrees of sexual
dimorphism, several inhabit cave systems, and some are social parasites of
termites. This study will be the first to investigate evolutionary relationships
within this family using modern molecular systematic methods. This project
specifically emphasizes currently under-utilized morphological imaging methods.
The morphological data from these fossil specimens will be evaluated and
included in analyses in order to examine the historical timing of evolutionary
events, such as the evolution of sexual dimorphism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will produce a revised classification for the Aderidae in addition to
the discovery and description of extant and fossil species. The complete
integration of data from extant and fossil specimens makes this an exemplar
multi-disciplinary study that will investigate the diversification of these
beetles within a temporal framework. Results from this research will be broadly
disseminated through presentations at research conferences and local science
caf√©s to promote scientific awareness in the community.