* 1311698
* Accretion and outflows in the limit of weak stellar magnetic fields: does the magnetospheric accretion paradigm apply to Herbig AeBe stars?
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Monnier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 416,582.00

The goal of this proposal is to investigate the mass transfer mechanism between
the accretion disk and the central star in Herbig Ae/Be systems. Herbig Ae/Be
stars are intermediate-mass, pre-main-sequence protostars that show evidence of
inflow and outflow motions similar to their lower-mass T Tauri star
counterparts. In the case of T Tauri stars, the inflow from the disk to the star
is generally thought to be the result of magnetospheric accretion, while mass is
transferred out of the system via magnetically driven outflows. These mass
transfer mechanisms require strong dipolar fields, which are present in T Tauri
stars but are generally not found in Herbig Ae/Be stars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed investigation of magnetically driven inflow
and outflow processes in young Herbig AE/Be stars will be accomplished through a
coordinated program of interferometric and spectroscopic observations along with
advanced numerical modeling. This research will provide valuable insight
regarding accretion and wind-generated mass loss as they relate to the formation
of stars. The proposed project will also contribute to scientific workforce
development through the support of a co-PI who is currently a postdoc soon to
become a research scientist at the Univ. of Michigan. The project includes
public outreach goals that will be accomplished through the development of new
exhibits for the historical Detroit Observatory recently re-opened in Ann Arbor,
MI. These exhibits will foster scientific literacy with an emphasis on the
fundamentals of astronomical research.