* 1311015
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Zane Pannell, Pannell                 Zane           H
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Zane Pannell of University of Tennessee, Knoxville to conduct
a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Tsinghua
University Institute of Transportation Engineering in Beijing, China. The
project title is "Road User Vulnerability - Impacts of the New E-Bike Mode." The
host scientist is Dr. Yang Xinmiao.

This research is an opportunity to explore crash histories for users of all
modes of traffic in Beijing, China. Although this project aims to focus on
safety for modes, it concentrates specifically on electric bicycles (e-bikes).
While a handful of studies have touched different aspects of multimodal safety,
this study brings a new approach to safety, focusing on vulnerability and fault.
This approach moves away from classic safety analysis (counting and normalizing
injuries and fatalities) and focuses on quantifying vulnerability and fault.
This is an important contribution because it moves policy toward protecting
vulnerable road users (VRU) (e.g., bicyclists) from what is hypothesized as
intrinsically dangerous road users (e.g., cars) rather than pointing at the VRU
as the dangerous element in the transportation system simply because they are
more represented in crash statistics.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the goal of this project is to help policy
makers establish a policy in effort to reduce the number of e-bike crashes,
which focuses on saving lives. This project can also help educate all modes of
the transportation infrastructure on the vulnerabilities of e-bikes and make
them more alert to e-bikes. In effort to broadcast the results, this project
will be submitted to top safety journals and the results will be presented at
conferences in the US and China. The results and traveling experience will also
be presented at the Institute of Transportation Engineers and American Society
of Civil Engineers meetings at the University of Tennessee Knoxville.