* 1311064
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jocelyn Lavallee, Lavallee                Jocelyn
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Jocelyn M. Lavallee of Colorado State University to conduct a
research project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at James Cook
University in Cairns, Australia. The project title is "Measuring the Turnover of
Black Carbon in Soil Using Hydrogen Pyrolysis." The host scientist is Dr.
Michael I. Bird.

Black carbon, also known as charcoal or pyrogenic carbon, is broadly defined as
the carbon-rich residue left after incomplete combustion of fossil fuels and
biomass. It is commonly found in soils, and there is evidence that it turns over
very slowly (over hundreds of years to millennia). Incorporation of carbon into
charcoal may be an important mechanism of carbon stabilization in soils, but
little is known about what factors control its turnover. This project uses a
promising new technique called hydrogen pyrolysis to study charcoal carbon in
soils. Hydrogen pyrolysis is combined with elemental analysis and mass
spectrometry to measure the carbon abundance and isotopic signature of charcoal,
which is used to calculate turnover times. The aim is to relate the turnover
time of charcoal carbon to environmental variables such as climate, dominant
vegetation, and management.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this investigation will encourage teaching
and integration of diversity through mentoring an undergraduate student from
James Cook University. The investigators will recruit a student from an under-
represented group who is interested in pursuing a degree and/or career in
science through the Student Mentor Program, designed to encourage under-
represented students from specific equity groups. At the culmination of the
project, this student will be encouraged to join a laboratory group at James
Cook University and to pursue his or her own research project. This Fellow will
also gain experience in working with scientists of different nationalities, and
in forming lasting collaborations.