* 1311153
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny, biogeography, and population genetics of Scirpus (Cyperaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Kenneth Sytsma, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 10/31/2015
* USD 19,565.00

An understanding of the evolutionary and ecological processes that have
contributed to the diversity and distribution of our flora is critical for
effective conservation strategies in this era of rapid climate change. Utilizing
state-of-the-art DNA sequencing technologies, this research investigates the
evolution of the bulrushes, an ecologically important group of wetland species
in the sedge family (Cyperaceae), and utilizes this historical context to
predict how species with disparate ranges may differentially respond to climate
change. Within this evolutionary framework, this study identifies two
endangered, narrowly distributed bulrushes and compares them to their most
closely related widespread relatives, quantifying the genetic diversity present
within their populations and modeling their responses to predicted climatic
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change has been a threat for decades, yet
effective mitigation strategies are still nascent. As resources allocated to
conservation are limited, it is essential to prioritize by protecting those
species most at risk. Using the evolutionary context afforded by this study,
this research utilizes the bulrushes as a case study in order to determine if
species with narrow ranges are inherently more at risk of extinction under
future climates than widespread species. The results of this study will
determine whether the range of a species is a useful proxy for extinction risk,
thereby allowing for the identification of at-risk species before they become
rare and ultimately informing a predictive and preventative, rather than
reactive, approach to conservation.