* 1311449
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   A genomic approach to understanding allopatric differentiation in tropical montane birds
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* John Bates, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2015
* USD 20,061.00

The formation of new species (speciation) is generally thought to begin with
geographic isolation of populations. When different populations of a single
species are isolated by geographic barriers, they are likely to evolve
differences. If the differences accrued in isolation are substantial, these
populations will be considered different species. However, the processes that
control the initial stage of speciation, the differentiation of geographically
isolated populations, are poorly understood. This proposal investigates the
factors that control differentiation of populations in geographic isolation. In
particular, it examines the roles that time spent in geographic isolation, and
the degree of geographic isolation experienced through time, play in determining
levels of population differentiation. This proposal uses bird species found in
the cloud forest of the Andes as a model system for hypothesis testing, as many
populations in this region show variable levels of differentiation across
geographic barriers. Recently developed genetic techniques will be used to infer
levels of genetic differentiation, and museum specimens of Andean birds will
enable measurement of differentiation in plumage and morphology among
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the causes of different amounts
of divergence from geographically isolated species will help illuminate the
processes involved in the initial phase of speciation for a large portion of
earth?s biodiversity. This project includes training of Peruvian scientists and
mentorship of local Chicago area high school students and undergraduates in
laboratory methods. This project also will involve public educational outreach
on genetic and evolutionary research at the DNA Discovery Center at the Field
Museum in Chicago.