* 1311883
* Collaborative research RUI: Nonlinear wave equations and inverse scattering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Barbara Prinari, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2016
* USD 145,992.00

This project concerns a class of nonlinear evolution equations (NLEEs) usually
referred to as soliton equations or integrable systems. Over the past fifty
years, a large body of knowledge has been accumulated on these systems, which
continue to be extensively studied worldwide. Nonetheless, problems in which the
boundary conditions play a crucial role still pose significant challenges. This
project is aimed at undertaking a wide-ranging investigation of initial-boundary
value problems for integrable NLEEs, both continuous and discrete, in both one
and two spatial dimensions, including their applications in several concrete
scientific and technological settings. This study will be carried out by
developing and using exact methods, such as the inverse scattering transform and
direct methods, in combination with appropriate asymptotic and numerical
techniques. Specific problems that are being studied include: (i) nonlinear
Schrodinger systems (scalar and vector, continuous and discrete) with non-zero
boundary conditions at space infinity; (ii) boundary value problems for discrete
and continuous NLEEs; (iii) characterization of soliton interactions for all of
the above systems; (iv) classification of solitary wave structures in
(2+1)-dimensional integrable systems such as the Davey-Stewartson
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear wave equations are well-known to model a
variety of physically interesting phenomena arising in areas ranging from fluid
dynamics and nonlinear optics, to plasmas, cosmology and quantum field theory.
The study of these equations is especially attractive because it offers a unique
combination of interesting mathematics and concrete physical/technological
applications. In particular, the systems that will be studied in this project
model wave propagation in water waves, optical fibers, lasers and Bose-Einstein
condensates. Hence the outcomes of this project will not only advance our
mathematical understanding, but they will also provide practical information
that will help scientists and engineers. The training of undergraduate and
graduate students is also an integral component of this project. One of the PIs
has co-authored a monograph on NLS systems that has been referenced extensively
and is helping the dissemination of knowledge in the field of nonlinear waves.
Both PIs have a long record of working with both graduate and undergraduate
students, and will work both with undergraduate students and with Ph.D. students
as part of this project.