* 1311028
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Semiarid Soil Microbial Response to Global Change
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Robert Sinsabaugh, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 04/30/2015
* USD 19,479.00

Microbes mediate many important ecosystem services yet remain relatively poorly
understood. This research examines how microbes - the bacteria and fungi that
occur in soils - contribute to the ability of grassland ecosystems to respond to
climate change. Desert grassland soils harbor high microbial diversity, but
collecting, identifying and interpreting this diversity remains a challenge.
Genomic tools will be used to identify the microbes in grassland soils under
different environmental conditions. This information on microbial community
composition will be linked with previous measures of microbial function in order
to predict how microbes and their associated plant communities will respond to
climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grasslands provide many ecosystem services
that benefit humans, yet they are changing rapidly in response to climate change
and human land use. Results from this study will be communicated to the public
in collaboration with the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge in central New
Mexico. Educational materials and exhibits for the Refuge's new Visitors' Center
will be developed based on this project. In addition, the researchers will
participate in the Junior Scientist Outreach Program, a new outreach activity
coordinated by the University of New Mexico Department of Biology. This activity
targets 4th and 5th grade students from under-represented groups and engages
then in hands-on activities coordinated by the research scientists.