* 1311845
* Materials World Network, SusChEM:  Collaborative:  Electron-Lattice Dynamics at an Atomically Controlled Buried Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Hrvoje Petek, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 405,282.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international collaborative research
program bringing together scientists from Germany (Marburg University), Japan
(National Institute for Materials Science) and the USA (Universities of
Pittsburgh and Florida) will investigate the correlation between the structural
and dynamical properties of GaP/Si buried interfaces in order to enable the
fundamental understanding and practical applications of such materials. The
GaP/Si interface is a material with potential applications having a high
sustainability impact for high efficiency solar cells and silicon
optoelectronics. Buried interfaces, excited states, and interaction of light
with nonequilibrium charge distributions represent challenges at the forefront
of condensed matter physics experiment and theory. By combining expertise in
materials growth, structure characterization, ultrafast electronic and phonon
spectroscopy, and theory, the team will investigate the relationship between the
structural and ultrafast optoelectronic properties of GaP/Si interfaces. The
optical and charge transport properties at an interface between two electronic
materials depend on the band alignment between them, and the atomic scale
structure of the interface in subtle ways that are difficult to characterize by
experiment and theory. The team will employ coherent phonon spectroscopy to
investigate the ultrafast response of the interfacial electronic and lattice
subsystems to band gap excitation. It is expected that the interfacial carrier
distributions and the built-in electric fields will substantially influence the
coupled carrier-lattice dynamics. By comparison with the dynamics of the
component materials (single crystal Si and GaP), the team will identify the
components of the ultrafast response that can be attributed to the existence of
the interface. The interface response will be investigated for materials grown
under different conditions that influence the material composition and
crystalline structure on the atomic to the nanometer scales. From the
spectroscopic measurements and theoretical simulations the team will identify
how the material structure affects the optical and electronic properties of
GaP/Si interface. The tight integration of material growth and analysis, with
ultrafast spectroscopic measurements will enable GaP/Si material optimization
for practical applications. The experimental methodology will be applicable to
studies of a broad range of interfacial phenomena of technologically important
electronic materials. Students will be trained in an area highly relevant to the
technical workforce and will gain global experience through the exchange among
the partner laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimized electronic materials enable efficient generation
and utilization of energy for continued economic development. The GaP/Si
interface has the potential for applications in high efficiency solar cells for
solar-to-electrical energy conversion, as well as for enabling optical signal
processing within Si based electronic devices. The function of such composite
materials, however, depends on the interface between them. Even though the
dimensions of the crystalline lattices of GaP and Si are nearly identical,
enabling growth of nearly defect free GaP overlayers on Si, their disparate
ionic and covalent characters cause the electronic properties at the interface
to change abruptly. Therefore, the optical and electronic properties of the
composite materials strongly depend on the atomic scale structure and
composition of the interface. Studying the relationship between the structure
and electronic properties of interfaces is extremely difficult because it
requires the ability to grow materials with particular characteristics, to
correlate the atomic structure with the growth parameters, to characterize the
relationship between the structure and electronic properties, as well as to
develop a theoretical model for the interface that can close the feedback
between the structural and functional investigations. This is a collaborative
team involving scientists from Germany (Marburg University), Japan (National
Institute for Materials Science) and the USA (Universities of Pittsburgh and
Florida) that will study the structure-function relationship of the GaP/Si
interface based on specific materials growth, structure characterization by
electron microscopy, investigation of the interface-specific electronic
structure and optical response, as well as theory. The methodology and
understanding obtained through the study will be applicable to similar studies
of a broad range of interfaces between electronic materials. Students will be
trained in an area highly relevant to the technical workforce and will gain
global experience through the exchange among the partner laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;