* 1311721
* Mechanics of Strain-Driven Nanopatterning in Alloy Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/06/2012,03/31/2013
* Vivek Shenoy, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 03/31/2013
* USD 104,189.00

CMMI 0855853: Mechanics of Strain-Driven Nanopatterning in Alloy Systems

PI: Vivek B. Shenoy, Brown University

As integrated circuit technologies are approaching their physical limitations
with current lithographic patterning methods, new approaches with improved
spatial resolution are required to keep this $200 billion market stable. A
bottom up or self-assembly approach driven by the elastic interactions is widely
viewed as a promising technique for the fabrication of structures such as
nanowires, quantum dots and nanoscale surface patterns. However, to follow this
approach and create structures in a desired manner, a reliable means to engineer
the size and shapes that the patterns adopt during self-assembly is essential.
In the proposed work, alloying will be explored as a means to achieve control
over the shape, size and spatial pattering of strained self-assembled structures
on surfaces. The investigator will develop computational models that accounts
for features unique to alloyed systems such as differences in transport
properties and segregation induced by morphology dependent elastic fields. The
composition and strain dependence of the material parameters will be obtained
from atomic scale simulations. The investigator has close ties with an
experimental group based in the semiconductor industry, which will allow for
direct assessment of the proposed modeling effort.

The multiscale methods that will be developed in the project will be broadly
applicable to analyze nanoscale patterning in a variety of material systems, but
the immediate focus will be on alloying of Si surfaces with Ge. The Ge/Si system
has the advantage that in addition to potential applications in renewable energy
devices and biological sensors, it is also naturally compatible with the well
developed Si integrated circuit fabrication technology. The project will provide
an opportunity for students to both collaborate with experimentalists in the
semiconductor industry and to develop advanced computational skills. The
students trained on this project will be well positioned to pursue careers in
academia and in the semiconductor and energy industries. The progress made in
the computational methods will be included in the course that the PI has created
to promote hands-on simulation experience.





