* 1311379
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The influence of soil fertility on tropical tree species carbon and nutrient storage: A comparison between lowland and montane forests
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* James Dalling, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 20,183.00

Tropical rainforests support a rich diversity of life including over 50,000 tree
species. One key to this diversity appears to be that different species grow on
different soils. This project will explore the features of plant function that
cause species to divide up the rainforest habitat in this way. Research will
test the hypothesis that the ability of a tree species to store wood
carbohydrates and nutrients in wood and then move them back out again for use in
other parts of the tree determines where a species is found in the forest along
a gradient from low to high soil fertility, a hypothesis not yet tested in
tropical forests. The two main objectives are to compare 1) the stocks of
carbohydrates and nutrients in wood in trees in different natural communities
along parallel gradients of soil fertility in lowland and montane tropical
forests in Panama, and 2) the ability of the saplings of related tree species
that grow on different soils to remobilize stocks of nutrients in response to
experimental defoliation.

This project will train a female Ph.D. student from the U.S. and expand
international scientific collaboration with students and faculty from a local
public university in Panama. As part of this collaboration, the Ph.D. student
will mentor an undergraduate Panamanian student on a senior thesis project and
serve as the teaching assistant for an undergraduate field course in Panama. In
the U.S., the Ph.D. student will share her knowledge of plant biology as a
volunteer in the Plants iView program, a six-week, after school, outreach
experience at Urbana Middle School in Illinois. Besides this educational
training and public outreach, the project will also benefit society by
increasing understanding of how to maintain biodiversity.