* 1311024
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jesse Angle, Angle                   Jesse          P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Jesse P. Angle of The University of California at Irvine to
conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 in the
Crystal Interface Laboratory at The University of Tokyo in Tokyo, Japan. The
project title is "In-situ Transmission Electron Microscopy Indentation to
Characterize Deformation in Ceramics." The host scientist is Professor Yuichi
Ikuhara.

This project focuses on determining the deformation mechanism in a widely used
ceramic material, mullite. Even with its uses in the aerospace and electronics
industries, many of the essential mechanical properties of this material still
remain unknown and by understanding the fundamental deformation mechanism of
slip, both the slip direction and slip-system, a complete characterization of
the mechanical properties of mullite can be achieved. In order to observe the
dislocation formation necessary to study the slip system of mullite, an in-situ
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) piezo actuator controlled nano indenter
is used to form indentations on the surface of a single crystal mullite sample
to create plastic deformation region and create localized dislocations. By
analyzing the reciprocal lattice vector (g) of the planes that diffract
electrons under a two-beam condition (meaning one set of planes satisfies
Bragg's Law), the Burgers vector (b) of the dislocation can be characterized.
Matching this slip direction to the orientation of the crystal, the slip plane
and thus the slip system can be determined. Understanding the limits of commonly
used materials, allows the design, manufacture and implementation of critical
engineering compounds with a much higher degree of success and reliability. This
project has potential to see direct impact in the aerospace and electronics
sectors where material advances drive the industry.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, results of this project will be disseminated
at conferences and in presentations, and will enhance scientific understanding
in the form of journal publications. Being active in both academic and research
focused outreach groups, this EAPSI Fellow plans to share his experiences in the
NSF EASPI program by showing students, graduate and undergraduate, how
international collaboration can be beneficial to their careers as scientists and
engineers.