* 1311851
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation - Feasibility Analysis of Self-Administered Eye Tactile Tonometer
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Eniko Enikov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 11/30/2015
* USD 186,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating micro-
electromechanical (MEMS) tactile sensing and signal processing science to fill a
non-invasive eye-pressure measurement technology gap. The translated technology
has the following unique features: the ability to detect minute changes in the
physical characteristics of soft materials and tissues, the ability to detect
and measure pressure inside closed cavities in tissues and organs such as the
human eye, and the ability to recognize changes that might occur due to aging
processes. The translated technology provides exemplary cost savings,
convenience, and efficacy when compared to the leading competing corneal
tonometry in this market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project accomplishes
this goal by utilizing the latest advances in sensor miniaturization, soft
tissue biomechanical modeling, and application of artificial neural network
(ANN) signal processing techniques, resulting in an easy-to-use self-
administered home tonometer. The partnership engages Arch Partners LLC, EPV
Sensors LLC, Arizona Retinal Specialists LLC, and the University of Arizona to
provide guidance in the home tonometry market space and other aspects:
evaluation and testing of the device, financing, commercialization, and
marketing as they pertain to the potential to translate the tactile sensing
technology along a path that may result in a competitive commercial reality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential economic impact is expected to be over $2B
in world-wide sales in the next 5 to 10 years, which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in the home tonometry market space. The societal impact, long
term, will be better management of glaucoma affecting over 4.3 M Americans each
year, reduced disability rates, lower healthcare delivery costs, and greater
access to eye diagnostics and care.