* 1311512
* Dissertation Research: Uncovering molecular mechanisms of facial recognition using comparative transcriptomics
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Amy Toth, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2015
* USD 19,233.00

Very few animals, mostly humans and other primates, are known to have a special
ability to recognize each other's faces. How is this impressive feat of learning
accomplished? Until now, technical limitations have made it difficult to study
the ways in which animals' brains and genes permit them to recognize faces. Here
the researchers are taking advantage of what some may consider a surprising
model for this, insects, to delve into how facial recognition works on the level
of brains and genes. The researchers have shown that several species of social
paper wasps (Polistes) possess the ability to recognize individual faces.
Polistes fuscatus wasps have striking variation in facial color patterns and
they can learn faces much more readily than other visual patterns. In contrast a
closely related species, Polistes metricus, does not have facial variation and
lacks the special ability to learn faces more readily than other patterns. These
two species with contrasting facial recognition abilities provide a unique
opportunity to study the relationship between genes, brains and this ability. In
collaboration with Dr. Elizabeth Tibbetts, wasps of each species are trained to
recognize faces or non-face patterns. Dr. Toth and Ms. Berens will use "next
generation" sequencing to measure the activity of thousands of genes in these
wasps' brains to determine whether there are particular genes associated with
facial recognition. The team will then manipulate gene activity in wasps' brains
in order to determine whether such a change can improve or impair wasps' facial
recognition abilities. Understanding the interplay between brains, genes, and
facial recognition will be of benefit to human health since disordered facial
recognition can impair human social interactions. This project is significant
because it will use the paper wasp model to provide the first in-depth genetic
analysis of a sophisticated form of learning that has been difficult to study in
detail in humans and other primates.

RNA data will be deposited at ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/)