* 1311837
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation: Smart Windows for the Improved Energy Efficiency of Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Sarbajit Banerjee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2014
* USD 159,308.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the
remarkable tunability of the abruptly discontinuous metal-insulator transitions
of binary and ternary vanadium oxides discovered upon scaling to finite size and
upon incorporation of substitutional/intercalative dopants to fill a critical
technology gap in their deployment as dynamic glazing components of thermally
switchable fenestration (doors, windows, and glazed skylights). The translated
smart window technology has the following unique features: thermally switchable
heat-blocking properties without a significant change in visible light
transmittance, tunability of the switching temperature to meet the needs of
different geographic climates, and voltage-driven induction of heat-blocking
properties that provides exemplary savings in air-conditioning costs while
allowing natural daylight to be used to light interiors of buildings when
compared to the leading competing electrochromic and static metallic coatings in
this market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project accomplishes this goal by
enabling investigation of scale-up of the synthesis of vanadium oxides,
identification of optimal coating deposition methods, and allowing correlation
curves and data tables to be compiled relating critical performance metrics to
coating thickness and density resulting in a prototype energy efficient window.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership engages a leading manufacturer of home
windows, the Technology Accelerator Fund, and the Office of Science, Technology
Transfer, and Economic Outreach at the University at Buffalo to provide guidance
in the fenestration industry and other aspects such as market adoption,
commercialization, and insulating glass unit design as they pertain to the
potential to translate the smart window technology along a path that may result
in a competitive commercial reality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
economic impact is expected to be ca. $118 Million in the next 4 years, which
will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in this area of green building
materials and energy efficient buildings. The societal impact, long term, will
be more energy efficient (even zero emission) buildings with a reduced carbon
footprint and energy savings that have been estimated by some accounts to be as
much as 1.0 quadrillion BTUs.