* 1311517
* DISSERTATON RESEARCH: Genetic diversification of mesic treefrogs in a dry Neotropical savanna: Next-Gen sequencing uncovers the roles of environment, paleoclimate, and geography
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* David Cannatella, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2016
* USD 17,710.00

Savannas, which are among the most diverse but understudied ecosystems, are
severely threatened due to the ease of converting these areas to agriculture.
The savannas of Brazil are the largest on Earth, and conservation and management
of the biota in the remaining savanna patches requires documenting the
evolutionary and ecological factors that gave rise to and maintain this
biodiversity. Treefrog species are excellent models for this research because
they are highly sensitive to vegetation type, temperature, and humidity levels.
Thus, climatic alteration is quickly revealed by declines in populations of
these species. Using new methods in computer modeling that describe environments
on a large scale, and advances in DNA technology, this research will assess the
genetic well being of frog populations in relation to their changing environment
and their prospects for survival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diverse sources of
data to be collected will provide baseline information critical to efficiently
protect and manage these endangered habitats and biotas. These methods and
research approaches will be transferrable to other groups of organisms in
different ecological regions. This project will contribute significantly to
promoting integrative, multidisciplinary research involving international
collaborators, and will train students as future scientists and science
educators.