* 1311972
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation - Nanoscale Optical Antenna for Next Generation Ultra-high Density Data Storage
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 05/31/2016
* USD 174,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating science and
technology in nanoscale optical antenna to fill the gap for Heat-Assisted
Magnetic Recording (HAMR). The translated science and technology in nanoscale
optical antenna has the following unique features: the nanoscale optical antenna
focuses light into nanoscale size with high efficiency, and moreover, can be
manufactured using industrial standard technology for mass production. HAMR has
been identified as the next generation data storage technology. The key
component in HAMR is a near field transducer (NFT) for producing a light spot of
tens of nanometers in size for localized heating. The proposed nanoscale optical
antenna is an ideal candidate for being used as the NFT to provide high
efficiency and a small light spot when compared to the other NFT designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project accomplishes this goal by proof-of concept
design and analysis, prototype development, and demonstration of a fully
functional NFT. Our partnership engages Advanced Storage Technology Consortium
(ASTC), the consortium of the data storage companies, to provide guidance in the
prototype development and commercialization as they pertain to the potential to
translate the technology along a path that may result in a competitive
commercial reality. The potential economic impact is expected to affect the next
generation hard disk drives which currently have a market of 600 million units
per year, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the data storage
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal impact, long term, will be on
science and engineering and human resource development. The outcome of this
project will have direct impact on the development of the next generation data
storage technology. The project will also advance the relevant science and
engineering. The ability to concentrate light into a nanoscale spot with high
efficiency has significant impact not only on the HAMR technology development
but also many other areas, from biological/chemical sensing to nano-photonics
devices. Results of fundamental research will be broadly disseminated by journal
publications, conference presentations, and websites, including Purdue's nanoHUB
web portal. The proposed research will also contribute to human resource
development, including providing graduate and undergraduate students with
trainings in interdisciplinary areas and experience in technology transfer,
integrating research outcomes with curriculum, outreaching to high school
students, and recruiting and educating students from under-represented groups.