* 1311981
* Innovation Institute
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2018
* Stephen Uzzo, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,301,876.00

The Innovation Institute: From Problem to Product (I2) takes high school
students through the entire process of inventing a device, software or other
technology. This proposal makes use of a Makerspace at the New York Hall of
Science (NYSCI), which is located in a community with a high proportion of both
immigrant and low-income residents. I2 builds on NYSCI experience with the Maker
movement and leverages its Explainer program (where high school students who
work as exhibit or program facilitators) by providing: 1) a product
prototype/design program for high school Explainers and 2) afterschool and
Saturday activities for middle school students, with mentoring provided by the
Explainers. It will serve a total of 60 high school students (20 in each cohort)
and 1000 elementary and middle school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
quasi-experimental design, the project evaluation addresses these questions:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Does engaging in the process from design to product, emphasizing
entrepreneurship, engineering, and the use of technology, lead to Explainers':
Deeper learning and 21st century skills?; STEM and ICT knowledge, skills,
dispositions?; and Persistence in the STEM workforce? &lt;br/&gt;2. Does
transferring the learning to younger students lead to deeper learning on the
part of the Explainers (transfer and self-regulated learning), increased
knowledge of the engineering process, and increased knowledge and skills in
using technologies? &lt;br/&gt;3. Does participating in design-based activities
increase middle and elementary students' positive attitudes, engagement and
interest in STEM and STEM careers and lead to the perception of Explainers as
role models? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will disseminate a replication
handbook for scaling up the model and project evaluation reports. Project
results will be further disseminated through articles submitted to peer-reviewed
academic journals, workshops presented at museum conferences, and articles in
other publications such as Make Magazine, a publication that targets those in
the Maker movement.