* 1311758
* AIR Option 1:   Technology Translation - Moving Reversible Ion Exchange-Membrane (RIX-M) Technology for Desalination into the Market Place: Technology Translation Plan Competition
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Arup Sengupta, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2015
* USD 156,016.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating ion exchange
fundamentals to fill the gap in brackish water desalination through a Reversible
Ion Exchange-Membrane (RIX-M) process. The translated technology has the
following unique features: increased product water recovery due to reduction in
scaling from sulfate and carbonate salts of calcium on the surface of Reverse
Osmosis (RO) membranes without requiring addition of any anti-scaling chemicals.
Threats of barium sulfate scaling and consequent fouling of membranes, wherever
present, may also be avoided.

The project accomplishes this goal by integrating a self-regenerated ion
exchange system along with the RO process. An appropriately designed mixed bed
of anion exchange resins significantly reduce sulfate concentration at the
membrane inlet, thus avoiding sulfate precipitation. The reject of the RO
membrane process is used to regenerate the anion exchange resins without needing
addition of external chemicals.

The potential economic impact is expected to be a significant reduction in
operating expenses of the desalination plants due to elimination of anti-scaling
chemicals. The partnership engages an ion exchange resin manufacturer and an
engineering firm to move into the growing brackish water desalination market
space globally through validation of the technology under representative
conditions. From a business viewpoint, the innovation can also be retrofitted
for existing RO plants, thus expanding the market for the proposed technology.

From a broader perspective, the proposed work will also lay the basis for an in-
land desalination technology which does not create a reject stream containing
environmentally objectionable anti-scaling chemicals requiring post treatment.
With higher product water recovery, the reject brine will be smaller in volume,
thus reducing the land requirement for disposal. The scientific approach
envisioned through fundamentals of ion exchange may also be transplanted in
multi-stage evaporative desalination systems to avoid scaling and consequent
reduction in heat transfer efficiency of evaporators.