* 1311484
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Temperature-Dependent Phylogeography and Limits of Thermal Tolerance in Anolis carolinensis
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Scott Edwards, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2015
* USD 21,970.00

This project aims to understand the physiological stresses that limit thermal
tolerance in terrestrial ectothermic ("cold-blooded") animals (such as reptiles,
amphibians and insects) and how those limitations affect a species' ability to
survive changes climate. The hypothesis that extreme temperatures prevent all
ectothermic species from effectively using oxygen has been widely applied to
explain the limits of thermal tolerance. However, this hypothesis has been most
heavily tested in aquatic species, raising the question: Does the same
physiological stress effect air breathing species? Using the green anole lizard
(Anolis carolinensis), the investigators seek to answer this question by
combining physiological experimentation with genome sequencing to directly
compare gene response under extreme temperatures to known genetic responses to
hypoxia. Through this approach, the investigators seek to shed valuable light on
the physiological mechanisms and evolutionary processes that allow terrestrial
ectotherms to survive, function, and adapt to novel thermal
niches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fully understand how climate change
will affect biodiversity it is essential to integrate information about
environmental change with data about species' ability to buffer, acclimate, and
adapt to that change via physiological and genetic mechanisms. This project
serves to accomplish this by combining information about thermal differences
within the range of a species with the wealth of knowledge on the thermal
biology of lizards and genomic resources only made available within the last few
years. Combining these tools will allow for better predictions of how changes in
climate will affect species' ranges and abundances around the world. This
research will also result in the training of a graduate student and will provide
research experiences for several undergraduates.