* 1311042
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Elizabeth Jensen, Jensen                  Elizabeth      A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Elizabeth A. Jensen of the University of Minnesota to conduct
a research project in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering area
during the summer of 2013 at Tohoku Gakuin University in Sendai, Japan. The
project title is "Distributed Algorithms for Multi-Robot Dispersion and
Exploration." The host scientist is Dr. Ken Sugawara.

In recent years, using a team of robots has become a popular method for
exploring both known and unknown environments. In particular, teams of robots
are being used with increasing frequency in areas such as surveillance or search
and rescue. In this research, the primary interest is in scenarios in which
there are too few robots to completely cover an environment simultaneously,
where communication is limited in range, and where the robots are required to
maintain communication with at least one other robot at all times. These
restrictions make the exploration and coordination of the team more complicated,
but simplify the robots needed, thus making team of these robots more attainable
and easier to maintain or replace. This project includes the development of one
or more distributed algorithms for dispersion of a multi-robot team into an
unknown environment. The performance of the algorithms is being tested in both
simulation and experiments with physical robots in a variety of environments,
including office building and open cave scenarios. This project will lead to
increases in the ability of simple, inexpensive robots to explore large and
complex indoor environments, making them more useful in real life situations,
such as search and rescue or Mars exploration.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this research will also provide algorithms
for multi-robot exploration, disseminated through publications and participation
in conferences and workshops, which can be used in courses to teach about
distributed systems and robotics.