* 1311342
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Sociability and reproductive success in brown-headed cowbirds (Molothrus ater)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Meredith West, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 19,562.00

Within humans it is widely recognized that early differences in personality
shape the development of behavior. For instance, extraverts commonly seek out
interactions with unfamiliar individuals, while introverts consistently seek out
interaction with fewer more familiar individuals. Thus, personality may shape an
individual's behavioral development by exposing them to different social
experiences from an early age. Recently there has been increasing awareness that
like humans, animals also possess personality traits. The proposed research will
investigate how variation in a personality trait, sociability, shapes behavioral
development in Brown-headed Cowbirds (Molothrus ater). Cowbirds, like many other
species, rely on social interaction in order to learn new skills and behaviors.
Sociability describes an individual's tendency to seek out interaction with
others. More sociable cowbirds will approach and interact with more individuals
more often than less sociable cowbirds. Two studies will investigate if: 1)
Variation in sociability predicts the development of adult like behavior in
juvenile cowbirds, and 2) if early experience with more or less sociable adults
shapes the development of juvenile personality traits. A new RFID based video
system will be used in both studies to identify individuals and record their
social behaviors over long periods of time. This system will allow measurement
of the details of sociability and social behavior in a way that was unavailable
to researchers before. Statistical time series models can be implemented to
uncover how an individual's sociability reflects the development of new
behaviors over the first year of life. In the second experiment, statistical
time series models will be used to uncover if experience with more sociable
adults can predict the emergence of adult-like behavior within a juvenile
cowbirds' first year. These results will provide insights into how early
personality differences shape the development of behavior by determining how
individuals interact and learn from others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be
stored and available at http://datadryad.org/