* 1311856
* Multi-constituent inhibitory systems with self-organizing  properties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Xiaofeng Ren, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 149,696.00

This project investigates several important binary and ternary systems with
self-organizing properties, with an emphasis on ternary systems and the longer
ranging confinement mechanism through nonlocal interaction or inhibitor
variables. One intriguing feature that sets ternary systems apart from binary
systems is the triple junction phenomenon. The three constituents of the system
may meet at a point in the two dimensional case or at a curve in the three
dimensional case. The PI proposes to show the existence of a double bubble
assembly pattern, where the triple junction phenomenon occurs in each double
bubble. Two novel techniques, restricted perturbation classes and internal
variables, will be used in the proof. The second feature in ternary systems is
the complexity of the long range interaction manifested in a two by two matrix
of parameters. For instance it will be shown that the core-shell pattern appears
only if the 2-2 entry is greater than the 1-2 entry of the matrix. When multi-
constituent inhibitory systems appear in a curved space, such as a vesicle of
lipid membranes, the role played by the Riemann curvature will also be
investigated. Patterns and their possible defects will be shown as a balance and
compromise of growth, inhibition, and curvature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exquisitely structured patterns arise in many multi-
constituent physical and biological systems as orderly outcomes of self-
organization principles. Examples include morphological phases in block
copolymers, animal coats, and skin pigmentation. Common in these pattern-forming
systems is that a deviation from homogeneity has a strong positive feedback on
its further increase. On its own, it would lead to an unlimited increase and
spreading. Pattern formation requires in addition a longer ranging confinement
of the locally self-enhancing process. This project derives geometrical patterns
from self-organization principles in various binary and ternary physical and
biological systems. Analysis of these geometric structures is a fundamental step
in understanding the mechanical, optical, electrical, ionic, barrier and other
properties of these systems. This project supports a culturally diverse
environment that fosters critical and independent thinking both in classroom and
research settings in the ethnically diverse metropolitan area of Washington, DC.
It produces mathematics of depth and beauty, and offers profound insights into
the natural world.