* 1311087
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Sheila Kitchen, Kitchen                 Sheila         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Sheila Kitchen of Oregon State University to conduct a
research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Okinawa Institute of
Science and Technology (OIST) and Tropical Biosphere Research Center of
University of Ryukyus in Okinawa, Japan. The project title is "Impacts of
Hyperthermal Stress on Coral Larvae Undergoing Symbiont Colonization." The host
scientists are Drs. Nori Satoh and Saki Harii.

Symbiotic corals form mutualistic associations with photosynthetic algae. These
associations are threatened by global climate change where the partnerships
collapse resulting in the loss of algae from the host, known as coral bleaching.
We are beginning to identify the physiological and molecular consequences of
bleaching events on host-symbiont associations in adults, but very few studies
address the affects of temperature-induced stress during onset and establishment
of symbiosis in coral larvae. This study extends work on hyperthermic stress of
coral larvae through examination of elevated temperature exposed larvae health
and survivorship, symbiont colonization success, and RNA-Seq transcript
expression profiles. RNA-Seq analysis is an unbiased, high-throughput approach
that surpasses preceding expression profiling technologies (e.g. microarrays or
suppressive subtractive hybridization) in its ability to detect rare transcripts
with more precision. The outcomes of this study further our understanding of the
physical environment and biotic pressures that mediate pre-settlement events in
corals and provides novel transcriptional patterns of the molecular coral stress
response.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, upon completion of the summer program, the
Fellow will mentor undergraduate students at Oregon State University in
laboratory work quantifying symbiont colonization and performing quantitative
PCR. Additionally, the transcriptional profile data collected in Japan will be
made publicly available through a searchable online database with collaboration
of researchers at OIST (http://marinegenomics.oist.jp/genomes/gallery). In
Oregon, the Fellow will volunteer with the Science and Math Investigative
Learning Experience program to develop hands-on science lesson plans focusing on
global climate change and marine ecosystem disturbance to be incorporated in the
curriculum of underrepresented and educationally underserved schools in fourteen
school districts.