* 1311069
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Hiroto Kameyama, Kameyama                Hiroto
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Hiroto Kameyama of University of California, San Diego to
conduct a research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Ehime
University in Ehime, Japan. The project title is "(Re)investigation of Wolbachia
Infections in Wild Japanese Populations of Drosophila bifasciata." The host
scientist is Dr. Masayoshi Watada.

In 1969, Dr. Hiroshi Ikeda investigated the occurrence of "sex-ratio" females in
wild populations of Drosophila bifasciata in Japan. "Sex-ratio" or SR females
have been shown to kill XY zygotes in early developmental stages, producing a
strong bias toward female offspring. Later investigations showed that the
Wolbachia-infected D. bifasciata induce male deaths during embryonic
development, and further analyses illustrated some of the fundamental mechanisms
of selective male killings. The project re-investigates the frequency of "sex-
ratio" females in three islands of Japan (Hokkaido, Honshu, and Shikoku) almost
half a century after the initial survey and tests for an association with
Wolbachia infection in any SR females.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the project in Japan gives American
scientists access to researchers and resources in Japan; building bridges
between American institutions and Japanese researchers. In addition, the samples
of various Drosophila species collected from the three islands will be made
available to the international scientific community through Ehime Fly. Finally,
it assesses the relationship between what is discovered with a model organism
such as Drosophila, and a widespread endosymbiotic bacteria, Wolbachia, under
laboratory conditions with what occurs in the wild, and in doing so, bear on the
ability to generalize from the laboratory to the natural world.