* 1311303
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating across behavior, hormones, and social context to understand the dynamic interactions between social behavior and fitness
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Matthew Grober, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 09/30/2015
* USD 19,240.00

Social behavior is a critical target for natural selection because expressing
behaviors appropriate for a given social context affects reproduction, resource
acquisition, and survival. Social context can vary greatly over a lifetime,
however, and it remains unknown how well, and by what means, individuals can
deal with this variation. The bluebanded goby (Lythrypnus dalli), a highly
social fish, is a useful model for investigating context-specific social
interactions because behavior and reproduction are simple to measure, and social
context is easy to alter in relevant ways. Hormones such as androgens, which are
important for vertebrate social behavior, reproduction, and context-specificity,
can also be measured and manipulated in L. dalli. For each status class in a
hierarchy of gobies, there are specific social behaviors that promote group
reproduction. This work will test for the first time whether those successful
individuals can translate prior success into positive outcomes in different
social contexts and whether the strategic expression of distinct behavioral
patterns underlies that success. The reproductive success of individual L. dalli
may be directly regulated by androgens and/or regulation could be indirect via
androgen effects on important social behaviors. Androgens acting in the brain
may be particularly important for the regulation of L. dalli behaviors
associated with reproduction. This work could elucidate an evolutionarily
conserved interaction between androgens and reproductive success. Social
behavior is complex, and this research approach, which integrates an
evolutionary perspective with mechanistic regulation by hormones, will be
critical to understanding why and how individuals behave the way that they do.
Diverse undergraduates, including women and minorities underrepresented in
science, have been, and will continue to be, involved in all stages of this
research. This work has already been shared with the public at K-12 schools,
museums, and research centers, and these education efforts will continue to be a
priority.