* 1311875
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation - Smart Power Protection Devices for Photovoltaic Installations
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Bradley Lehman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2015
* USD 149,998.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating smart fault
detection methods for photovoltaic (PV) installations to fill the technology gap
of identifying and protecting against dangerous electrical faults in solar PV
installations. The translated science/technology has the following unique
features: 1) it uses machine learning to identify fault type and fault location
in the PV arrays; 2) it will be able to clear faults that traditional fuses or
other fault protection devices cannot presently clear; 3) it will be a fully
integrated fuse holder and box that has user interface allowing the user to
monitor the PV array performance. The new solar PV protection technology will be
able to isolate, clear, and identify the type and location of PV fault. This
includes several types of faults that presently pose fire hazards to PV
installations, such as line-to-line faults that may occur when branches or wires
accidentally connect two different PV arrays in a big installation. The new,
smart fuse protection adds exemplary safety, reliability, and even increased
energy delivery when compared to the leading competing science/technology, such
as traditional fuses or circuit breakers in this market space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project accomplishes this goal by running smart fault
detection algorithms that utilize machine learning, nonlinear model prediction
of PVs, intelligent measurements of PV currents and voltages, resulting in a
method to identify hazardous fault location and types. Prototype smart over-
current protection devices will be built with miniaturized self-contained
electronics. The protection devices will be tested in PV installations to
demonstrate their commercial viability and benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
partnership engages Mersen USA Newburyport-LLC to provide guidance in the
fuse/over-current protection manufacturing and commercial market. Mersen will
help manufacture the prototype smart fuse holders and test them in their lab PV
facilities. Throughout the project, Mersen will lead product testing, customer
surveys and other aspects of commercialization and financing as they pertain to
the potential to translate the smart PV fuse protection science/technology along
a path that may result in a competitive commercial reality. The potential
economic impact is expected to be 1) the creation of a new product market in
smart PV protection fuses projected to reach more than $750k annually within 2
to 3 years of the project conclusion and 2) the further acceptance of solar PV
energy in the consumer marketplace by making the PV installations safer to the
consumer. The smart PV protection devices will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in this PV installation market, since each installation of solar
PV array must utilize (usually multiple) over-current protection devices, such
as fuses. The societal impact, long term, will be improved safety of any PV
installation, increased energy yield due to immediate knowledge of fault, and
better diagnosis in real-time of any reductions of energy yield caused by PV
arrays that may need repair.