* 1311570
* Precision Measurements of Quantum Scattering Phase Shifts with a Juggling Fountain Clock
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kurt Gibble, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

This experimental research program will make precision measurements of quantum
scattering phase shifts of ultracold cesium (Cs) atoms in an atomic clock. The
group has demonstrated these measurements with a new type of scattering
experiment that scatters a cesium atom in a coherent superposition of its two
clock states off atoms in a pure state at ultracold temperatures. Each clock
state experiences an s-wave scattering phase shift and, by detecting only the
scattered part of each atom's wavefunction, the difference of the scattering
phase shifts is directly observed as a phase shift of Ramsey fringes. A unique
feature is that the observed difference of the scattering phase shifts is
independent of the atomic density, providing atomic clock accuracy to scattering
measurements. With high precision, the group has observed a number of Feshbach
resonances with two clouds colliding at energies between 10 and 50 microKelvin,
and recently at collision energies of order 1 microKelvin, within a single
cloud. They will perform a first accuracy demonstration, which is expected to
significantly improve the knowledge of the Cs-Cs interactions. The scattering
lengths are presently insufficiently known that they impact the accuracy and
operational parameters of cesium clocks, particularly the Atomic Clock Ensemble
in Space (ACES) clock scheduled to fly on the International Space Station. The
group will evaluate systematic errors, principally due to backgrounds, and
improve the precision of the phase measurements. An improved theoretical
understanding can guide future measurements, potentially studying different
angular momenta, versus energy and magnetic field, and for various internal
states. The group will also collaborate with national labs around the world to
improve the accuracy of the best atomic clocks. The group provides a unique
expertise on the design of microwave cavities for primary atomic clocks and
participates in the accuracy evaluation of primary atomic clocks. Ideas
developed as part of the juggling experimental work provided the explanation of
the interactions of ultracold fermions for optical lattice clocks, recently
experimentally observed in a chip-scale atomic clock and with a radio frequency
transition in Li-6 fermions.

Accurate time keeping is crucial for navigation, communication, global
positioning, and national security. Recent research of this group has
significantly advanced the accuracy of the atomic clocks that contribute to
International Atomic Time (TAI). Their contributions were essential to realize
the currently most accurate atomic clock. Novel advancements by the research
have reduced many large systematic errors that previously limited the
performance of atomic clocks. Earlier work had led to rubidium being adopted as
the first amendment to the definition of the International System of Units (SI)
second, novel space clock designs, and an understanding of the frequency shifts
due to ultracold collisions in precision measurements. The research will further
advance the most accurate precision measurements and the understanding of
ultracold atom-atom interactions. The training of graduate and undergraudate
students in many areas of modern technology from lasers, electro-optics, radio-
frequency and microwave techniques, and atomic clocks and frequency control, is
important for the development of the nation's scientific workforce.