* 1311337
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phenotypic plasticity and evolution in  the pharyngeal jaw apparatus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* James Fordyce, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,221.00

Phenotypic plasticity, developmental change within genetically similar
individuals in response to environmental stimuli, could be a key feature in
biological diversification. Cichlid fishes are an exceptionally diverse group
that also might be unusually phenotypically plastic. This work is investigating
the evolutionary consequences of phenotypic plasticity in morphology, gene
expression, and evolution of protein-coding genes in these fishes. The current
work is focused on a group that exhibits two alternative morphologies in the
same populations that differ extensively in jaw characters. This type of
variation could represent an intermediate stage in how evolutionary divergence
begins, and species with this type of polymorphism might generally be more
plastic than non-polymorphic species. Plasticity in the jaws of these fish will
be examined using experimental manipulations of diet. Changes in the level of
gene expression in the jaw muscles in response to diet will be quantified using
high-throughput sequencing and compared to gene expression in a non-polymorphic
species.

These analyses will shed light on whether gene expression in a polymorphic
species is greater than plasticity in gene expression in a less variable
species. This project will produce broad insight into the origin and pace of
morphological divergence among species. This work will also provide a better
understanding of the molecular pathways involved in muscle growth and atrophy
that are shared across all vertebrates. Students will be trained, and K-12
outreach will occur.