* 1311380
* Dissertation Research: The Effects of Soil Residence Time on Nitrogen Availability in Lowland Tropical Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Robert Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 18,758.00

Ecologists seek to understand what controls the availability of nutrients in
tropical forests, a globally important ecosystem type. While dogma suggests
lowland tropical forests are rich in nitrogen, recent studies have observed
large variation in tropical nitrogen dynamics across physical scales from small
plots to the region. This project adds to dissertation research that has
documented variation in soil nitrogen across a highly dissected tropical
landscape in Costa Rica. Results suggest that differences in soil nitrogen are
linked to patterns of erosion and soil development over the landscape. This
project will test that by documenting the corresponding patterns in the physical
and chemical development of soils across the same landscape. Chemical weathering
of soils will be measured by comparing the amounts of minerals in the soils near
the surface to those in underlying rocks. Soil residence times will be
calculated by measuring the abundance of a rare atmospherically derived
radionuclide, Beryllium-10. This information will be integrated with geomorphic,
ecological and soil chemical data to explore the links between soil erosion,
soil development and nitrogen availability.

This project will increase the scope and value of a PhD dissertation, while
shedding new light on the ecology of tropical forests, an under-studied biome of
enormous socio-ecological importance. Collaborators in this project include Osa
Conservation, a non-governmental organization that manages the study area on the
Osa Peninsula of Costa Rica. University of Colorado undergraduate students will
also be included in research trips to the Osa. The investigators will also
collaborate with Osa Conservation to incorporate project results into
educational materials.