* 1311865
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation - Portable, Naked Eye-based, Ultrasensitive Explosive Vapors Detector
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Yu Lei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2015
* USD 162,773.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating molecular
sieve and fluorescent sensing technology to fill handheld, ultrasensitive
explosive detection technology gap. The translated molecular sieve and
fluorescent sensing technology has the following unique features: fast
concentration of explosive vapors through size-exclusion and signal-amplified
fluorescence quenching ('molecular wire') that provides cost-effective,
handheld, rapid and naked-eye based ultrasensitive detection of a range of
military explosives when compared to the leading competing portable explosives
detection technologies such as Ionscan, RedXDefense and Fido XT in this market
space. The project accomplishes this goal by integrating a simple pre-
concentrator membrane with ultrasensitive nanofibrous sensing membrane resulting
in a low-cost, handheld prototype device to rapidly 'read-out' ultra-trace
quantities of explosives by naked eye under UV light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
partnership engages Swedish Explosive Ordinance Disposal and Demining Center and
University of Connecticut Technology Transfer Center to provide guidance in the
explosive vapor detection market and other aspects of financing and
commercialization as they pertain to the potential to translate the integrated
handheld explosives pre-concentrator/sensor device along a path that may result
in a competitive commercial reality. The potential economic impact is expected
to generate revenue through manufacturing and sale of the products to the
military and demining companies in the next two to three years, which will
contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in handheld explosives detection market.
The societal impact, long term, will be to bring the capabilities of (or beyond)
canine detection into the hands of first responder and security personnel, thus
protecting civilians and the environment.