* 1311293
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Drivers and Consequences of Intraspecific Trait Variation: Ecology of a Forest-Stream Community
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2015
* John Wootton, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2015
* USD 20,540.00

Numerous aquatic insect species inhabiting rivers feed on leaves shed from trees
in the surrounding forest. Experiments using alder trees showed that these
stream organisms can adapt to feed optimally on individual alder trees growing
along their specific river banks; i.e., they feed on locally derived alder
leaves faster than on leaves from alder trees growing alongside different
rivers. Further studies suggest that aquatic organisms adapt to individual alder
trees based on differences in the chemical composition of the leaves.
Terrestrial insects feeding on leaves often induces plants to produce chemical
deterrents to defend against further feeding, which suggests the hypothesis that
variation in the chemical defense system among individual trees influences
feeding rate by aquatic organisms. This project will test that hypothesis
through chemical analyses to determine the leaf traits causing local adaptation,
and by experimentally unraveling the roles of aquatic microbes and insects in
driving this adaptation. This research will increase our understanding of the
role of biodiversity at the individual level in shaping ecosystem function,
illustrate how the ecological interactions in one ecosystem can indirectly shape
the structure of other ecosystems through fluxes across boundaries, and
illuminate the mechanisms of resilience in river
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research informs two economic pillars of
the Olympic Peninsula of Washington, forestry and fisheries, by advancing our
understanding of how variation among trees may affect rivers that sustain the
region's fisheries. Results from this project will be disseminated to local
forest and fisheries managers, including the Elwha and Makah Native American
tribes, as well as to the general public. Understanding the ecological effects
of individual variation is essential to efforts to predict how genetic
diversity, which is rapidly declining due to habitat loss and fragmentation, can
alter the functioning of ecosystems. This project will provide research
experiences for undergraduates and supports the dissertation research of a
doctoral student.