* 1311365
* Dissertation Research: Reconstructing past terrestrial nitrogen cycles from chlorophyll degradation products in soil
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Sara Enders, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2016
* USD 19,955.00

The goal of this project is to develop a method to reconstruct how nitrogen
cycles of pre-industrial landscapes behaved in the past during periods of
environmental and ecological change to enable better insights into potential
future changes. Changes in nitrogen dynamics of the past, such as how much
nitrogen was available for plants to take up from the soil, or whether losses of
nitrogen from ecosystems were greater in water or as a gas to the atmosphere,
may be inferred from information contained in the nitrogen isotope ratios of the
remains of plant parts that persist in soils. This project will examine the
persistence of particular plant compounds in soils and determine if their
nitrogen isotope ratios are conserved as the plant residues decompose to form
more stable soil organic matter.

The need to accurately include the dynamics of nitrogen into models of global
carbon and climate is well recognized. Nitrogen is the nutrient which most
commonly limits plant growth and, as a result, has a major influence over carbon
storage on land and in soils. It is a paradox that nitrogen is also an important
pollutant, depending on where it is and what chemical forms it takes. Future
responses of the nitrogen cycle to concurrent changes in climate, atmospheric
carbon dioxide levels, and biodiversity are highly uncertain. Predictions of
future conditions will be greatly improved through greater understanding of how
nitrogen cycles have changed in the past. As part of this project, the
researchers will mentor a high school student in the development of a soils-
based activity targeting the California State Science Standards for ecology.
This activity will be incorporated into an existing education and natural
resource stewardship program that connects classroom learning to the real world
for high school students from underserved, minority-dominated farming
communities in the state.