* 1311395
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Community assembly across regional diversity and latitudinal gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Emma Moran, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 19,000.00

Humans depend on biodiversity for countless goods and services, and it is thus
essential that we understand the processes that regulate diversity in space and
time. For example, it has long been recognized that the number of species
generally increases towards the equator, and scientists have historically
assumed that this ?latitudinal diversity gradient? results from variation in
environmental factors or changes in how species interact with each other.
Consequently, research on this topic has explored how diversity and latitude
relate to nearly everything imaginable. This body of work has ignored a simple
alternative explanation: random processes. In particular, the accidental arrival
of a new individual or the random extinction of a small population can make a
big difference in what species happen to live in a certain place. Some
scientists now believe that the effect of such random events may vary with
latitude and diversity. The goal of this research, therefore, is to determine
how important these random versus more predictable processes are in determining
where species occur. This will be achieved by collecting data from natural
aquatic communities and conducting outdoor experiments across a several sites
and latitudes in North America.

This project also provides several opportunities for undergraduate and high
school students to become actively involved in ecological research. Two
undergraduate students will be taken on cross-continental sampling trips and
will be mentored on independent projects that relate to this research. The
experimental work incorporates several students from St Louis high schools, who
not only work directly with the researchers on this project, but also get
exposure to other projects at Washington University. Finally, one aspect of this
project is collecting data for natural communities over multiple sites and years
across a latitudinal gradient. Such large data sets with standardized sampling
methods replicated in space and time are relatively rare, yet are absolutely
necessary to understand large-scale patterns of biodiversity. The data generated
from this project will be added to a publicly available database through
Washington University?s Tyson Research Center, giving access to anyone
interested.