* 1311076
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Elucidating Evolutionary Histories of Multiple Chipmunk Parasites Using Next Generation Sequencing
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Joseph Cook, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2015
* USD 19,630.00

This research investigates the response of parasites to the diversification of
their chipmunk hosts across temporally and spatially variable environments in
western North America. Chipmunks are frequently infected with externally-
parasitic sucking lice and internally-parasitic pinworms. It is unclear if
parasite lineages are restricted to individual chipmunk species and diversifying
in tandem with the host lineages (codiversification), or if they are adapted to
a resource shared among chipmunks and thus can infect any species of chipmunk
they encounter. This project tests for codiversification among each parasite and
the hosts and investigates the role of climate in determining parasite
distribution and diversity. The research uses a combination of geographic
mapping and genetic sequencing techniques to determine the influence of climate,
geography, and species associations in evolutionary
diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated view of the evolutionary
history of hosts and parasites has wide-ranging implications, including
consequences of climate change on pathogens and parasites. Beyond the current
interest in biotic responses to climate change, studying host-parasite
associations allows for testing of foundational coevolutionary rules and
hypotheses. This research will provide training for undergraduate and graduate
students in field, museum, and molecular lab research. Additionally, this
project will feed into an effort to integrate museum specimens and databases
into undergraduate courses through inquiry-driven student projects that raise
awareness of the value of natural history collections. Through this research,
students will be introduced to cutting-edge analytical and collaborative
approaches in bioinformatics. Chipmunks are familiar, highly visible, and
provide a gateway to conversations with school groups, the public, and others
about conservation, evolution, and parasites.