* 1311535
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Evolution of Parasite-Host Fitness Tradeoffs in a Mosquito-Gregarine System
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Todd Livdahl, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2015
* USD 19,707.00

The evolution of virulence is of critical importance to predicting the outcomes
of a disease introduction into a new host population. Past hypotheses have
postulated that the direction of evolution in virulence should be away from
antagonistic relationships, but observations on human disease, particularly
those borne by vectors such as mosquitoes, have challenged this view. This
project seeks to examine the trade-off hypothesis, an important concept in
disease ecology, which suggests that the virulence of a disease is restricted by
an evolutionary link with transmission rate. This project will test this
hypothesis by estimating the virulence and transmission rate of parasites of
several medically important mosquitoes through modern molecular biology
techniques along with traditional ecology modeling methods that will allow an
assessment of the success of both host and parasite.

This work has broad implications beyond exploring the trade-off hypothesis. By
understanding how virulence has evolved across the lineage of a parasite,
valuable insight into mechanisms related to disease virulence can be gained.
Further, as mosquitoes are vectors for many human diseases, an increased
understanding of the role of parasites of those mosquitoes might assist in
future control efforts of host mosquitoes. Finally, this work will also present
a chance to mentor and train undergraduate students in ecological modeling and
quantitative polymerase chain reaction techniques.