* 1311000
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Josef Stiegler, Stiegler                Josef          B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

This action funds Josef B. Stiegler of The George Washington University to
conduct a research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at the Institute
of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology in Beijing, China. The project
title is "The Anatomy and Evolutionary Relationships of a Peculiar Dinosaur from
Wucaiwan (Xinjiang, People's Republic of China)." The host scientist is Xu Xing.

The theropod dinosaur Limusaurus inextricabilis is a basal ceratosaur of
uncertain relationships from the Jurassic Shishugou formation of Xinjiang. Its
highly reduced, four-fingered hand has undergone bilateral digital reduction, a
condition previously unknown in Mesozoic theropods but known to be present in
the three-fingered hands of birds via embryological evidence. This project
documents the skeletal anatomy of Limusaurus, in order to resolve its
relationships within Ceratosauria. Should it occupy a basal position within the
clade, it may provide evidence for a frameshift in digit identity in the most
recent common ancestor of Limusaurus and more derived theropods (including
birds), or that ancestor's stem lineage.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the evolution of dinosaurs is a topic of
great interest to the public and is often introduced to children at a young age.
Given the potential for this project to resolve a conflict between
paleontological and embryological evidence regarding the evolution of the hand
along the lineage leading to modern birds, it may provide further opportunities
to engage the public with science and an accessible example of evolutionary-
developmental biology (evo-devo) for science education. Data and educational
materials related to this project will be publicly available via the Morphobank
website upon publication of the results.