* 1311242
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding mate choice and hybridization of the endangered red wolf
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Sabrina Taylor, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2015
* USD 17,040.00

Small populations face unique risks associated with inbreeding and reduced
genetic variation which can influence hybridization and/or disease
susceptibility reducing viability and likelihood of survival. This is especially
true for endangered populations, which are vulnerable to inbreeding and loss of
variation because they are small by definition and frequently consist of related
individuals. This study will examine whether inbreeding and low variation at
genes important for disease resistance: (1) affect reproductive success and
survivorship (fitness) in endangered red wolves; (2) cause red wolves to seek
unrelated or genetically dissimilar mates including mates from closely related
species, and; (3) affect red wolf disease susceptibility as measured by parasite
load and immune assays that test the ability of blood to fight pathogens.
Preliminary results reveal that red wolves are highly inbred and have little
variation at genes important for disease resistance which may cause them to
experience reduced fitness, hybridize with coyotes to avoid mating with kin, and
increase their susceptibility to pathogens. Results will help wild red wolf
recovery by informing managers about actions needed to increase reproductive
success and survival, such as increasing genetic variability through the
introduction of captive red wolves, screening potential red wolf mates for
genetic compatibility, and increasing vaccination regimes to reduce pathogen
infections. More broadly, this study may highlight the importance of maintaining
large natural populations with high levels of genetic variation and increase
understanding of the factors leading to hybridization and disease in endangered
species. Finally, this study will integrate research and education by taking
advantage of Louisiana State University's extensive high school and
undergraduate student outreach programs.