* 1311106
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Joseph Byrnes, Byrnes                  Jospeh
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Joseph Byrnes of the University of Oregon to conduct a
research project in Geoscience during the summer of 2013 at the Earthquake
Research Institute, University of Tokyo in Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo. The project title
is "Using Recordings of Distant Earthquakes to Measure the Thickness of Tectonic
Plates." The host scientist is Professor Hitoshi
Kawakatsu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has recently been shown that a sharp
discontinuity in seismic velocity exists at the bottom of tectonic plates in the
ocean. This discontinuity is postulated to distinguish the rigid plate (the
'Lithosphere') from the underlying convective mantle (the 'Asthenosphere'). The
reason the discontinuity exists is poorly understood. This project aims to
measure the depth of the discontinuity with plate age using ocean bottom
seismometers located on the Juan De Fuca Plate, just off the coast of the
Pacific Northwest. Since the discontinuity is sharp, P and S waves from distant
events convert into one another when passing through the plate. The difference
in arrival time, due to the lower velocity of S waves, between the direct and
converted phases gives the depth to the discontinuity. Using this technique, the
evolution of this enigmatic boundary can be established. Several competing
theories have been put forward to explain why this discontinuity exists. The
simplest hypothesis is that the plate thickness grows as the square root of its
age, as predicted by models of a plate growing by conductive cooling. The most
likely alternative is that the discontinuity has constant depth and is
independent of age, which would likely represented a plate defined by the
removal of water from the mantle when the plate is created, forming a rigid body
that defines the tectonic plate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of an
EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand research experience
outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science policy, and scientific
infrastructure of the respective location; and an orientation to the society,
culture and language. These activities meet the NSF goal to educate for
international collaborations early in the career of its scientists, engineers,
and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific workforce.
Furthermore, the Fellow hopes to establish relationships that produce scientific
results beyond the summer. The research done during the funding period will lay
the groundwork for future collaboration between researchers in the U.S. and
Japan.