* 1311053
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Arianna Lark, Lark                    Arianna        S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Arianna Lark of University of Iowa to conduct a research
project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at Nagoya University in
Nagoya, Aichi, Japan. The project title is "Imaging Neuronal Activity to
Identify the Role of Novel Steroid Hormone Receptors in Stress Behaviors." The
host scientist is Dr. Azusa Kamikouchi.

Steroid hormones such as estrogen and testosterone play many important roles in
behavior and development. Steroid hormones are generally thought to bind to
receptors within cells and modulate gene expression. However, besides this
relatively slow steroid signaling pathway, there are other faster pathways
steroid hormones can initiate. In one of these noncanonical pathways, steroid
hormones bind to G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) at the cell surface and set
off a cascade of changes which can quickly modify the cell. In neurons, these
fast changes to the cell may alter its activity within its network; this in turn
can alter the behavior of the organism. Several of these receptors have been
recently identified including a GPCR for estrogen in humans. Unfortunately many
results from studies of this receptor have been conflicted likely due to the
high complexity of the mammalian system. Recently a cell membrane-bound steroid
hormone receptor, DopEcR, has been identified in Drosophila (fruit flies).
Drosophila has a simpler nervous system with many tools to manipulate genes and
is an excellent model to study the mechanisms underlying regulation of
behaviors. It has recently been identified that mutants for Drosophila DopEcR
have defects in a behavioral response to stress: starvation-induced sleep
suppression. Starvation induced sleep suppression has been observed in humans,
rats and flies and likely results from an evolutionarily conserved response to
food scarcity which overrides sleep urges to induce food searching behaviors.
Dr. Kamikouchi and colleagues have expertise in a technique to image activity of
the neurons in a living fruit fly. Using this technique this project identifies
starvation initiated changes in neuronal activity mediated by DopEcR.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, these results are expected to lead to a
better understanding of the function of membrane-bound steroid hormone receptors
within the brain as well as a greater general understanding of behavioral
regulation by steroids.