* 1311616
* DISSERATION RESEARCH: Geomicrobiology of manganese oxide-depositing hot springs in Yellowstone National Park
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Wendy Todd, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 20,020.00

Manganese (Mn) is an element often overlooked with respect to its potential
importance in biogeochemical cycles, metabolic processes, and the biomolecular
history of the Earth. Mn undoubtedly played an important role during Earth?s
transition from an anoxic to an oxic planet being the key catalyst in oxygenic
photosynthesis as well as the metal cofactor for key enzymes involved in oxygen
metabolism. In this project we propose to study an active Mn oxide-depositing
hot spring in Yellowstone National Park (YNP) as a possible analog of early
Earth. In most contemporary near neutral pH environments Mn-oxidizing
microorganisms are believed to be the primary catalysts for Mn oxide formation.
Such Mn-oxidizing microorganisms typically encase themselves with Mn oxide
minerals producing distinct structures that may be preserved in geologic
deposits. While molecular oxygen is required for Mn-oxidation, only trace
amounts are needed, because the source of reduced Mn is from oxygen depleted
environments. Mn oxidizing microorganisms are thus typically found in the
transition zone between the oxic and anoxic regions. Preliminary results of the
Ph.D. graduate student this project supports has revealed the presence of
ancient and unique Bacterial lineages and the occurrence of Archaea in one of
the YNP hot springs. Research will characterize this hot spring ecosystem
examining the water chemistry, Mn mineral deposits, microbial mats/biofilms and
microbial diversity and functionality in an effort to gain a better
understanding of these novel microbial communities their metabolic basis of
growth and survival in the hot spring. Approaches will employ geological,
chemical, microscopic, microbiological and molecular microbial ecological
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will expand our knowledge of
microbial biodiversity and the evolution of life on Earth, including the
evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis, and may lead to the discovery of novel
metabolisms and unique enzymes of potential biotechnological application. The
research may also lead to new approaches for interpreting Earth?s geological
record and the formation of manganese ore deposits. The project expands the
graduate student training of a Native American student in environmental
chemistry, analytical electron microscopy and molecular microbial ecology
including molecular methods for analyzing the entire genomes of microbial
communities and their activities.