* 1311269
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary Genetics of Asexual Reproduction in a Wild Plant Species
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Catherine Rushworth, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2016
* USD 20,404.00

Despite the prevalence of sexual reproduction in nature, asexual reproduction is
also found in many diverse organisms. Apomixis (asexual reproduction via clonal
seed) occurs in approximately 400 genera across 40 different plant families, and
is always associated with polyploidy (whole genome duplication) and
hybridization. To date, these confounding factors have prevented investigation
of the evolutionary and ecological processes maintaining apomixis in plant
populations. The genus Boechera, a self-fertilizing wild relative of Arabidopsis
thaliana, contains diploid apomicts. This offers a unique opportunity to
disentangle the factors underlying apomixis and polyploidy. The proposed
research examines the processes underlying a sexual/apomictic breeding system
polymorphism in wild populations of Boechera, using population genetic models
that historically are designed for diploid organisms. Understanding the link
between apomixis and hybridization still remains problematic. Any putative
fitness effects of apomixis may be due to hybridization, which introduces
genetic variation to inbred Boechera. Through a combination of crossing
experiments, field research, and genomic sequencing techniques, the PIs will
investigate the fitness effects of hybridization and increased genetic diversity
in Boechera. This research permits complete separation of these two confounding
factors from the study of apomixis for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Most crops are of hybrid origin, and the introduction of apomixis
promises fixation of advantageous lineages through their clonal offspring;
therefore, apomixis is of great agricultural interest. A developed understanding
of the evolutionary maintenance of this breeding system in nature is critical to
current and future efforts to battle hunger across the world. Training of
students will occur.