* 1311614
* Dissertation Research: Pedogenesis and Anthropedogenesis on the Southern Piedmont
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Daniel Richter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 17,113.00

This study builds on current research focused on deep soil carbon storage
following reforestation in the Southern Piedmont region of the southeastern
United States. Globally, soil contains more carbon than that stored in all land
vegetation. However, most studies trying to connect carbon storage with changes
in land use have ignored soil deeper than one meter. The investigators
hypothesize that the widespread trends of reforestation in this region over the
last century have led to deep carbon storage that depends intimately on the
chemical behavior of soil iron. To test this hypothesis, specialized carbon
measurements (radiocarbon dating) will be made to a depth of two meters in soils
that have been either reforested or not reforested over the last century. The
carbon measurements will be interpreted alongside results of new analyses of
soil iron to provide insights on changes in deep soil carbon storage following
reforestation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the Southern Piedmont, reforested land
is by far the dominant land use. This project will improve regional management
of forests by showing how reforestation affects the storage of deep soil carbon.
The project will also enhance an interdisciplinary collaborations among Duke
University, researchers in the International Soil Carbon Network and the German
GeoForschungsZentrum program. All project data will be made freely available
online as part of a widely disseminated soil carbon database for use by other
researchers. Results will also be presented to diverse audiences at various
scientific meetings, in peer-reviewed publications, and at regional public
hearings on land use.