* 1311406
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Predicting Plant Life-Cycles in Changing Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Liana Burghardt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 20,402.00

A critical goal in ecology is to predict how organisms will respond to altered
climate. Since responses to temperature differ at different stages in the
development of most plants and animals, one must investigate these responses in
each life stage. For plants, the environment that each life stage is exposed to
is determined by the timing of germination, reproduction, and seed dispersal.
Plants can use environmental cues such as temperature, moisture, and day length
to time these developmental transitions so that life stages occur during
favorable times of year. For example, temperature during seed maturation can
influence the level of seed dormancy, and the timing and duration of seed
maturation can determine the seasonal conditions during seed dispersal. However,
little is known about how the environment during seed development affects plant
life cycles. This project will provide empirical estimates of the environmental
sensitivities to temperature of seed dispersal, dormancy, and germination in the
plant Arabidopsis thaliana, and incorporate these estimates into linked models
to predict when a plant will be in each of its life stages when exposed to a
particular regime of temperature. Experiments in the field and in growth
chambers will characterize how variable temperatures during seed maturation
alter dormancy level, levels of gene expression of a key dormancy gene, and the
timing of seed dispersal. The experiments will provide critical information on
the least understood phase of the life cycle of annual plants. Integrating these
data into the life-cycle model will improve predictions of organismal responses
to changing climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important to society
because accurately predictions of life-cycle timing in plants will be necessary
to anticipate the ecological consequences of global warming, and to manage weeds
and other invasive species as plant ranges expand across landscapes. The project
will also contribute to the scientific training of a Ph.D. student and three
undergraduate, and to educational outreach through the creation of an
interactive teaching module for undergraduate and high school students.