* 1311103
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Andrew Friedman, Friedman                Andrew         R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Andrew Ronald Friedman of the University of California,
Berkeley to conduct a research project in Geoscience during the summer of 2013
at the Research Center for Environmental Changes, Academia Sinica, in Taipei,
Taiwan. The project title is "Variability of the Hemispheric Temperature
Contrast." The host scientist is Dr. Shih-Yu Lee.

The research project investigates the variability of the temperature contrast
between the northern and southern hemispheres and its relationship with tropical
rainfall. The project explores how the temperature contrast has varied over the
twentieth century in response to the different climate forcings between the
northern and southern hemispheres, as well as other factors. It investigates
temperature contrast variations on interannual timescales, as well as an abrupt
climate event: a sharp decrease in the north-south hemispheric temperature
difference around 1970. A project aim is to attribute these changes to climate
forcing factors by comparing the spatio-temporal signatures of historical and
specific-forcing global climate model runs with observations. Another goal is to
quantify the impacts of the temperature contrast on shifts in the latitude of
the tropical rainfall bands over the twentieth century and in global climate
model simulations of twenty-first century climate change.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language of Taiwan. The project will
foster fruitful collaboration between the University of California, Berkeley,
and the Academia Sinica, Taipei. These activities meet the NSF goal to educate
for international collaborations early in the career of its scientists,
engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific
workforce. Furthermore, the research project aims to develop insight into
twentieth-century and projected future climate change at hemispheric and
regional scales. In particular, a goal is to develop understanding of shifts in
tropical rainfall that may affect water resources and agriculture in marginal
regions. The Fellow plans to communicate the project results to climate impacts
research community and make the findings publicly available online.