* 1311547
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Impact of disturbance from hurricane Sandy on methane emission and carbon sequestration rates in NJ coastal wetlands
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Gil Bohrer, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2013
* USD 70,200.00

1311713 (Schafer), 1311796 (Jaffe), and 1311547 (Bohrer). This RAPID will
evaluate the consequences on greenhouse gas (GHG) fluxes of ?superstorm? Sandy
in a temperate urban coastal wetland in New Jersey. Ongoing experiments have
already been providing baseline data for more than a year of intensive
measurements of carbon dioxide and methane fluxes with the eddy covariance
technique, methane fluxes with the chamber technique and below ground porewater
measurements. With this baseline data, it is possible to characterize the impact
Sandy had and will continue to have on the processes governing methane release
and carbon dioxide emission and uptake. Advanced remote sensing analysis will be
conducted to map the storm disturbance to wetland vegetation at very high
resolution, and additional chamber measurements will target locations where
specific types of disturbances occurred (uprooting, wind damage, flood-sediment
cover). The production, emission and uptake of methane and CO2 from the wetland
as a whole will be determined using eddy-covariance measurements, and the
relative rates of carbon and methane cycling in specific microsites will be
quantified, along a gradient of disturbance and among different vegetation
types, including native and invasive vegetation. The effects of the storm, in
terms of greenhouse gas budget of the wetland and its microsites from a few days
to a year following the storm, will be determined. Regular monitoring of eddy
flux, chamber measurements and porewater will continue longer than a year as
part of an on-going CBET/ENG/NSF project. This study will provide the first
report of the greenhouse gas response (including methane) of a coastal wetland
to the effects of a large storm. The insight from this study could further
inform the scientific and land-management communities about the role of
wetlands, and the vulnerability of their ecosystem service, in terms of GHG, to
storms and future climate that may include stronger and more frequent storm
events. Results will be communicated to the many visitors at the Meadowlands
Environmental Research Institute (MERI) that offers a wide range of workshops
and educational activities for high school students in the area and hosts
research symposia with scholars from the New Jersey and New York area. Sharing
the insights of this research will also be made available to the Meadowlands
Commission, which is the policy arm of MERI and thus may have management
implications.