* 1311335
* Dissertation Research: Does microbial diversity affect ecosystem function? : A denitrification case study
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Joseph Yavitt, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2015
* USD 16,380.00

Human activities have more than doubled nitrogen pollution of the environment
through the use of agricultural fertilizer and deposition from fossil fuel
burning. This has important ecological consequences, yet the fate of nitrogen in
ecosystems is poorly understood. Previous work on nitrogen budgets have found
that a large fraction of added nitrogen cannot be accounted for. One of the ways
this nitrogen might not show up in the budget is if it is converted to a gas.
This can occur through a process called denitrification, which creates harmless
dinitrogen gas (N2). However, this pathway can release harmful intermediates,
such as nitrite, nitric oxide and nitrous oxide, with the latter being a potent
greenhouse gas. Therefore, understanding the factors controlling the rate of
leakage, which could include the nature of the microbial community or the soil
properties, is important if we are to have an accurate understanding of the fate
of nitrogen added to soil systems. One of the challenges faced in doing this
type of work is quantifying denitrification intermediates and, especially, N2,
since it is difficult to distinguish the N2 produced from denitrification from
that present in the atmosphere. The work proposed here will take advantage of a
novel sampling robot that can measure and quantify the production of all
intermediates and N2 from soils. In addition to measuring intermediate release
we will identify the active bacterial communities responsible for
denitrification through sequencing of the active genes. By taking a two-pronged
approach we can more accurately define the factors controlling nitrogen flow in
ecosystems. This project will explore the relationship between the active soil
microbial community and rates of denitrification, an essential ecosystem process
which has implications on global climate change. Data collected from this
research will strengthen interdisciplinary research that involves the fields of
microbiology, ecology, biogeochemistry and bioinformatics. The microbial
sequencing data will be made publicly available, and the data will be especially
useful for the development of undergraduate classroom materials for
bioinformatics training at both the introductory and advanced level. This
project will also foster training of undergraduate students in microbiology and
biogeochemical sciences. Finally, this project will support international
collaborations with soil microbial ecologists in Norway.