* 1311381
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: PHENOTYPIC RESPONSES TO URBAN HABITATS: A POTENTIAL ROLE FOR DNA METHYLATION
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Sarah Foltz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 13,646.00

Urban areas are rapidly expanding and present both opportunities and challenges
for wild animals. While some species do poorly in urban areas, others do well.
Previous research has documented many differences between urban and rural
individuals of the same species, but little is known about how these differences
are created and maintained. One possible mechanism is DNA methylation, a process
that affects gene expression without changing the underlying genetic code.
Patterns of DNA methylation can be inherited, but may also change within an
individual's lifetime in response to environmental stimuli. Because DNA
methylation enables rapid yet stable and heritable changes of an organism's
outward characteristics, it is a prime candidate for explaining how species
adapt to novel habitats and situations, including urbanization. This study will
compare DNA methylation patterns of urban and rural songbirds and relate these
patterns to previously observed differences, specifically aggressive behavior
and stress hormone levels, between these same groups. Differences between urban
and rural birds in DNA methylation levels and locations are predicted, as is a
relationship between methylation patterns and observed differences in behavior
and physiology. The results of this research will be broadly applicable, as DNA
methylation is a process found in taxa ranging from fungi to plants to animals,
including humans. This study will increase understanding of how urban habitats
can affect current and future generations of organisms living in them, knowledge
that is especially important as urban areas continue to grow. Finally, two
undergraduate students will participate in this study, giving them valuable
research experience that will advance them towards a career in science. In
addition, activities exploring the impacts of urbanization on animals and humans
will be created for the local nature center giving the broader public an
awareness of why this research is important.