* 1311443
* Dissertation Research: ECOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS OF HUMMINGBIRD FEEDING MECHANISMS
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Margaret Rubega, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 06/30/2014
* USD 20,538.00

Since all life depends on water, the movement of fluids is profoundly important
in both natural and engineered systems. The physics of flow in large volumes of
fluids is fairly well understood, but we know less about how to move very small
volumes of liquid efficiently. Rico-Guevara and Rubega recently showed that
hummingbirds use a previously unknown method to move tiny volumes of fluids very
rapidly while feeding. Hummingbirds eat more than twice their body weight in
nectar daily. Thus, hummingbirds are a premier natural example to mimic in
engineering effective fluid-moving devices for biomedical and other purposes.
Rico-Guevara and Rubega's previous work generated predictions about how much
fluid can be collected and transported in a second. This project will use high-
speed camera traps to test those predictions by measuring actual rates of nectar
extraction (in microliters/second) for hummingbirds feeding at wild flowers. The
results will have two benefits: 1) They will confirm a model of the physics of a
method of fluid transport that has potential for the engineering of microfluidic
devices; and 2) will provide insight into how the limits on how fast birds can
feed on nectar have shaped the behavior, distribution, ecology and evolution of
hummingbirds. The project will contribute to the professional development of
four students (Hispanics) from one of the most underrepresented groups in
science. The project is already engaging members of the public through a
database of bird-plant interactions called "Hummingbirds and flowers" on
iNaturalist.org (see http://www.inaturalist.org/projects/hummingbirds-and-
flowers), making behavioral and ecological data publicly available.