* 1311347
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Local adaptation of the integrated phenotype: can life history and physiology mediate behavioral evolution?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Ryan Earley, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 18,866.00

Organismal form and function arises through complex interactions among traits
ranging from growth and reproduction to behavioral and hormonal responses to
environmental stimuli. In this time of global climate change and unprecedented
ecosystem disturbance, accurately predicting how organisms respond over the
long-term to environmental change is essential. The degree to which traits are
integrated, how strongly they covary, ultimately dictates a population's
response to environmental pressures. The investigators capitalize on the
reproductive system of mangrove rivulus, a fish that inhabits imperiled mangrove
ecosystems and is capable of producing offspring genetically identical to the
parent and all siblings, to determine with exceptional resolution how life
history (e.g., growth, reproduction), behavioral (e.g., aggression, risk-
taking), and morphological (e.g., shape, size) traits covary at the phenotypic
and genetic levels. They expect differences among populations in the composition
and interconnectedness of trait networks, which would provide evidence that the
physical, community, and social environments exert strong influences on trait
integration. The investigators also seek to understand the mechanisms underlying
trait integration. Steroids like the androgen testosterone and the stress
hormone cortisol influence the expression of multiple traits simultaneously.
Thus, the investigators expect to uncover linkages between hormone profiles and
patterns of trait integration. This study combines an integral knowledge of the
mangrove rivulus' genetics with behavioral, ecological, and physiological
techniques, to explore central questions in biology, how are complex phenotypes
organized and how can we predict phenotypic responses to environmental change?
By studying organisms as integrated wholes we can derive more accurate
predictions about how ecosystem disturbances impact native flora and fauna. The
investigators will participate in outreach activities to educate the public
about mangrove ecosystem inhabitants, threats to the ecosystem, and how
knowledge gained from basic biological exploration can transform our everyday
activities and drive positive changes at the individual, community, and national
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be maintained and available at
(http://datadryad.org).