* 1311163
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Why species delimitation matters: Cryptic diversity, complete species-level phylogeny, and Andean diversification of an American marsupial clade
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Sharon Jansa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2016
* USD 19,641.00

The Neotropics is one of the most biodiverse regions of the world. However,
understanding the historical processes underlying this diversity is a
challenging task due in part to the complex geographic and climatological
history of this region. For mammals, this task is further hindered by our lack
of fundamental knowledge about biodiversity, such as the number of species
occurring in this area, their distribution, and how they are related to each
other. This is particularly true for a group of small opossums (Thylamyini),
which are broadly distributed throughout the Neotropics but are often
morphologically indistinguishable from each other. There are 37 currently
recognized species of Thylamyini, but preliminary analyses suggest that species
diversity may be nearly double that.&lt;br/&gt; This project aims to discover
the true diversity of this ecologically important group of mammals using
multiple nuclear and mitochondrial DNA sequences as well as morphology. This
revised view of mammalian diversity will have profound implications for our
understanding of diversification in the Neotropics and will provide the basis
for much needed conservation strategies in this time of global extinction. In
addition, the proposed outreach and educational activities will continue to
strengthen developing collaborations between US and Colombian institutions of
higher education.