* 1311521
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Exploring the parallel evolution of duplicate sodium channel genes during the convergent evolution of electric organs in teleosts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Ammon Thompson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2015
* USD 18,939.00

Why did an ancient duplicate copy of an important muscle gene evolve to become
an integral part of a novel organ system used for electrical communication in
two families of electric fishes? It is possible that this gene was less
essential to muscle than the other duplicate copy of the gene, therefore making
it ?easier? for it to evolve a new function in a new cell type. The
investigators will measure the patterns of gene expression among several close
relatives of the electric fish lineages to determine if expression of this gene
changed before it gained a new function in electric fish. This project will also
knock out the two genes individually in a close relative of electric fish to
determine the relative impact on muscle function. This project will demonstrate
how expression evolution may have facilitated functional evolution of this
gene.&lt;br/&gt;Gene duplication is the primary source of new genes in a genome
and is an important player in the evolution of&lt;br/&gt;novel cells and organ
systems. This project seeks to ascertain the sequence of events that led to the
evolution of a novel function for a duplicate gene which made it functionally
distinct from the ancestral gene. This will provide insights into the molecular
mechanisms behind gene evolution after duplication and how that relates to the
evolution of novel organ systems. The project also provides research training to
several undergraduate students, and the co-PI will promote findings of the
project through a public website demonstrating evolution through simulations.