* 1311318
* The Stony Brook-Brookhaven AGEP Frontiers of Research and Academic Models of Excellence (FRAME) Alliance for Transformation
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2019
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,407,991.00

The Stony Brook-Brookhaven AGEP Frontiers of Research and Academic Models of
Excellence (FRAME) Alliance for Transformation was created in response to the
NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 12-554) for the AGEP-Transformation (AGEP-T) track. The AGEP-T
track targets strategic alliances of institutions and organizations to develop,
implement, and study innovative evidence-based models and standards for STEM
graduate education, postdoctoral training, and academic STEM career preparation
that eliminate or mitigate negative factors and promote positive practices for
URMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an alliance between SUNY at Stony Brook (SBU)
and Brookhaven National Laboratory's Office of Educational Programs (BNL) that
is partnering with eight organizations who are members of the Brookhaven Science
Associates (BSA), the company that was formed to operate BNL for the U.S.
Department of Energy: Battelle, SBU, Columbia University, Cornell University,
Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Princeton University
and Yale University. The Stony Brook-Brookhaven AGEP FRAME Alliance is engaging
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, as well as other minority service
institutions, through collaborations with the Interdisciplinary Consortium for
Research and Educational Access in Science and Engineering
(INCREASE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FRAME Alliance is working on a goal to help
U.S. citizens who are underrepresented minority (URM) graduate students and
postdoctoral trainees develop the essential skills to succeed in the competitive
professional environment of the professoriate. An Alliance participant is
defined as a URM U.S. citizen who is a graduate student or postdoctoral fellow
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives for this project
are:&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Double the number of URM U.S. citizens who are
postdoctoral trainees at SBU and BNL, from the current baseline of 18, to
36.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Establish a postdoctoral fellow training regimen for
U.S. URM citizens with formal pedagogical and professional competencies.
&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: Provide targeted support and intensive training for U.S.
citizens who are URM STEM doctoral students at SBU/BNL to become productive and
independent researchers who receive offers, and accept postdoctoral positions,
at BSA member institutions (Columbia University, Cornell University, Harvard
University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Princeton University and Yale
University) or other top tier research institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 4:
Develop and sustain a mutually beneficial relationship between INCREASE
institutions and SBU in order to strengthen the research training, mentoring and
networking opportunities across a broad community of URM students, who are U.S.
citizens, whereby there is an increase from 30% to 60% in the number of INCREASE
institutions that provide pathways for their undergraduates to pursue graduate
study at SBU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities that contribute to the model
for the SBU/BNL AGEP FRAME Alliance are very specific and they include:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Building a mutually beneficial partnership between SBU, BNL, BSA,
and INCREASE whereby an increase in joint publications, diversity centered
collaborations and appointments of the postdoctoral fellows in positions within
the consortium will be measures of success. &lt;br/&gt;2. Providing high level
training to U.S. citizens who are URM graduate students and postdoctoral
trainees about professional and research skills whereby an increase in their
research productivity, engagement in mentoring activities, improved science
writing, and science communication skills will be measures of success.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Transitioning U.S. citizens who are URM graduate students and
postdoctoral trainees into professoriate positions at research intensive
universities with change measured by an increase in the number of students
applying to, receiving offers from, and entering postdoctoral and faculty
positions at BSA institutions or other top tier institutions, and postdoctoral
fellows applying to, receiving offers, and entering faculty positions at BSA
institutions or other top tier institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
includes a social science research study that explores whether the level and
stability of STEM identity among graduate and postdoctoral fellows is enhanced
by increasing levels of self-efficacy over time, and predicts STEM success and
persistence outcomes among URMs who are U.S. citizens. The research is testing
the psychosocial processes underlying this goal. The research team is assessing
two key psychosocial factors, and their corresponding processes, theorized to
impact STEM success and persistence among URM graduate students and postdoctoral
trainees: the level and stability of STEM specific self-efficacy and STEM
identity among URM graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, compared to non-
URM graduate students and postdoctoral trainees. A primary vehicle for expected
changes in STEM self-efficacy and STEM identity among URM students and
postdoctoral fellows should be exposure to the SBU/BNL AGEP FRAME Alliance
programming interventions.