* 1311003
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Charles Yeager, Yeager                  Charles        B
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Charles Yeager of graduate Penn State University to conduct a
research project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at Tokyo Institute of Technology. The project title is
"Increasing Power from Thin Film Vibration Harvesters to Power Autonomous Sensor
Networks." The host scientist is Professor Hiroshi Funakubo.

Piezoelectric energy harvesting systems can convert ambient mechanical
vibrations into a source for electric energy to power microelectromechanical
sensors and there is a drive to increase the harvested power level to allow more
sophisticated sensor systems, or enable the duty cycle for data transmission to
be increased. The Fellow recently made an experimental characterization of
piezoelectric lead zirconium titanate (PZT) thin films to be used in vibration
energy harvesting systems and demonstrated that increasing the c-axis texture in
the film allowed the energy generation figure of merit to increase. This work
has raised questions as to the magnitude of the energy generation properties of
PZT films with 100% c-axis texture. This project grows PZT films by metalorganic
chemical vapor deposition at several compositions and with systematically
changing c-axis texture to find how the single-domain energy generation factor
changes as a function of composition, as well as reporting the highest possible
property for this application. The c-axis texture is controlled by selecting
substrates with appropriate thermal expansion coefficient and through growth
temperature. These are primary factors to control thermal stress. It is
predicted that a 100% c-axis PZT 30/70 film would have twice the figure of merit
as the best reported PZT grown by sol-gel. Also, fundamental knowledge is gained
by the direct measurement of how the transverse piezoelectric coefficient
changes with c-axis texture for {001}PZT films. The c-axis texture is
characterized by 4-circle X-ray diffraction and by infrared spectroscopy as
well. The piezoelectric coefficient is characterized by the wafer flexure
method.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language.These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the experience and results of the research
will be presented at the Fellow's home institution to groups of various
backgrounds.