* 1311469
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Why do dominant individuals cooperate? Fitness consequences of cooperative courtship in a system with variable cooperative partnerships
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Emily DuVal, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2015
* USD 19,100.00

Understanding cooperation has long interested humans, but the majority of
research in this field has focused on why helpers help, because to us helping is
a paradox because helpers appear to be sacrificing their own reproductive
opportunities to increase others' reproductive success. However, it is equally
important to understand whether and how cooperation benefits the recipients of
this help (dominant individuals), as cooperation results from the interaction of
individuals that may have very different reasons for participating. This
research investigates the causes and consequences of cooperation by dominant
males, those that have an option to cooperate or not. Using variation in
cooperative mating displays within a population of a neotropical bird, the
White-ruffed Manakin, this project addresses three objectives: (1) quantify the
costs of cooperation for dominant males, (2) quantify the reproductive
consequences of cooperation for dominant males, and (3) evaluate potential
mechanisms that result in indirect reproductive benefits for dominant
individuals. The research will be completed by combining traditional field
techniques of behavioral observations and experiments with modern genetic
techniques. This research addresses a previously unexplored aspect of
cooperative display behavior, and therefore represents a significant
contribution to the general understanding of the costs and benefits of
cooperation. The research activities include active mentorship of high school
students, undergraduates, recent graduates, and graduate students. The field
component of this research is conducted at Rara Avis Reserve in Costa Rica, an
eco-tourism establishment that puts researchers in contact with international
and US tourists on a daily basis where they explain this research and its
importance. Understanding how manakin groups function cooperatively sheds light
on how cooperation may have evolved and continues to function in other animal
groups and in human societies.