* 1311902
* WNY Genetics in Research Partnership: Expanding Exposure, Career Exploration and Interactive Projects in Basic Genome Analysis and Bioinformatics
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Stephen Koury, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,136,573.00

This project will develop an ongoing partnership with disadvantaged schools
across a 14-county region of New York that will facilitate teacher and student
recruitment, preparation, and mentorship for careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Project activities will focus on basic
genome analysis and bioinformatics, and the partnership will be directed by the
University at Buffalo Department of Biotechnical and Clinical Laboratory
Sciences (BCLS) and the New York State Area Health Education Center System (NYS
AHEC). Thirty biology teachers annually from partnering schools will attend a
two-week summer workshop at the University at Buffalo where they will receive
training in use of the Integrated Microbial Genomes Annotation Collaboration
Toolkit (IMG-ACT) of the U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute.
During Semester I of each school year of the project, NYS AHEC will organize
college and career exploration sessions to familiarize students with the gene
annotation project and to provide a "real world" context. Students will develop
career plans by the end of Semester I as well as indicate their interest in
participating in gene annotation activities during Semester II. During Semester
II, each teacher will work with at least 5 students (150 total per year) on a
genome annotation project using the IMG-ACT. Each spring, a Capstone Symposium
will be held, bringing participating students and teachers together to present
their projects and to interact with university faculty, researchers and
bioscience employers. Formative and summative evaluation activities will be
conducted for all teacher and student participants who participated in multiple
years of the project to assess broader based outcomes related to changes in
knowledge, behavior and dispositions toward STEM-related careers.

Bioinformatics is in a period of rapid growth, and genomics is becoming
increasingly important to the life sciences and health care practices. Genetic
and genomic research are expanding throughout the biological sciences, and
bioinformatics is providing tools for enhanced understanding of health and
improvements in prevention, detection, diagnosis, and treatment of disease.
Growth has been so rapid that some areas are experiencing shortages of trained
researchers, and the health professions have been challenged to keep up with
developments. Moreover, this era of great research potential coincides with a
trend of declining student interest in science, and the nation has had
particular difficulty addressing minority underrepresentation in STEM fields.
There is an urgent need for teacher and student exposure to science role models,
as well as instructional approaches that allow students to work with real
scientific data and tools, and to make connections between what they are
studying and the problems their families and communities are facing. As students
and teachers perform the gene annotations associated with this project they will
simultaneously be learning to use public domain bioinformatics software and
conducting a research project. They will experience the excitement of making
novel discoveries, as well as some of the uncertainty associated with any
scientific experiment. They will learn to question assumptions and to formulate
and test hypotheses about the genes they are annotating, rather than simply
performing scripted laboratory exercises. It is expected that the hands-on
approach to learning and basic bioinformatics research, along with the STEM
related career exploration sessions and continued NYS AHEC support of student
participants, will motivate students, and better prepare them to seek out
academic programs and careers in STEM-related areas. Teachers will obtain
professional development and training in basic bioinformatics that can then be
incorporated into their general classroom teaching.