* 1311167
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Causes and Consequence of Rapid Evolution of Seminal Fluid Protein Genes in Populations of the Red Flour Beetle, Tribolium castaneum
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Michael Wade, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2015
* USD 20,277.00

Males produce a myriad of proteins that are transferred to the female during
mating and directly influence reproductive success. As a group, the genes that
encode these male reproductive proteins exhibit elevated levels genetic
diversity and rapid evolution. The proposed research aims to further understand
the evolutionary causes and consequences of the rapid evolution of male
reproductive proteins, a ubiquitous but enigmatic pattern. Using the red flour
beetle as a model system, this research will combine both genetic and phenotypic
approaches to differentiate between two alternate hypotheses proposed to explain
the rapid evolution observed among this class of genes. Specifically, the
research aims to determine whether the accumulation of genetic variation is due
to adaptive or neutral evolutionary forces. &lt;br/&gt;This research will also
benefit a number of undergraduate students who will be trained by the graduate
student co-PI. The co-PI also contributes to a popular science blog accessible
to a general audience. Furthermore, understanding the evolution of male
reproductive proteins will inform areas of applied research. For example,
efforts aimed at developing biological control methods for insect disease
vectors and agricultural pests, such as the red flour beetle, have recently
begun to investigate whether this group of genes may provide new avenues for
population control.