* 1312095
* Towards a Predictive Theory of Galaxy Formation: Cosmological Gas Accretion and Galactic Outflows
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Lars Hernquist, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 746,191.00

Cosmological simulations of galaxy formation provide the most complete approach
for understanding the evolution of structure in the universe. The ultimate goal
of such simulations is to trace the formation of galaxies from first principles;
but the enormous dynamic range, and the many poorly understood physical effects
involving baryonic matter in galaxies, make this an extremely difficult
computational challenge. In this project, a model for the visible universe will
be constructed using state-of-the-art cosmological simulations. The simulations
will include both dark matter and baryons, and will employ a novel moving mesh
technique implemented in the new code AREPO. Using convergence tests, it will be
possible to determine which results are robust to variations in the treatment of
star formation, black hole growth, and feedback, which will be handled in ways
that are more physically motivated than in earlier studies. The scientific
effort will focus on understanding: 1) the formation of galactic disks in a
cosmological context and the impact of feedback on galaxy morphology and
kinematics; 2) the nature of gas inflows into galaxy halos and the accretion of
gas by disks; 3) the interaction between accreted gas and galactic outflows of
chemically enriched material and consequences for the circumgalactic medium; and
4) the co-evolution of galaxies and their central supermassive black holes. The
simulation results, including snapshots of the full simulations, galaxy
catalogs, images, and videos, will be made available to the research community
through a web-based interface. The project will support the work of a
postdoctoral scholar and a graduate student; in addition, a series of lectures
will be developed to be given to high school students in Cambridge, MA on topics
covering the evolution of the Universe and its constituents.