* 1312463
* Experiments in Magnetohydrodynamic and Hydrodynamic Instabilities of Astrophysical Interest
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Jeremy Goodman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2019
* USD 487,630.00

Efficient dissipation of the orbital energy of plasma occurs in accretion disks
ranging from those in which planets form around protostars, to those around
supermassive black holes in active galactic nuclei. Two mechanisms have been
proposed for the turbulence that drives dissipation and angular-momentum
transport in such disks: (1) a linear instability of magnetized and electrically
conducting flow known as magnetorotational instability (MRI); and (2) nonlinear
hydrodynamic shear-flow instability. Two experiments are running at Princeton:
the Liquid-Metal experiment studies MRI and related magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
instabilities, while the Hydrodynamic Turbulence Experiment studies nonlinear
hydrodynamic transitions. Recently, the MHD experiment has demonstrated robust
nonaxisymmetric Shercliff-layer instabilities in strong axial magnetic fields,
paving a clear path towards a first conclusive demonstration of MRI in the
laboratory. The present contribution to this research will focus on experimental
studies of the following questions: (1) Why are quasi-keplerian flows resistant
to turbulence? and (2) How do MRI, Shercliff-layer instabilities, and other MHD
activity, drive angular momentum transport? This requires adding crucial
diagnostics for direct global torque measurements, measuring local Reynolds and
Maxwell stresses in the liquid-metal flow; and making critical hardware
improvements to increase and control rotation speeds. This research will educate
the next generation of scientists and forge links with neighboring disciplines
such as geophysics, fluid dynamics, and plasma physics, while advancing
laboratory astrophysics generally.