* 1312458
* Nonlinear Wave Dynamics: Emergent Methods and Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Robert Buckingham, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2016
* USD 153,001.00

This research project will use rigorous asymptotic analysis to answer open
questions concerning the following three aspects of integrable nonlinear wave
equations: (A) The asymptotic behavior of initial value problems for
multicomponent integrable systems in one spatial and one temporal variable,
including the n-wave model and the Markov n-wave model for Burgers turbulence.
(B) Understanding and classifying critical behavior in boundary regions in
systems such as the semiclassical sine-Gordon and long-time nonlinear
Schrodinger equations, and uncovering fundamental properties of associated
Painleve functions. (C) Asymptotic analysis of models in two spatial and one
temporal variables, such as the Davey-Stewartson II and Kadomtsev-Petviashvili
II equations, requiring the d-bar approach to inverse scattering. These three
projects will make use of and further develop recent advances in asymptotic
analysis, scattering theory, and the study of orthogonal polynomials and random
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear wave equations are powerful
mathematical models for energy transmission in fluid dynamics, solid state
physics, and other physical systems. Specific applications of the models
considered include the evolution of cosmological structures, the onset of wave
collapse in fiber-optic cables and superconducting Josephson junctions, the
accumulation of fluid vortices, and Hele-Shaw flow. Solutions to these equations
are typically too complex to describe in full generality, yet salient features
often become clear in certain asymptotic limits for entire families of initial
conditions. This universality is an indication of the reasonableness of the
equation as a good physical model. Incorporating the effect of interaction terms
in multicomponent systems, analyzing critical transitions to help completely
describe global behavior, and developing the mathematical tools necessary to
study systems in two spatial dimensions will help build a fuller picture of the
behavior of general nonlinear wave equations and their applicability as physical
models.