* 1312351
* Strategies: SISTERS: Sustaining Interest in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Research in Society
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Maryann Bratton, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 02/28/2018
* USD 799,998.00

The SISTERS project reinforces the school curriculum through a theory-driven,
after- school science and engineering education program for girls in grades 5
and 6 from low income communities. The girls are engaged in science and
engineering lessons with technology-rich, hands-on experiences which foster
critical thinking, and engineering practices. They discover and come to
appreciate the iterative research process and learn the proper use of
technological resources which builds their confidence in pursuing future STEM
learning and careers. Each year, eight specially selected formal and informal
educators from four schools in the Encinitas School district and eight female
undergraduate engineering students from the University of California at San
Diego lead twice-weekly after school science classes for about 100 girls
focusing on solving socially relevant problems in solar energy and energy
efficacy. Other activities include twice yearly field trips, twice yearly family
science events, meetings with female professionals and a capstone team challenge
project. A week-long professional development for the instructors and
undergraduate students is offered for them to modify and use the lessons and to
integrate environmental sensors. This project represents a strategic partnership
between a nationally engaged research university and a local school district to
create an innovative pilot program that can serve as a scalable and replicable
model for others to follow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies how the
interaction with role models and the use of socially relevant scientific and
engineering challenges impact fifth and sixth grade girls' self-efficacy, STEM
content and their interest in STEM Careers. The evaluation also measures
teachers' change in practice. Information is gathered through surveys, focus
groups and observations. Validated assessments developed with some of the
activities being used are used to measure student knowledge of engineering
practices and science concepts. The project intervenes at a critical time in
student development of self-efficacy in STEM subjects. The students develop
relationships with positive role models that foster a continued interest in
science and mathematics and STEM careers.