* 1312865
* Controls on South Pacific Convergence Zone Precipitation and Its Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Benjamin Lintner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2016
* USD 123,496.00

This project studies the South Pacific Convergence Zone (SPCZ), a large region
of cloudiness and rainfall south of the equator extending southeastward from the
Western Pacific (the warm pool region) past Fiji and American Samoa to about
30S, 140W. The basic dynamics that produce the SPCZ are still poorly understood,
and climate models have difficulty in simulating it correctly (the simulated
SPCZ is often too zonally oriented and too close to the equator). This project
has two objectives: first, to diagnose multiscale SPCZ circulation-moisture-
precipitation relationships evident in observations, reanalysis datasets, and
simulations of current generation coupled climate models (from the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project version 5). Second, to develop an SPCZ region air mass
trajectory climatology using a parcel dispersion model. A fully 3-dimensional,
Lagrangian perspective of the pathways of air masses interacting with the SPCZ
will be produced and analyzed, motivated by the idea that variations in the flow
of dry air into the SPCZ drives precipitation variability in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aside from its scientific merit, the work is
expected to produce results of interest to decision makers and stakeholders in
the South Pacific, who would benefit from better understanding of rainfall
variability given vulnerability to floods and droughts in the region. The
Pacific Centre for Environmental and Sustainable Development (PACE-SD) will
serve as a venue for interactions between the PI of this project and South
Pacific researchers, forecasters, and decision makers. The project also fosters
international collaborations, including collaborations with the Australian
Bureau of Meteorology and the participation of a Costa Rican scientist with
expertise on Lagrangean trajectory analysis. In addition, the project supports
and trains a graduate student, thereby providing for the future work force in
this research area.