* 1312667
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of Privacy Preserving Secure Data Exchange Technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2013,07/31/2013
* Bon Sy, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this project is to further develop the research team's privacy
preserving secure data exchange technology. This technology uses a two-party
secure computation mechanism allowing for verifiable private data reconstruction
and comparison without the sender revealing the data to the receiver. The
technology is designed to assure an individual's privacy by empowering the
individual to have full control of their own data with three advantages. First,
the data exchange technology does not need a trusted third party to act as a
proxy to realize privacy protection. Second, data intended for an exchange is
based on reconstruction by the receiver using helper data and does not require
the data owner to disclose or share private data over the communication channel.
Third, the technology is scalable for use in a distributive computing
environment.

This technology has the potential to provide a foundation for a number of
technical solutions for various applications and markets. There is a need for
this type of technology in emergency management and emergency health data
management, for example, this technology would allow an emergency medical
technician responding to an incident to reconstruct the emergency health data of
an individual without that individual having to unlock their smartphone and
reveal the emergency data it stores. In addition to facilitating secure
emergency health data exchange, this technology could also be used with
biometric authentication applications.