* 1312483
* Materials World Network:   Project Summary Disorder Tuned Quantum Phases in Topological Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Lia Krusin-Elbaum, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 410,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: In the last few years there has been an explosive development
in materials science. It began with the theoretical prediction of a new class of
three dimensional (3D) topological insulators (TIs) which are fully gapped in
the bulk, and with unusual gapless protected 2D Dirac surface states. This
protection arises from the linear energy-momentum dispersion, with the surface
states near the Fermi surface residing on a single Dirac cone. If realized,
these systems could be the Holy Grail in the fields of spintronics and fault-
tolerant quantum computing. However, access to this 2D quantum matter is a
challenge, owing to the difficulty of separating surface contribution from the
finite conductivity of the bulk. In this MWN project supported by the Division
of Materials Research, swift (~ MeV range) electron and / or proton beams will
be utilized to create controlled disorder by (a) tuning the bulk carrier density
and Fermi level across the Dirac point, and (b) reducing bulk conductivity by
forcing Anderson localization. The former will result in charge compensation in
a bulk TI. The later will test recent theoretical ideas of Quantized Anomalous
Hall Effect (QAHE) and, even more remarkably, (c) test a recent prediction of a
Topological Anderson Insulator - a nontrivial quantum phase with quantized
conductance obtained by introducing disorder in a metal with strong spin-orbit
interaction. Determining the precise dose at which this occurs should establish
a new large-scale route to achieving intrinsic quantum transport of the
topological surfaces states.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The ability to control the quantum mechanical properties
of materials is one of the forefront challenges for material scientists and
condensed matter physicists. In the past few decades several bottom-up
approaches striving to engineer new materials (thereby controlling their
properties) at the atomic level have been devised to achieve this goal. In this
proposal a top-down material modification approach will be utilized in which a
controlled amount of defects will be introduced to alter the electrical
properties of topological insulators (TI's) - a newly discovered class of
materials which promises to offer a robust platform for quantum computing. Owing
to the unique properties of TI's disorder introduced by particle irradiation
will only affect the unwanted / parasitic electrical properties of these
materials, while simultaneously enhancing the desired quantum properties that
will foster the realization of revolutionary electronic devices and the
synthesis of novel states of matter. This proposal is an international
collaboration between the condensed matter physics group of the PI at The City
College of New York (CCNY) - CUNY, and groups at Ecol√© Polytechnique in
Palaiseau, France, with unique expertise in swift particle irradiation
techniques and advanced optical spectroscopy. This collaboration combines the
complementary technical strengths of materials science with particle beam
technology to control and tune key electronic properties of the newly discovered
functional materials class. CCNY is a federally recognized minority serving
institution. Ecole Polytechnique is one of the leading institutes of higher
education in France, with a decidedly international outlook. The research
program will have a great educational impact on the students involved, both
graduate and undergraduate, for it will facilitate international visits and
exchanges that will broaden their educational range and provide training in a
wide spectrum of materials synthesis and experimental characterization
techniques in a collaborative spirit.