* 1312676
* MWN: Thermal Transitions in Polyelectrolyte Multilayers and Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Jodie Lutkenhaus, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2017
* USD 366,500.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolyte complexes and
multilayers (PECs and PEMs, respectively) are both formed from oppositely
charged polymers, and share many similarities in structure and properties. Both
PECs and PEMs are increasingly important for applications ranging from
underwater adhesives to drug delivery and biomaterials. Recent work by the
Lutkenhaus group has discovered that PEMs undergo a second-order, glass
transition-like thermal transition upon heating in the presence of water. Even
though the thermal transition observed by Lutkenhaus has all the classic
features of a glass transition, its exact nature remains elusive. PEMs are often
approximated as, and compared to, PECs because they both use ion-pairing and
entropic interactions to control their formation. Rationally, PECs can be used
as a platform for both experiments and simulations to approximate the role of
hydration, ionic strength, and temperature in PEMs. Therefore, the PIs propose
to study PECs as an approximation of PEMs using hydration, ionic strength and
ionic species, and temperature as tuning parameters. With financial support from
the Division of Materials Research at the National Science Foundation and the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Unit at the Academy of Finland, this
Materials World Network project will approach the study through both
experimental and simulational approaches, in which the U.S. and Finnish teams
have expertise, respectively. Teams will hold student and faculty exchanges to
foster the international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolyte complexes, which are
formed from the interactions between oppositely charged polymers, are
increasingly important for applications ranging from underwater adhesives to
drug delivery and biomaterials. Whether or not the complex forms depends on
several parameters: polyelectrolyte type, salt type, concentration, hydration
and temperature. Recently, the Lutkenhaus group has observed that
polyelectrolyte multilayers, which have been proposed to be similar to
complexes, undergo a unique thermal transition at elevated temperatures. The
nature of this transition is not at all understood, but it is critically
important to the future innovation of complexes and multilayers to do so.
Therefore, this Materials World Network project will study the effects of the
aforementioned parameters on the formation in and thermal transitions of
polyelectrolyte complexes. Student exchanges are planned between U.S. and
Finnish teams. Polyelectrolyte complexation demonstrations are planned for Texas
A&amp;M University's Chemistry Open House, an annual event open to the public.
Undergraduate and graduate research mentoring, as well of mentoring of secondary
school teachers is planned.