* 1312392
* From Reconstituted Actin Networks to 3D Multi-cellular Microtissues: Multi-scale Models and Experiments on Contractility in Active Cytoskeletal Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Vivek Shenoy, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this proposal is to develop multiscale models and to
design controlled experiments to quantitatively study force generation due to
actomyosin activity in active cytoskeletal networks and in multicellar
microtissues. The biomechanical tension generated by myosin motors in the actin
cytoskeleton, which is a flexible and dynamic network of filaments that is acted
upon by a variety of regulatory and crosslinking proteins, is fundamental to
many pathologic processes such as tumor growth, metastasis and fibrosis. Studies
to be conducted under this award include: incorporation of key mechano-bio-
chemical processes in a active finite-element based actin network to model
contractility, development of a coarse-grained description that explicitly
includes actomyosin activity to model deformation of 3D microtissues and
experiments to quantitatively determine the role of actomyosin activity in
different cell types where motors are localized in the cortex actin or in stress
fibers and the biomechanical interplay that occurs when two cell types are
mixed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these studies would add
significantly to our understanding of how elastic stresses lead to an
enhancement of contractile activity in living cells. Moreover, multi-scale
quantitative models that can predict the behavior of multicellular 3D systems
and supporting experiments will reveal the mechanisms of force transfer through
cell-to-cell in complex 3D environments. This in turn may help understand how
the actin networks of multiple cells interact with each other to drive multi-
cellular events critical to the function of tissues and organs such as
histomorphogenesis, repair and regeneration. The award will provide an
opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students to both carry out
experimental work and to develop advanced computational and modeling skills. The
progress made in the modeling methods and experimental techniques will be
included in the courses that the PI and the co-PI have created to promote hands-
on simulation and laboratory experience.