* 1312424
* Computational Model-based Statistical Methods in Biomedicine
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Erkki Somersalo, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2018
* USD 254,018.00

This project concerns the mathematical modeling and analysis of biomedical
applications in which the objective is to retrieve pertinent information of the
structure or functioning of a biological system from indirect and minimally
invasive measurements. The applications include electroencephalography (EEG) and
magnetoencephalography (MEG), electrical impedance tomography (EIT), electric
neurography (ENG), and dynamical PET imaging. Characteristic for all these
problems is the high complexity of the mathematical model describing the system,
significant level of noise in the signals, and severe ill-posedness of the
inverse problem of recovering the information of interest from the data. Well-
planned model reduction methods help to simplify the model, but at the same time
a significant modeling error is introduced, as the simplified model can no
longer capture all the features of the data. The aim in the project is to
develop computational statistical methods to overcome these problems. Unknown
quantities are modeled as random variables, making it possible to analyze in
statistical terms the model reduction errors. In the MEG/EEG application,
stochastic modeling is used to analyze and filter out the complex noise due to
normal brain activity that easily masks the signal coming from an abnormal
activity such as the onset of focal epileptic seizure. Well-planned prior models
for the unknown quantities help to reduce the ill-posedness of the inverse
problems, and lead to efficient numerical methods for both estimating the
unknowns of interest as well as to quantify the uncertainty in the estimate.
Novel time-dependent filtering methods are investigated to deal with noisy
signals.

The mathematical and computational methodology aims at improving the performance
of different diagnostic processes: In the impedance tomography application, the
goal is to be able to discern benign and malignant lesions seen in a mammography
image without the need of breast biopsy, by injecting weak electric currents
through contact electrodes in the breast and measuring the corresponding
electric voltages, and by further computing the electric response of the tissue
of interest. It is known that cancer tissue is characterized by an abnormal
electric response. The main target in EEG and MEG research is to help localizing
epileptic foci in the brain by measuring the electric and magnetic fields
outside the patient's head. This information helps greatly the brain surgery
planning for patients with severe epilepsy that does not respond to medication.
Dynamic PET imaging is used in the studies of brain functioning, e.g., under
severe liver conditions that change the ammonium level in the blood. Electric
neurography aims at reading the electric signals inside a peripheral nerve in a
minimally invasive manner using contact microelectrodes. This data can be used
to give a patient control of a prosthetic robotic arm mounted on an amputated
limb, as if the arm would be a real arm responding to neuronal commands. Another
exciting application being investigated is the possibility to control chronic
pain.