* 1312155
* Air Option 1:  Technology Translation Dual Mode Electromechanical Assessment of Soft Tissue Character In Situ
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Jonathan Butcher, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2015
* USD 166,240.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
technology for non-optical measurement of local tissue biomechanics to fill a
key unmet need for real time soft tissue health diagnostic technologies. The
translated dual-mode diagnostic probe has the following unique features: 1) It
combines both biomechanical and impedance measurement in the same device, which
likely enhances sensitivity and specificity; 2) It's detection zone can be
designed down to 2 mm in diameter, enabling a minimally invasive profile and
fine local analysis; 3) It interrogates tissue through a width and depth
equivalent to twice its diameter, enabling identification of deeper tissue
phenomena with less invasion; 4) it is real-time, alleviating more costly and
time consuming follow-on analysis and permitting instantaneous decision making
for the user without risk of losing the location; 5) it can be manufactured very
cheaply using flexible electronics. These features will provide improved
diagnostic performance over current approaches that utilize only one-mode of
sensation in this market space (e.g. Dune Biomedical), and significant time and
cost savings compared to traditional excisional tissue biopsies. Furthermore,
this technology will enable interrogation without tissue destruction, which is
of paramount importance for very sensitive tissue regions (e.g. glands, nerves,
lymph nodes) in this market space. The project accomplishes this goal by
optimizing the probe geometry, electrical stimulation profiles, and pressure
ranges that safely quantify biomechanical and impedance measurement in soft
tissues. These results will generate a field serviceable prototype that will
establish the foundation for evaluation in potential markets and
commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will engage the Cornell
Center for Technology Commercialization, Cornell biotechnology Institute and
partner with the McGovern Business Incubator to provide business development and
scale-up guidance, access to financial networks, and connection to future
industrial partners that are experienced in navigating the diverse regulatory
and manufacturing landscapes as they pertain to the potential to translate the
dual-mode along a path that may result in a competitive commercial reality. When
successful, the potential economic impact is expected to be widespread, filling
needs in markets ranging from food science to cancer margin detection. The first
market area of pre-term labor will be focused on in this proposal, and it is
anticipated that clinical trials in humans can be initiated within the next 5
years. When successful, this low-cost, quantitative, real-time assessment tool
will enhance U.S. competitiveness in medical diagnostic technologies.
Societally, access to real-time quantitative diagnostics, especially bringing
that technology closer, potentially in the hands of the end-user, provides
significant cost and time savings, leading to a better quality of life.
&lt;br/&gt;