* 1312034
* Precision Measurements of the Black-Hole Properties in the Center of the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Dimitrios Psaltis, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 541,733.00

The black hole in the center of the Milky Way, Sgr A*, is the most massive among
all the known black holes in our galaxy. Is also by far the closest among all
the supermassive black holes in the universe. This combination of a large mass
and a small distance makes Sgr A* the ultimate test-bed of high-energy and
gravitational astrophysics in the strong field regime. In the near future, major
developments in instrumentation will provide the tools for high-precision
studies of its space-time via observations of relativistic effects in stellar
orbits, in the timing of pulsars, and in horizon-scale images of its accretion
flow.&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed research project, the PI and his collaborators
will investigate the astrophysical complexities that may limit precise
measurements of the black-hole properties with each technique and devise ways to
overcome them. This work will allow them to capitalize on the NSF investment in
technologies, such as the Event Horizon Telescope and the GBT, as well as on the
construction of a GPU-based computer cluster at the University of Arizona that
became possible through an NSF-MRI award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
proposed project, one graduate student will be educated in predicting the
strong-field properties of astrophysical black holes and in implementing
statistical tools for analyzing future data. The PI and CoPI are also committed
to the broader dissemination of the research activities in the scientific
community by organizing interdisciplinary scientific conferences during the time
of the proposed project. They are also engaged in communicating the scientific
results to the general public via non-technical public lectures and
demonstrations.