* 1312697
* Materials World Network: Particle-Mediated Control Over Crystallization: From the Pre-Nucleation Stage to the Final Crystal
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Jillian Banfield, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 07/31/2018
* USD 417,092.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The formation of hierarchically organized crystalline solids
through nanoparticle interaction and attachment is now recognized as a
widespread phenomenon in environmental, biological and synthetic crystallization
systems. The goal of this project is to develop a mechanistic understanding of
how these so-called mesocrystals are created through particle-mediated growth
processes. To achieve that goal, expertise in growth of mesocrystals will be
combined with capabilities in high-resolution in situ transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging, dynamic force
spectroscopy (DFS) of nanoparticle interactions, determination of atomic
structure, and modeling and simulation from the atomic to mesoscale. Using
calcium carbonate, iron oxide and calcium-silicate hydrate (SCH) combined with
polymers as the experimental systems, the project will pursue three thrusts,
structured around the key scientific issues. The nature of pre-nucleation
clusters will be determined using ion potential measurements, titration and
ultracentrifugation and their solution interaction dynamics will be probed
through liquid cell TEM. The interactions responsible for particle co-
orientation and reorientation will be determined through a combination of DFS
and modeling. Experimental measurements will be supported by molecular modeling
simulations, which will be used to determine molecular details of the effective
interactions and provide parameters for phase field calculations. The kinetics
of particle aggregation, crystallographic orientations of the aggregating
particles, and structural evolution of mesocrystalline aggregates will be
investigated by liquid cell TEM and ex situ HRTEM. Emphasis will be placed on
distinguishing between oriented attachment and orientation following random
aggregation either through whole-particle rotation or atomic-scale ripening.
These data will be compared to phase-field models of assembly that utilize the
experimentally determined interaction energies. The outcome will be a set of
principles to guide synthetic strategies for creating hierarchically organized
materials such as bioceramics, photonic solids, energy harvesting materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Through support from the NSF Division of Materials
Research, a Materials World Network will be formed to investigate mechanisms by
which complex crystalline structures, known as mesocrystals, are created through
the interaction and attachment of nanoparticles. The goal of this research is to
establish a mechanistic understanding of this process and a set of principles to
guide synthetic strategies for creating hierarchically organized materials such
as bioceramics, photonic solids, and energy harvesting materials. The work will
be carried out by combining computer simulations and chemical analyses with a
powerful set of in situ microscopy tools that provide real-time molecular-scale
information about both nanoparticle attachment processes and the interaction
forces between the particles. The materials to be investigated include those of
relevance to biomaterials research, such as calcium carbonate, as well as those
of relevance in energy and environmental systems such as iron oxide. The outcome
will be a set of physical principles that can be applied both to understanding
the processes responsible for formation of natural materials in the environment
and to synthesis of hierarchical materials for energy, biomedical, and
structural applications. Success of the project is enabled by an international
collaboration between four US and German Universities, each of which brings a
unique set of skills and knowledge to the project. Moreover, this collaboration
will provide a unique learning experience for the graduate and undergraduate
students involved in the research through international exchanges between the US
and German labs. Finally, the project will include development of a module on
mesocrystal formation for the public outreach programs to be made available
through the NSF-funded Nanoscale Informal Science Education network.