* 1312603
* BAYESIAN ENSEMBLE METABOLOMIC NETWORK CONSTRUCTION
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Seongho Kim, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2017
* USD 180,000.00

Metabolomics is the study of low molecular weight molecules found within cells
and biological systems. It has emerged for deciphering the complex time-related
concentration, activity and flux of metabolites in biological samples. Multiple
analytical platforms such as liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
have been used in metabolomics. Unlike other analytical platforms, the
comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography mass spectrometry system
provides a much increased separation capacity, chemical selectivity and
sensitivity for the analysis of metabolites. The aim of this project is to infer
metabolic networks from the measurements of metabolites using this high-
throughput comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography mass spectrometry
system. To achieve a high accuracy metabolic network construction, an innovative
peak detection algorithm will be first developed for simultaneous baseline
removal, smoothing and peak picking steps, as well as the statistical assessment
of peak confidence level. The investigators will then develop an innovative peak
alignment algorithm based on global comparison using point matching algorithm as
well as considering measurement error and outlier detection. Once an accurate
alignment peak table is created, metabolic networks will be created using
Bayesian ensemble method, which is Bayesian model averaging, to find meaningful
pairwise interactions and associations among sets of metabolite peaks as well as
to account for uncertainty of network complexity. In particular, the pathway
information will be incorporated into network constructions for weighting each
network constructed by several different approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography mass spectrometry platform can
not only leverage the peak capacity issue in current metabolomics, but also
brings much improved chemical selectivity and sensitivity for metabolomics
analyses. The developed statistical and computational approaches will lead to
new methodology for data pre-processing and metabolic network construction for
the analysis of high-throughput data. The metabolic network construction system
developed from this project will enable identification of consistent metabolite
mechanisms and pathways for numerous organisms and diseases in real time. Thus
this research will have broader impacts for biomedical research, medicine and
public health. The methods developed in this research can also be applied to the
analysis of liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry based metabolomics data.