* 1312952
* Control of Fluid-Elastic Structures and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Scott Hansen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2017
* USD 191,123.00

The proposed research is aimed at better understanding the controllability
structure of coupled fluid-elastic systems. Specifically, we focus on the
situation of a fluid in a three-dimensional domain with a flexible boundary that
is described by a plate or membrane equation. We suggest several problems which
serve to address our fundamental question: How much control in one or more
components of the coupled system is needed to obtain (i) controllability or
approximate controllability of the coupled system or (ii) partial
controllability (approximate or exact) of one or more components of the system?
The proposed research extends the state-of-the-art in several ways. First, the
partial controllability problem in the context of a fluid-elastic system has not
been addressed for the types of physically-based models we are considering.
Secondly, many of the models we propose to analyze have not been studied even
for well-posedness. This is a nontrivial step even in the linear case for some
of the models (e.g., when considering free boundary conditions). However we also
hope to address local controllability for the nonlinear problems associated with
the free boundary problem for the Stokes system associated with a moving
flexible boundary. Likewise we hope to make some progress in the case of a
compressible Navier-Stokes fluid coupled with a plate. Our main analytical tool
to attack these problems will be the method of Carleman estimates together with
microlocal analysis. Development of Carleman estimates for these types of
coupled systems might turn out to be be very useful in a broader context, as it
is likely that a similar approach may be useful in the analysis of a variety of
other types of coupled systems. We also propose to investigate the closely
related inverse problem of determination of plate coefficients through knowledge
of the appropriately defined Dirichlet-to-Neumann maps associated with solutions
of the coupled plate-fluid system.

The fluid-elastic structures we aim to study arise in many practical
applications. For example,the problem of minimizing the engine noise in a
portion of an aircraft fuselage through controllers placed on and inside the
aircraft is closely related to the partial controllability problem (ii)
mentioned above. One specific fluid-elastic structure we plan to investigate is
the cochlea, which is the auditory organ in the inner ear that translates sound
vibrations to electrical impulses transmitted to the brain. A better
understanding of the controllability structure of the cochlea could lead to an
improved design of cochlear implants and hearing aids.