* 1312202
* AIR Option 2: Research Alliance Bio-enabled Nanosensors with Fully Programmable Ligand Detection
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Alan Johnson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 04/30/2016
* USD 812,000.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of programmable, nano-enabled chemical sensor technologies to fill technology
gaps in medical diagnostics and environmental monitoring. The technologies have
the following market-valued features: programmable ligand sensitivity, miniature
form factor, and compatibility with lab-on-a-chip technology, that provide
exemplary sensitivity, selectivity, and overall performance when compared to the
leading competing technologies in this market domain, for example ELISA tests
and metal oxide gas sensors. The project accomplishes this transfer to the
market by developing a set of platform technologies suitable for incorporation
into commercial products across a broad set of applications, resulting in
creation of new jobs in sensor systems design and manufacturing, commercial
products for analysis of disease biomarkers and air/water quality, with the
potential to license intellectual property generated by the project that will
result in spinoffs. The partners engaged to transfer the technologies to the
market domain include major industry (Intel, Lockheed Martin), start up ventures
(Adamant Technologies, Graphene Frontiers), and a technology-based economic
development program (Ben Franklin Technology Partners of Southeastern
Pennsylvania) with a network of angel investors. The partners will provide
crucial insight into potential markets and application spaces, as well as access
to critical technical capabilities and capital that will enable the new ventures
that emerge to flourish.

The potential economic impact is expected to be on the scale of tens to hundreds
of millions of dollars in the next five to ten years, which will contribute to
the U.S. competitiveness in this global chemical sensors market. The societal
impact in the short term will be the creation of technologies that will drive a
transformation to a "smart society" where integrated chemical sensor systems are
ubiquitous. The longer term impacts include a new generation of science and
engineering students, educated in depth in their discipline but also with
experience in the agile, dynamic thinking processes that are characteristic of
innovative, entrepreneurial small businesses.