* 1312376
* The Dragonfly Project: Imaging the outer limits of nearby galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Pieter van Dokkum, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2016
* USD 480,291.00

Simulations of galaxy formation generically predict that all luminous galaxies
are embedded in extensive tidal debris fields, caused by occasional major
mergers and the continuous accretion of small satellite galaxies. These debris
fields are curiously missing around actual galaxies. While this may indicate
that revisions to the standard cosmology are needed, a more mundane explanation
is that we have not yet obtained sufficiently deep observations to detect the
debris fields. This award provides support for the Dragonfly Project that will
attempt such a detection. The project is an ultra low surface brightness imaging
survey with the Dragonfly telescope of all luminous galaxies within a distance
of 30 megaparsecs (Mpc) that are visible from New Mexico. Over the award period
of 3 years, the investigators will obtain 40 hr deep images of a complete sample
of 72 luminous nearby galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent simulations suggest
that the debris mostly lives at surface brightnesses of 29 to 31 mag per
arcsec^2, fainter than the typical deep imaging limit of about 28 mag per
arcsec^2. The investigators have constructed a telescope for the specific
purpose of determining whether all galaxies have ultra low surface brightness
tidal debris around them on scales of 30--100 kpc. The collected data will reach
about 30 mag per arcsec^2 on 3 arcsec scales. The Dragonfly telescope is an
array of telephoto lenses coupled with standard charge-coupled device (CCD)
imagers. The latest generation of these lenses has nano-fabricated coatings that
minimize scattered and reflected light. Together, these lenses constitute a
perfectly baffled telescope with extremely fast, all-refractive optics and
better scattered light control (by an order of magnitude) than existing
reflecting telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigating team will make the
fully processed and calibrated images publicly available through a web
interface. The project integrates education and research in the following ways:
(1) The project is complementary to multi-year instrumentation efforts on large
telescopes and is well-suited for graduate student training in astrophysical
instrumentation. (2) The straightforward remote operation model lends itself
well to classroom teaching and demonstrations. The telescope will be integrated
into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum at Yale University and will also
be used as a science demonstration tool for high school students.