* 1312359
* AIR Option 2:  Research Alliance Nitrogen Removal with Energy Recovery Through N2O Decomposition
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Craig Criddle, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translation of a new
wastewater treatment technology to fill the wastewater nitrogen treatment
technology gap. The translated technology has the following unique features:
conversion of ammonia to nitrous oxide, use of nitrous oxide to oxidize methane
in biogas, and enhanced recovery of energy that provides exemplary opportunities
for protection of waterways from nitrogen pollution while decreasing energy
usage, decreasing residual solids for disposal, and increasing energy recovery
compared to the leading competing technology (conventional nitrification and
denitrification) in this market space. The project accomplishes this goal by
short-circuiting the conventional nitrogen removal process, converting waste
ammonium to nitrous oxide and using nitrous oxide to oxidize biogas for energy
recovery resulting in on-site proof-of-concept with nitrogen-rich wastewater
generated during the anaerobic digestion of organic matter at leading wastewater
utilities in the San Francisco Bay area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership
engages East Bay Municipal Utility District (Oakland, CA), South Bayside System
Authority (Redwood City, CA), and Delta Diablo Sanitation District (Antioch, CA)
to provide guidance in the wastewater treatment sector and other aspects:
financing, commercialization, adaptation of existing infrastructure, and scale-
up, as they pertain to the potential to translate the technology along a path
that may result in a competitive commercial reality. The expected economic
impact is $300k to $500k in annual operational savings at treatment plants that
adopt the translated technology, which will contribute to the U.S.
competitiveness in wastewater treatment within 3 to 5 years. The societal
impact, long term, will be the development of a cost-effective technology for
removal of nitrogen from wastewater, preventing fertilization of waterways and
potential for formation of destructive anoxic dead zones while also creating
opportunities for energy recovery, converting nitrous oxide from harmful
greenhouse gas to a new source of renewable energy.