* 1312582
* Materials World Network: Quasi-Phase Matching in Non-Centrosymmetric Wide Band Gap Semiconductors.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Ramon Collazo, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 01/31/2017
* USD 374,999.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;With support from the Division of Materials
Research, a collaboration between the Wide-Bandgaps group at North Carolina
State University (NCSU) and the Quantum Optics group at the University of
Ljubljana, Slovenia, has been established to explore the feasibility of using
non-centrosymmetric wide bandgap semiconductors as nonlinear optical materials.
In this work, AlGaN (aluminum gallium nitride) will serve as a model material
for the investigation of the applicability of this semiconductor class as the
high-quality quasi phase-matched structures for second harmonic generation
(SHG). As a wide bandgap semiconductor, this will allow for SHG to shift the
wavelength of available semiconductor lasers to the range of shorter
wavelengths, where injection lasers are not available. In principle, it should
allow for the frequency doubling of the output of a semiconductor laser with the
shortest wavelength in the violet-blue region and produce a compact, coherent
deep ultraviolet light source with wavelengths approaching 200 nm. This
international collaboration seeks to demonstrate quasi-phase matched structures
for SHG based on wide bandgap nitrides and to develop fundamental nonlinear
optical concepts for efficient SHG in the UV spectrum that cannot be achieved in
other systems. In order to realize this, two main challenges need to be met: (1)
the demonstration of periodic lateral polarity control in AlGaN alloys, and (2)
the development of the basic understanding of nonlinear optical characteristics
of these structures. The group at NCSU addresses the first challenge, where
their expertise in growth and control of polarity in III-nitrides has been
demonstrated. The Quantum Optics group at the University of Ljubljana addresses
the second challenge with their unique capabilities and expertise in harnessing
non-linear optical properties of different materials. The periodic AlGaN
structures are grown and fabricated using metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition, with the choice of alloy composition and structure geometry based on
the optical research by the group at Ljubljana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear optical devices based on the aluminum
gallium nitride semiconductors can provide a broad-based vehicle for laser light
generation in the deep ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum, which
is not accessible by any other solid-state technology. This can find uses in
health care, bio-defense and other commercial and defense applications. The use
of light sources in the deep UV will lead to detection systems of different
chemical and biological aerosols, providing for detection of a variety of
pollutant agents among other effluents. In general, this research will lead to
materials that will be used for applications that deal with the preservation and
extension of natural resources by: (1) allowing for the efficient use and
transmission of electrical energy, (2) availability of clean potable water
through disinfection by the use of UV light emitting diodes, and (3) emissions
and other effluents detection. In addition, this challenging project will
provide the opportunity to establish a research collaboration and student
exchange between North Carolina State University and the University of
Ljubljana. This opportunity will also help expose the students and researchers
to state of the art facilities within NCSU and the University of Ljubljana for
realizing this research, while at the same time building an international
network for establishing future careers.