* 1312211
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation A Microwave Assisted Biomimetic Coating Technology for Polymer Implants
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Vijay Goel, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2018
* USD 198,934.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating previously
developed fundamental science to coat orthopedic implants made out of polymers
with bioactive coatings. With the increasing clinical acceptance of
Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) implants, there is an urgent need in the industry to
develop low-temperature coating processes. The translated biomimetic coating
technology has several distinctive features. First, being a low temperature
benign process, it is eminently suitable for coating polymeric substrates such
as PEEK implants. Second, the process has the ability to produce carbonated-
calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite (CDHA), similar in composition to bone mineral
and a bioactive variation of inert hydroxyapatite. Third, unlike conventional
biomimetic processes spanning over several weeks, the deposition of the coating
takes place within a relatively short time frame of less than an hour, thus
providing the ability for large scale industrial production. All of these
features taken together make the technology more versatile than conventional
coating processes. This project accomplishes the broad objective of fabricating
the coatings and evaluating them for their physical, mechanical, and biomedical
properties in vitro and in vivo; data essential to obtain approval from the
various regulatory agencies, like the FDA.

This effort is a "Win-Win" situation for both the partners: The University of
Toledo and Orchid Bio-coat (Orchid) will work with the University of Toledo's
Technology Transfer Office to bring the technology to market. The partnership
engages Orchid to provide guidance to UT in the overall manufacturing,
translation, distribution and further commercialization aspects that will
introduce to the market a new generation of bioactive orthopedic implants made
out of PEEK. Orchid is one of the nation's largest providers of plasma sprayed
coatings on titanium implants with their distribution network all across the
globe. However, with the switch from metallic to polymeric implants, UT will be
able to provide the "turn-key" technology. The potential economic impact is
expected to be felt within next three years' time frame, which will contribute
to the U.S. competitiveness in this orthopedic implant space.

This project has a significant societal impact on the ageing "Baby Boomers" and
an increasingly active general population. These segments of the society, which
are growing at a very fast rate, experience the most musculoskeletal diseases
and injuries. This population is expected to require a wide variety of implants.
In the U.S., the orthopedic reconstructive device/implant market is presently
experiencing an annual growth rate of 12 to 14%, which is even higher than that
of the spinal implant market, growing at 10%. This proposal will address this
demand by developing improved and novel products with enhanced integration of
the implant with the adjoining boney surfaces. The effort will also train
qualified manpower and will cater to the needs of implant manufacturers.