* 1312142
* Many Particles' Systems: Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Pierre-Emmanuel Jabin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 341,270.00

The proposal investigates, theoretically and numerically, a wide spectrum of
particle's systems found in various applications. The dimension of those systems
is proportional to the number of particles involved which can be quite large, up
to 10^{25} in some settings. This makes them too complex to analyze and too
costly to solve numerically. However a key feature of those large systems is
their multiscale nature: It makes the dynamics extremely complex at the
microscopic level of an individual particle. But it can also lead to a drastic
reduction in the complexity of the system by approximating it at the mesoscopic
or macroscopic level with PDE's in lower dimensions; the main difficulty in that
case is the study and control of the correlations between particles. A classical
example is the usual mean field limit problem for kinetic equations in
statistical physics for which the investigator will develop novel techniques in
order to handle singular potentials. New extensions will be investigated as well
in order to push beyond the classical framework, including bacterial
suspensions, mean field games models and applications to social sciences
(consensus formation...). The bacterial suspensions under study have a
relatively high number density with hence non negligible correlations between
the particles or bacteria. The investigator and collaborators introduce a new
numerical scheme to calculate those correlations. In the case of mean field
games, in addition of "classical" interactions between the particles or agents,
a control on the dynamics is optimized by a central agent. The usual techniques,
propagation of chaos on the joint law for instance, are no more applicable and
we develop a new approach, based on the minimization of N and 1 agent
energies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Systems with a very large number of particles
are ubiquitous in science and engineering. Indeed depending on the context and
the model, the term "particle" may represent very different objects; in the
scope of this project, a particle could for instance be as "simple" as an
electron or ion (particles in a plasma), or more complex like a bacteria, an
economical or social agent or even a very large structure like a galaxy
(dynamics of clusters in astrophysics). Reducing the complexity of such large
systems, for instance by approximating them by Partial Differential Equations,
is a critical step to be able to use them (numerical simulations...). The
project will contribute to the understanding of this phenomenon for a few
important applications: the classical framework of statistical physics,
suspensions of bacteria with critical density, multi-agent systems in economy
and consensus formation. The project also has a direct impact on the education
and future careers of graduate students and will also involve undergraduate
students.