* 1312333
* Scaling Up Success: Using MATE's ROV Competitions to Build a Collaborative Learning Community that Fuels the Ocean STEM Workforce Pipeline
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2021
* Jill Zande, Monterey Peninsula College
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,048,933.00

The Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE) Center at the Monterey Community
College in collaboration with Washington State University is engaging in a
scale-up study of the remote operated vehicle (ROV) program to new audiences of
middle and high school students and teachers. Using a train the trainers
approach, the MATE ROV project is conducting at least 45 regional professional
development workshops in 15 regions for a total of 500 teachers. Scaling-up the
project also includes the development of regional teacher leaders who have the
resources developed from previous funding and the support from MATE through
materials, administrative processes, and professional development to expand the
implementation of the MATE ROV competitions. The project outcomes include
increased student interest in STEM and STEM careers as well as increasing their
knowledge of STEM content and how engineering and science work together to solve
real-world problems. Additional outcomes include increasing parental involvement
to support and encourage students to continue with STEM studies and careers and
the implementation of professional development, instructional resources and
mentoring to increase teacher capacity to engage students in the MATE ROV
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expanding the focus of the
MATE ROV from an after school program to connect the robotics focus of the
program to the Next Generation Science Standards and create a series of
curricula experiences across the middle grades complete with instructional
videos. An online resource for parents is one mechanism that the project is
developing to support parental involvement, and the structuring of regional
parental advisory boards is a second. The project is conducting a longitudinal
study of the students who participate in the MATE ROV competitions. The project
is connecting the MATE ROV AlumniWeb to the National Student Clearinghouse to
track students from the secondary experiences with the program into their
college majors and matriculation. The project is also studying the ways that the
variation of the MATE ROV professional development is evident throughout the 15
regional hubs of the project to provide a better understanding of how a
technology-rich program moves to scale.