* 1312125
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation - Proof-of-concept testing and technology translation for engineered nanocomposites
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Rajesh Dave, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 11/30/2015
* USD 179,949.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating innovative
surface modification science with fluid-bed coating technology for producing
fine drug nano-composite particles to fill current technology gap of lack of
scalable and economically feasible methods to produce highly bioavailable drug
composite particles that do not have a gritty mouth-feel, which is undesirable
for patients with swallowing disorders. The translated science-based technology
has the following unique features: very fast dissolution even for poorly water
soluble drugs, a size small enough for incorporation into orally disintegrating
dosages, and excellent flow and handing properties that provide exemplary
performance using conventional robust processing methods that lead to efficient,
scalable and cost-effective manufacturing when compared to the leading competing
technologies such as spray drying and hot-melt extrusion for bioavailability
enhancement, or freeze-dried fast disintegrating dosage forms in this market
space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project accomplishes this goal by combining
fundamental aspects of surface science to reduce cohesion of carrier particles
and to stabilize nano-drug particles, which are 300 times smaller than the
diameter of human hair, to preserve their large surface area resulting in a
proof-of-concept highly bioavailable drug composite particle that is taste-
masked, and is less than 50 microns, i.e., smaller than the diameter of human
hair. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership engages Catalent Pharma Solutions, a
contract manufacturer, along with their pharmaceutical company clients to
provide guidance in the technological as well as regulatory aspects of orally
disintegrating dosage forms and other aspects such as patentability, market
research, financing, and commercialization as they pertain to the potential to
translate the science based technology along a path that may result in a
competitive commercial reality. The final output of the commercialization is a
robust manufacturing platform that is applicable to any poorly water soluble
drug and forming fast dissolving drug-composite small particles that can be used
in chewable tablets, syrups, strip-films or lozenges, targeting patients having
swallowing disorders, thus increasing patient compliance. As a reference, the
majority of newly discovered drugs are almost insoluble in water; while the
market for dysphagia alone is currently over $3B/year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential economic impact is expected to be well over $100M/year in the next
five to fifteen years, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the
pharmaceutical sector, since nanostructured particulates are produced via
methods that have scalability, reproducibility, low cost, and high-yield, and
the products will have better bioavailability, are smaller and are essential
components of next generation pharmaceutical manufacturing. Similarly, it can
have an impact on other industries; such as; food, agrochemical, nutrient
delivery, cosmetics, as well as dental and bio-materials. The societal impact,
long term, will be in robust manufacturing platform that leads to products that
provide improved patient comfort, hence compliance, and improved performance
using simple, cost-effective processes, as well as have the reduced-risk of
using nano-particles through lack of associated exposure to factory workers.