* 1312344
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics and pattern formation of nonlocal collective motion and assembly
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2013,07/31/2015
* James von Brecht, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2015
* USD 69,191.00

The investigators of this project will study the dynamics and pattern formation
of particles or agents that evolve under non-local collective motion laws.
Specifically, the PI and co-PI will study systems in which collective behavior
manifests non-trivial co-dimension. The mathematics of such particle systems
pervades many disciplines, ranging from physics, chemistry and biology to
control theory and engineering. Modern applications in these areas include
protein folding, colloid stability and the self-assembly of nanoparticles into
supramolecular structures. In biology, similar mathematical models help explain
the complex phenomena observed in viral capsids, locust swarms and colonies of
bacteria. The first phase of this project will apply and expand recently
developed mathematical tools to identifiy various physical and chemical
interactions that will naturally produce co-dimension one structures. This has a
direct application to the study of processes, such as the self-assembly of
Polyoxometalate (POM) molecular clusters into spherical supramolecular
structures, in which experimental evidence is overwhelming but a theoretical
understanding of the underlying formation mechanisms is lacking. The PI, co-PI
and their collaborators have made numerous important developments in the
mathematical theory of such mechanisms when the interaction is isotropic. This
part of the project aims to further develop this theory in a manner that will
prove useful to a broad set of researchers in other disciplines. The proposed
research project is fundamentally interdisciplinary in that it derives
mathematical problems from unexplained phenomena in diverse fields such as
chemistry, biology and engineering. The PI and co-PI will apply a broad set of
mathematical tools drawing from dynamical systems, partial differential
equations, mathematical modeling and computational methods to solve several
problems that are subject to active research in these fields, including the so-
called 'designer potential problem' in nano self-assembly. By clarifying which
physical forces drive POM self-assembly and other related phenomena, such as
viral capsid formation, we will provide rigorous solutions to the question of
how to design sub-units that form into these importantstructures.

One of the demonstrated career goals of the PI is to further the inclusion of
underrepresented groups in the field of mathematics. The PI has the personal
experience and critical perspective necessary to serve as a mentor for the
diverse student body at University of San Francisco. Exposing these students
from underrepresented groups to cuttingedge mathematical research, coupled with
faculty mentoring, will inspire many of them to pursue graduate degrees in the
mathematical sciences. The student research supported by this grant will prove
indispensible to the project's recruitment efforts given USF's high proportion
of low-income students who are compelled to work part-time while they pursue
full-time academic degree programs. The PI has a proven track record of
recruiting talented students from underrepresented groups into mathematics and
this grant would allow these activities to continue and expand.