* 1312282
* Bits-2-Bites:  Youth Applying STEM Content and Computational Thinking to Learn about Nutrition and Advocate for Food Justice
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Keith Braafladt, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,199,539.00

Bits-2-Bites is a strategies project that will engage middle school and high
school students in learning to apply computational thinking and computer based
tools to address STEM related community issues. Participants will learn about
the biology and chemistry of food science, nutrition, food production,
environmental sustainability, and how they relate to relevant community health
issues such as the proliferation of obesity and diabetes. Participants will
learn how to apply process skills including design, analysis, and
troubleshooting to complete a service learning project based on sustainable
agriculture. Initial skill building projects for both middle and high school
youth will focus on finding comfort with and interest in computer programming,
using programming languages such as Scratch and C++. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Science Museum of Minnesota's Kitty Andersen Youth Science Center (KAYSC) will
develop two 12-member high school crews (grades 9-12) as participants in the
project who each will receive 350-400 contact hours of instruction per year by
museum staff. By year 3, participants who have completed two years will engage
in self-directed projects. They will also serve as teaching assistants for those
who will have started in years 2 and 3. In addition, four 12- 15 member
volunteer teams composed of 7th and 8th graders at four St. Paul middle schools
will use the Bits-2-Bites curriculum units that the high school students use to
learn about computing focusing on computational thinking and tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure and design of the program are based on youth
development and service learning practices that emphasize: participation that
focuses on depth, continued skill development, and long-term involvement, rather
than occasional short bursts of activity; teams of youth who work closely with
one or more adult museum staff member and come into regular contact with other
museum staff, educators and STEM mentors; progression from skill building to
skill application through hands-on projects that allow them to make positive
contributions to their communities; opportunities to take on greater leadership
and responsibility; individual and as a group reflection; opportunities to build
awareness of community issues and needs, and to share skills and knowledge with
peers, younger children, parents, and professionals; planning for transitions to
college and careers by exploring 2- and 4-year college options, STEM, CSE and
ICT careers and work places, and what is needed to get there; fostering a
community a youth who support one another?s interests in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both modules, those for middle school and high school
students, include discussions of food justice, site visits, and interaction with
professional role models. The museum is predicting 70% completion of high school
program participants who will spend two full years in the program. The middle
school participants who are exposed to the curriculum are prepared to move into
the full museum based activities. Prepared with relevant experience, the high
school crews develop outreach activities for middle school children and families
that infuse computational thinking into relevant projects such as analyzing
school kitchen food waste and food production and sources within the community.
Their training prepares them to pursue STEM careers. Parents and other community
members also gain exposure to the program and the
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will take place in three phases:
1)training in basic computer programing and how to apply that knowledge to
manipulate basic micro-controllers along with the basics of sustainable
agriculture. Students learn how individual components can be made to work
together to represent a complex system. They apply that knowledge to development
of a sustainable system using the example of aquaponics, a sustainable food
production process; 2) learning how food they eat can be understood as a complex
system, studying school lunches as an example; 3) examine the cultural and
dietary habits in their homes developing a picture of community habits and
sharing the results with the community through visualizations of the data they
have created and presentations to increase the community dialog on patterns of
food choices and community access.