* 1312597
* Molecular Mountains of the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Jonathan Tan, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 12/31/2017
* USD 392,549.00

The majority of stars are born in small clusters with other stars. These
clusters are thus the basic building blocks of galaxies. These clusters start
out as clouds of molecular gas, which turn into stars over millions of years. A
number of fundamental questions about star cluster formation are still debated,
including "exactly how long does it take"? and "how much of the gas in the
clouds turned into clusters stars"?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on their previous
observations of the distribution of molecular clouds, they have argued for
relatively long formation times. With this assumption of slow star formation,
they will compare the types of molecules detected in our galaxy with the
chemical relationships between the molecules. They will match their observations
to find the correct chemical models. They have thousands of hours of previous
observations which they will use to answer these questions. Also they will fully
calibrate the data in a manner useful to other astronomers studying star
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because they have measurements of a large part
of the center of our galaxy, they will relate the chemical structure on small
scales with our galaxy's large scale structure. On the larger, galaxy-sized,
scales there are also many open issues related to the basic question of how star
move from small clusters, and in the process, destroying the molecular clouds
which were the birthplaces of the stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
be integrated into the teaching activities, including additions to the
introductory astronomy course, Discover the Universe, he teaches each year to
hundreds of students at the University of Florida. They will develop a new
public outreach presentation based on this research, entitled "Molecular
Mountains of the Milky Way", which will be presented in local schools and at the
Starry Night public outreach event he helps organize at the Florida Museum of
Natural History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this proposal will directly
contribute towards the training of two Ph.D. students. One of the main research
products will be the molecular line survey data, made publicly available to the
astronomical community via the internet. During this proposal period the PI will
organize an international conference on star formation in Florida, part of which
will be devoted to the results from Galactic plane surveys that connect star
formations to the structure of our Galaxy.