* 1312926
* Stochastic Modeling and Inference of Gene Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Abhyudai Singh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 229,165.00

The environment within living cells is incredibly noisy with biochemical species
randomly bumping and reacting with each other. This inherent probabilistic
nature along with low population counts of cellular species creates considerable
stochastic fluctuations in protein copy numbers over time inside individual
cells. Increasing evidence suggests that this stochastic dynamics plays
important functional roles within cells. Moreover, many diseased states have
been attributed to elevated noise levels in specific proteins. Stochastic
analysis of biochemical processes relies heavily on Monte Carlo simulation
techniques that come at a significant computational cost. In addition, these
techniques do not provide closed-form solutions that enable a systematic
understanding of how stochastic variability is regulated in these systems. This
project will overcome these challenges by developing computationally tractable
methodologies based on moment closure schemes for studying stochastic dynamics
of gene regulatory networks. Various analytical approximations that relate
statistical properties of the system to biologically relevant parameters will be
investigated. Far from being a hindrance, signatures of protein noise levels can
be informative of the underlying gene network topology. This project will build
mathematical techniques that harness quantitative measurements of stochasticity
in protein levels for inferring regulatory interactions between genes and
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological data is being collected at a rapid
rate and innovative methods for analyzing data are critically needed. Advances
in experimental techniques allow measurements of fluctuations in protein levels
in individual cells, which carry useful information to probe interactions
between genes and proteins. In this project, tools exploiting statistical
properties of these fluctuations to characterize cellular processes will be
developed and will be made available for the broad scientific community to use.
Stochastic variability in protein levels has been implicated in bacterial
antibiotic resistance, mutation-independent selection of tumors and driving
pathogenic human viruses, e.g., HIV, into a drug-resistant dormant state. This
research will improve the characterizations of gene networks underlying these
disease systems and thus this research will have a broader impact on medicine.
Many of the results of this project will be incorporated into various courses
offered across different departments providing interdisciplinary training and
research experience to students at the interface of mathematical and biological
sciences.