* 1312654
* Development and Analysis of  Numerical Methods for Fluid Interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* J. Thomas Beale, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 205,605.00

This work concerns numerical methods for material interfaces moving in viscous
fluid flow. Such models are used especially for biological processes on small
scales, in which the interface exerts a force on the fluid. The work to be done
will focus on the efficient computation of surface integrals representing
viscosity-dominated flow, or Stokes flow, and error analysis of finite
difference methods for more general Navier-Stokes flow, such as the immersed
interface method, in which the equations are discretized on a regular grid, with
modifications near the interface to account for the forces. The methods
considered should be at least second-order accurate. In the first project a
relatively simple method will be developed for computing singular or nearly
singular integrals on smooth surfaces, such as the velocity integrals for three-
dimensional Stokes flow, evaluated on or near the surface. This work will
improve and generalize earlier work, in which a standard quadrature of a
regularized integral is combined with corrections found by analysis near the
singularity. This method should be accurate even for grid points near the
surface, allowing more flexibility in computing the motion of the surface. It
could be used as part of a computation for Navier-Stokes flow. In the second
project, error estimates in maximum norm will be derived for finite difference
methods such as the immersed interface method. Recent results of the proposer
showing a gain in regularity for finite difference versions of Poisson or
diffusion equations will be used to clarify the relationship between the
accuracy of numerical solutions and the corrections needed near the interface
and also the choice of time discretization. The work will include convergence
proofs for simplified interface problems with Navier-Stokes flow and maximum
norm stability of the approximate projection on divergence-free vector fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of scientific problems involve moving boundaries
in fluids, such as a drop of one fluid in another, or the motion of an elastic
membrane in living tissue. Numerical study of such problems has special
difficulties, since it is desirable to discretize the fluid variables on a fixed
grid, while the moving boundary must be represented separately, together with
its influence on the fluid motion. It is difficult to discretize the moving
surface in a way that is simple and practical. For Stokes flow, dominated by
viscosity, integral formulations of the fluid variables are widely used. The
proposed method of integration promises to be simpler and more efficient than
standard methods and require less effort with the surface. Thus it could
contribute to the practicality of three-dimensional simulations as the models
become more realistic. The second project emphasizes estimates of maximum
errors, since these are likely to be largest near interfaces. They are less well
developed than estimates in integral norms. Such estimates will be used for
methods such as the immersed interface method, the decomposition of Navier-
Stokes flow mentioned above, and approximate projection methods. Error analysis
of existing numerical methods should improve understanding of their validity and
limitations. It can also show how choices in the methods affect their accuracy
and suggest improvements.