* 1312906
* Geometric Criteria for (In)Stability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Christopher Jones, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Many scientific phenomena involve, in some way, permanent structures such as
waves, patterns or steady fluid flow. These structures occur throughout science,
in particular in such key technological areas as nonlinear optics, oceanic and
atmospheric fluid flow as well as biology. Assessments of the stability of such
structures have thus become a key part of applied mathematical investigations.
There is a dearth of techniques for determining the stability of structures in
spaces of dimension greater than one, including, for instance, the physical
three-dimensional space in which we live. This lack of methodology has severely
hampered the use of mathematical techniques in many application areas and the
work of the investigator and collaborators under this award will address this
important issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the work under this award
will be on criteria for the stability of particular states of a system that are
based on intrinsic features of that state. The approach envisioned by the
investigator rests on a long history of such connections, including the direct
relationships between nodal properties of solutions, or conjugate points of
geodesics, and their Morse indices. The underlying ideas are rooted in dynamical
systems and thus have been almost exclusively in one space dimension. The goal
of this work is to build a viable theory for multi-dimensional domains. The
approach will place the multi-dimensional problem in a dynamical systems context
by introducing a domain sweeping technique that parametrizes the domain with the
boundaries of shrinking domains. A key bridging role between the domain and
solution geometry, on the one hand, and the spectrum of the linearized operator
on the other, is played by the Maslov index. In this multi- dimensional context
aninfinite-dimensional formulation is necessary and this will be further
developed and adapted to the conditions of the specific problems. A particular
focus will be on problems from Bose-Einstein condensates and fluid mechanics.
Sought will be results that relate information about the underlying structure to
the spectrum of the linearization of the dynamic equation. A goal in the
application to Bose-Einstein condensates will be to understand how the
interaction of localized vortices and background optical lattices leads to
instabilities. In the 2D fluid flows, the relation is anticipated to be between
the configuration of the Lagrangian dynamics and the instabilities due to point
spectrum.