* 1312727
* Analysis and computation of partial differential equations in Mechanics and related fields
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Anna Mazzucato, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2016
* USD 239,817.00

Mazzucato 1312727

This project focuses on the analysis of partial differential equations arising
in continuum mechanics and related fields, such as statistical mechanics and
probability. Both theoretical and computational aspects are addressed. Its aim
is to help advance our understanding of physical phenomena in many-particle
systems and impact real-life applications. Three main areas of investigation are
considered. (a) Incompressible fluid mechanics: boundary layers for linearized
flows and helically-symmetric flows are studied. (b) Elasticity: the principal
Investigator continues to model elasticity in polyhedral domains and to develop
suitable numerical methods, in particular the Generalized Finite Element Method
(GFEM); she is investigating how to obtain size estimates of inclusions from
boundary measurements. (c) Solution methods for evolution equations: the
investigator is further developing Green's function methods for parabolic
equations, in particular Fokker-Planck equations; she also continues her work on
a wave-packet solution method for variable-speed scattering problems, with
applications to seismic imaging. Common themes, such as the investigation of the
effect of boundaries and interfaces on continuum systems, and the use of
specific techniques, such as scaling and localization, make the project a
cohesive research program. Employing refined analytical tools, microlocal and
harmonic analysis in particular, is warranted by the complexity of the problems
studied, which feature nonlinearities in the partial differential equations,
ill-posedness and instabilities, and singular geometries.

The aim of this project is to advance our knowledge of complex phenomena
occurring in the mechanics of fluids and elastic solids, by utilizing a rigorous
analysis of the underlying mathematical models and by devising efficient, yet
accurate, computational tools to simulate them. Some of these phenomena, such as
turbulence in fluids, are a common occurrence, yet they still lack a thorough
understanding. A relevant trait of the project is the interplay between
theoretical and computational methods, with each providing its own avenue for
investigation that can shed light on different aspects of the same phenomenon.
Progress on each part of the project has the potential to impact real-life
applications. Vorticity created by viscous flows at container walls enhances
mixing and transport in fluids with applications for example to climate and
environmental modeling, and industrial processes (part a) of the project).
Helically-symmetric flows arise, for instance, in modeling of blood flow (part
a)). Problems with interfaces appear naturally in a variety of applications,
such as determining the elastic properties of composite materials and modeling
of biological processes (part(b) of the project). Imaging by elastic waves is
used as a non-invasive medical diagnostic tool and in probing the earth's
interior, that is, in seismic imaging, for earthquake prediction (parts (b) and
(c) of the project). Parabolic equations of the Fokker-Planck type arise in
probability with applications, for example, to plasma physics and economics
(part (c) of the project). The project provides training opportunities for both
graduate and undergraduate students.