* 1312562
* Engaging Non-Science Majors in Inquiry through Backwards Faded Scaffolding Approach to Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Stephanie Slater, Capitol College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 197,063.00

National reform movements are calling for undergraduate science survey course
faculty to design and deliver science instruction using the principles of
inquiry. This astronomy education project is iteratively developing, field-
testing, and disseminating an inquiry-oriented teaching approach framed by the
notions of "backwards faded-scaffolding" as an overarching theme for
instruction. In this approach, students are guided through a number of
scientific projects, with reduced guidance in each successive project. The
reduction starts from the end of the process and works backwards, and thus the
term 'backwards-faded scaffolding.'

This project is transformative in that faculty need instructional materials that
focus on teaching science as inquiry while at the same time are practical to
implement. The objectives of the project are to: create effective and easy-to-
implement curriculum materials based on contemporary teaching methods designed
to increase non-science majoring undergraduates' and pre-service teachers'
abilities to participate in scientific inquiry; determine the extent to which
learners' participation in inquiry using "backwards faded scaffolding" impacts
their conceptual understanding of astronomy and of scientific inquiry; and
widely disseminate the results and resources developed in this project to the
astronomy teaching community through professional conference presentations,
refereed publications, an interactive web site, and through a collaborative
partnership with a publishing house. The evaluation plan is to use a single-
group, multiple-measures, quasi-experimental design to explore students'
enhanced content knowledge of science and inquiry.

The INTELLECTUAL MERIT of the project is to iteratively create and
systematically evaluate an innovative approach to inquiry-oriented teaching in
order to contribute to the research literature on undergraduate STEM education.

The BROADER IMPACTS are to provide professors with new, adaptable, and well-
evaluated tools for working with undergraduate non-science majors and future
teachers where large numbers of diverse students are successfully conducting
meaningful and fully supported scientific investigations.