* 1312966
* Multiscale  Models of Bacterial Chemotaxis and Phase Segregation in Axons
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Chuan Xue, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This project investigates fundamental questions of a multiscale nature in two
biological systems. The first topic concerns chemotaxis of cell populations,
which is the directed movement of cells in response to external chemical
signals. Current continuum models for chemotaxis of cell populations using
partial differential equations are phenomenological and do not match recent
experimental data. This research investigates this issue in the context of
bacterial chemotaxis, and derive continuum models from cell-based models based
on the detailed biochemistry of cell signaling. This task involves development
of new multiscale methods that deal with nonlinearities of single-cell dynamics
and overlapping time scales. The second topic concerns the dynamics and
organization of the axonal cytoskeleton. A fundamental question in axonal
physiology is to understand how the structure of the axonal cytoskeleton is
developed and maintained in health and how it gets perturbed in diseases. This
research investigates the mechanisms that lead to the segregation of axonal
cytoskeletal molecules observed in diseases using multiscale models, and will be
conducted in close collaboration with experimentalists.

Complex biological systems involve multiple space and time scales. To completely
understand these systems, multiscale models and methods are essential tools.
This research addresses questions of a multiscale nature in two biological
systems by developing new multiscale models and methods. The first concerns the
directed cell movement in response to chemical signals, which is crucial in
bacteria-induced infections, bioremediation, wound healing, cancer metastasis,
and embryonic development. This research will lead to quantitative, mechanistic
models for directed movement of bacterial populations. These models will enhance
our ability to predict and control health problems such as bacteria-associated
infections and environmental problems such as bioremediation. The resulting
multiscale analysis framework is broadly applicable to study collective movement
of other types of cells, ants, birds and animals, and thus this research has
far-reaching impacts in medicine and ecology. The second topic concerns the
physiology of axons, which are long thin projections of nerve cells. Maintaining
the regular shape and organization of the axonal cytoskeleton is critical for
the normal functioning of neurons. How is the normal organization of the axonal
cytoskeleton maintained and established in health? How is it perturbed in
neurodegenerative diseases? This research investigates these questions using
multiscale models that integrate the detailed biology of the axonal cytoskeletal
molecules. This research will shed light on the underlying mechanisms of many
neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. This project
will also involve cross-disciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate
students with diverse backgrounds at the interface between multiscale modeling
and wet-lab experiments.