* 1312181
* Isoperimetric Inequalities
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Erwin Lutwak, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2017
* USD 468,747.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS 1312181, Principal Investigator: Erwin
Lutwak, Deane Yang, Gaoyang Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
develop both extensions and duals of the classical Brunn-Minkowski theory. One
of the PIs has shown that for each p greater than 1 there is an Lp Brunn-
Minkowski theory. Thus far, most work on this new theory has been limited to p
greater than 1, but the PIs together with Boroczky have made progress in the
singular case of p = 0. Just as the classical Minkowski problem is a central
focus of the classical Brunn-Minkowski theory, its Lp analogue is central to the
new theory. For p greater than 1, there has been significant progress on the
elliptic PDE now known as the Lp Minkowski problem. A complete solution of the
zero-th Minkowski problem would have a profound impact on a number of important
questions. The PIs in collaboration with Boroczky have established both
necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of solutions to this
logarithmic Minkowski problem when the prescribed "data"' is even. They have
also established uniqueness in two dimensions. Proving uniqueness in higher
dimensions is part of the proposed work. One particular focus of the PIs'
research is the development of affine isoperimetric inequalities. Over the years
the PIs have established a number of sharp affine isoperimetric inequalities and
their analytic counterparts. New methods recently developed by the PIs will be
used to extend earlier work. While the Brunn-Minkowski theory has been an
effective tool for solving a variety of basic inverse problems involving data
about projections of convex bodies onto subspaces, the study of a dual Brunn-
Minkowski theory initiated by one of the PIs is ideal for dual questions
involving intersections of convex bodies with subspaces. The PIs have recently
discovered new dual curvature measures that arise naturally within the dual
theory and believe that newly developed tools within the dual theory can be used
to solve the PDE that is the natural dual analogue of the Christoffel-Minkowski
problem. An intensive effort to solve this PDE is a central part of the work
proposed. Previous work of the PIs has indicated fascinating parallels between
information theory and both the Lp Brunn-Minkowski theory and its dual. The PIs
will continue to investigate connections between a subject that is associated
with Electrical Engineering and one that is considered pure
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Brunn-Minkowski theory and its dual are
the core of convex geometric analysis and are the foundation of Geometric
Tomography. Geometric Tomography aims at retrieving information about a
geometric object from data about its lower dimensional sections or projections.
It has had and clearly will continue to have practical applications in science,
engineering, and even medicine (think CAT scan machines). While isoperimetric
inequalities go back to the ancient Greeks, many of the newer ones are
applicable in geometry, analysis, and even engineering. The new inequalities and
theories that the PIs propose to establish (and extend) should result in the
development of mathematical tools that offer potential new applications to
mathematics, science, and engineering.