* 1312423
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Modeling of Biological Processes in Edematous Tissue
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Karen Uray, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2016
* USD 147,000.00

This project aims to better understand the processes behind the decrease of
intestinal muscle contractility resulting from intestinal interstitial edema.
Intestinal edema refers to the excess accumulation of fluid in the interstitial
spaces of the intestinal wall tissue. The project focuses on two separate
scales. At the continuum scale, the intestinal layer is modeled as an
inhomogeneous poroelastic medium that undergoes finite deformation. Intestinal
transit is modeled as Navier-Stokes flow within the intestinal cavity and is
coupled to the intestinal wall model in a fluid-structure interaction algorithm.
Coupling conditions include the continuity of normal fluid flux, the balance of
forces and the Beavers-Joseph-Saffman condition, across the interface between
the lumen and intestinal layer. At the microscale, a detailed biochemical-
mechanical mathematical model of a smooth muscle cell is developed. The model
focuses on the regulation of myosin light chain and its phosphorylation, which
have been linked to intestinal muscle contractility. Experimental data from both
animal and cell models are to be incorporated into the development of the
mathematical models at both scales.

Intestinal edema can arise in patients with gastroschisis, inflammatory bowel
disease and cirrhosis, as well as in patients receiving resuscitative fluid
treatments after traumatic injuries. The main problem for a patient with
intestinal edema is that the condition causes ileus, a decrease in intestinal
transit due to decreased intestinal smooth muscle contractility. Decreased
intestinal transit often leads to longer hospital stays and recovery times for
patients and in extreme cases can be fatal. The link between edema and ileus is
unknown, and is thus the motivation for developing mathematical models to
explore this phenomenon. Results from this project will improve understanding of
edema formation and its effect on intestinal muscle contractility and intestinal
transit. The models will be utilized to simulate treatment scenarios to assist
experimentalists with their goal of preventing ileus when edema forms. There are
only a few drugs available to treat ileus; they have limited effectiveness and
all target the enteric or central nervous system. This research will be
integrated into a Summer math program for high school students. In addition, an
important aspect of this collaborative project is the interdisciplinary research
experience the postdoctoral fellows and students will obtain as a result of
their interactions with the mathematicians and experimentalists.