* 1312708
* Formally determined inverse problems for hyperbolic PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Rakesh Rakesh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2017
* USD 88,268.00

In geophysics one is interested in recovering the acoustic properties of a three
dimensional medium from the medium response when probed by an acoustic wave. The
property of the medium is modeled by a function of three variables, loosely
called the potential, and the acoustic wave satisfies the wave equation with the
zeroth order term coefficient being the potential. The PI proposes studying two
specific problems. In the first problem, the medium is probed by a plane wave
and the medium response is measured in the same direction as the incoming wave,
over a long enough time interval. This data is measured for incoming waves from
all possible directions (the back-scattering data) and the goal is to recover
the potential. The PI proposes studying the special case when the potential is
analytic in the angular variables, by adapting Volterra type methods and using
scales of Banach spaces - an idea used by Romanov on a different inverse
problem. The PI proposes also using a time domain interpretation of the back-
scattering problem which he has already used successfully to obtain new
uniqueness results for certain restricted classes of potentials. In the second
problem, the medium is excited by a point source placed at the center of the
medium, the medium response is measured at the boundary for a long enough time
period, and the goal, again, is the recovery of the potential. There are one
dimensional versions of this problem, even with interior measurements, which
remain unsolved with the chief difficulty being that the response is measured at
points away from the source so that Volterra type methods such as layer
stripping or downward continuation are not applicable. The PI proposes studying
these problems with the help of Carleman estimates using results of Ionescu and
Klainerman which give easily verifiable conditions for constructing radial
Carleman weights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be of interest to people
working in geophysics, oil prospecting, medical imaging, fiber-optics, and in
any area where one wishes to determine the properties of the interior of a
medium from the response of the medium, measured on the boundary, to an acoustic
wave generated at the boundary. The PI will supervise graduate students who will
work on these problems towards a PhD and possible careers in the energy
industry, the medical devices industry or in academia. Undergraduate students
may study discrete versions of these problems in one space dimension. The
results of this work will be disseminated through graduate seminars,
publications in research journals, and presentations at conferences and
introductory workshops for non-specialists.