* 1312490
* Collaborative Research: Trait evolution and the stability of ecological communities
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Casey terHorst, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2017
* USD 297,852.00

Environmental changes, such as those associated with global climate change, can
affect the stability of natural communities. These same changes may also affect
how species evolve, especially on very short time scales (months to decades).
The goal of this project is to understand how to measure and predict the
stability of natural communities, particularly when species evolve in response
to environmental changes. While ecological and evolutionary processes were
traditionally not studied together, there is mounting evidence that these
processes interact and affect present-day communities (i.e. eco-evo feedbacks).
A fundamental challenge facing evolutionary ecologists is to determine the
extent to which these eco-evo feedbacks affect species abundances and the
stability of communities. This project tackles this challenge by developing a
mathematical framework for analyzing eco-evo feedbacks, and applying this
framework to species in a natural community. Specifically, the investigators
will use pitcher plant communities to evaluate the applicability of the
mathematical framework and to provide an empirical basis for extrapolating
theoretical results to other natural communities. These combined theoretical and
empirical efforts will provide insights into when eco-evo feedbacks stabilize or
destabilize ecological communities.

Understanding eco-evo feedbacks is particularly important in ecosystems where
human activities are a dominant ecological and evolutionary force. Society
depends on many ecosystem services, in the form of food, medicine, and energy,
which in turn depend on the stability of natural communities. In analyzing the
role of eco-evo feedbacks on community stability, the project will provide a
framework to better understand how ecosystems respond to anthropogenic
disturbances and how to potentially minimize their impact on ecosystem services.
This project will also support multiple outreach activities to K-12 education.
Particularly, the investigators on this project will continue their extensive
work with the California State Summer School for Mathematics and Science
(COSMOS) at Davis, the GK-12 program to develop Data Nuggets for use in K-12
classrooms, and continued outreach to a number of organizations aimed at
promoting STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) education for
young women at Davis. Undergraduate students will be supported by this project
and recruiting efforts will target traditionally underrepresented groups in the
sciences by interfacing with Biology Undergraduate Scholars Program (BUSP), the
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP), the McNair Scholars,
and the California Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP) at Davis.