* 1312430
* Multi-Component Fermi Gases in a Honeycomb Lattice
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Kenneth O'Hara, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This research program will use ultracold atoms to emulate, with precise
experimental control, the behavior of electrons in graphene, a technologically
interesting allotrope of carbon, and that of fundamental particles (e.g. quarks
or leptons) governed by the laws of special relativity and quantum mechanics. In
doing so, this program can elucidate open questions regarding the equilibrium
and dynamical behaviors of such systems when comprised of many particles that
strongly interact. To achieve this, ultracold lithium-6 atoms will be confined
in an optical lattice potential formed from interfering laser fields which
produce a honeycomb intensity pattern through which the atoms move. This lattice
potential mimics that experienced by electrons in graphene which move through a
honeycomb lattice of carbon ions. At a particular filling fraction of the
lattice sites, the low-energy excitations of the system are governed by the laws
of relativistic quantum mechanics but with an effective speed of light that is
orders of magnitude smaller, making the direct observation of relativistic
quantum dynamics experimentally feasible. Phenomena to be studied include Klein
tunneling, Veselago lensing, chiral symmetry breaking, and the effect of
interactions and disorder on particle mobility. These phenomena are relevant
both for understanding electron transport in graphene and elucidating
fundamental predictions of relativistic quantum mechanics.

The investigations of transport (including the role that interactions and
disorder play) and mechanisms for opening a bandgap in a two-dimensional
honeycomb lattice can potentially aid the development of nanoelectronic devices
based on graphene such as ultra-high speed transistors and novel electron optics
devices. The opening of a bandgap due to interactions will also provide insight
into chiral symmetry breaking and mass generation in quantum chromo-dynamics. In
carrying out this research, undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researcher associates will be trained in the use of modern
technology, analytical thinking, scientific writing and giving clear oral
presentations. This research program will continue to recruit students from
demographic groups underrepresented in the sciences.