* 1312525
* Materials World Network, SusChEM: Control of Interfacial Chemistry in Reactive Nanolaminates (CIREN)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Yves Chabal, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 416,035.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This US/France collaborative project funded by the
Division of Materials Research will focus on fundamental studies of a novel
class of sustainable reactive composite nanolaminates containing a metal
(commonly aluminum) and metal oxide (commonly copper oxide, iron(III) oxide, and
zinc oxide). The materials attracted great interest in the energetic material
community since they are characterized by a high energy and power density
(superior to supercapacitors), and are low cost and safe, useful for micro-
thermal sources, micro-actuators and enablers for environmentally clean primers,
miniature safe detonators, in-situ welding and soldering, and also chemical
neutralization agents. Yet, interfaces play a critical role during the synthesis
and the utilization of these reactive layered nanostructures. The formation of
interfacial layers is not only poorly understood but uncontrolled at present. A
fundamental understanding of the formation and role of these aluminum/metal-
oxide interfacial layers would not only bring control of such systems, but also
be transformative for fundamental and practical advances in this field. This
project aims at developing an atomic-level understanding of the interface
formation process between Aluminum/Metal-oxide by combining in-situ spectroscopy
and imaging with Density Functional Theory calculations for a variety of
deposition methods. To this end, model surfaces and atomically precise
deposition methods (e.g. atomic layer deposition) will be used to derive
detailed atomic information, in combination with nanopatterning processes to
quantify the contribution of the interfacial layers for both the reaction
kinetics and the stability at low temperatures. Deposition/synthesis issues
specifically associated with highly reactive materials are unraveled by the
development of novel theoretical methods coupled with extensive and unique in
situ characterization methods. Thermal characterization techniques combustion
tests combined with high resolution imaging and x-ray diffraction will be used
to quantitatively evaluate the role of such interfaces in operating conditions.
This project constitutes a first step in understanding the role of interfaces in
reactive hetero-structures. &lt;br/&gt;Aluminum, copper, iron and zinc are all
widely available and recyclable resources and common materials in
microelectronics. These Aluminum/metal oxide nanolaminates are therefore
sustainable, totally safe and not toxic for the environment and human health,
requiring no hazardous substances and releasing no pollutant chemicals for their
productions. The social, environmental and economic benefits are clear since
these nanomaterials and nanostructures will contribute to reducing the use of
many dangerous and polluting energetic materials (containing lead salt for
example or synthesized using polluting chemistry). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Reactive materials are critical for defense and
energy. Ultra-thin layers of reactive materials, called reactive composite
nanolaminates (e.g. aluminum and copper oxide), have attracted great interest in
the energetic material community since they are characterized by a high energy
and power density and are low cost and safe, useful for miniature thermal
sources, actuators, detonators, and chemical neutralization agents. Most
investigations have focused on the relationship between the structure and
thermal properties of these reactive and metastable nanolaminates. Yet,
interfaces play a critical role during their synthesis and utilization. The
nature of interfaces is not only poorly understood but uncontrolled at present.
A fundamental understanding of the formation and role of these interfacial
layers would not only bring control of such systems, but also be transformative
for fundamental and practical advances in energy and defense fields. By
combining growth, characterization and theoretical studies, this project
provides the foundation towards the design of future tailored reactive
nanostructures by interface optimization using atomically precise technologies.
It establishes a bridge between the fields of reactive materials and solid state
and material chemistry. It provides a multidisciplinary environment for the
students, besides the benefits of cultural exchange. There is a focused
integration of the research topic into educational programs (graduate courses,
tutorials, certificates) both in the US and in France. At UT Dallas, this
project engages underrepresented minority and women graduate students, and is a
backbone for targeted outreach within the greater Dallas area. It supports
existing programs developed by the UT Dallas Office of Diversity and Community
Engagement, and programs to mentor and engage undergraduates in research such as
the Academic Bridge and the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
programs.