* 1312168
* Going Green! Middle Schoolers Out to Save the World (MSOSW)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Tandra Tyler-Wood, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,021,412.00

The project aims at helping middle school students understand the relationship
between energy, economics, and climate change by monitoring home-energy
consumption. Students use energy-monitoring equipment to assess the amount of
stand-by power consumed by their home appliances and entertainment devices when
these units are powered off. Service-Learning is the theoretical foundation
underlying the project, which is based on a student empowerment model that
values their contributions to solve problems. The project seeks to investigate
the necessary conditions to expand learning opportunities and outcomes from a
previous project with sixth graders in new learning environments with diverse
ethnic groups, rural areas, alternative schools, and different climate zones.
The scale-up plan (Dede, 2006) addresses depth (deep belief change),
sustainability (maintaining the innovation over time), spread (diffusion of the
innovation to a large number of classrooms), shift in reform ownership (comes to
be owned and maintained by the local school), and evolution (project revision by
a reflective community of practice over time). To accomplish its goals, the
University of North Texas partners with Numedeon Inc. to provide curriculum
development services through Whyville, a learning-based virtual environment
about the science and mathematics of energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
research question is: What are the necessary conditions to scale-up the positive
impacts of STEM content knowledge, dispositions, and affinity for careers from a
previous project to a wider audience of diverse populations and learning
environments representative of the national student population? The setting of
the project is 24 middle schools in seven states (Maine, Vermont, Virginia,
North Carolina, Louisiana, Texas, and Hawaii). The G-Power, version 3.1, is used
to estimate power of the proposed analyses using individual repeated measures
ANOVA analyses. Assuming the projected sample size of 1,400, with รก=0.05 and
ES=0.05, power is estimated at 0.84. In Year 1, teachers (n=8) and students
(n=192) will be the treatment group, while 8 new classrooms with the same sample
sizes will be the comparison groups. In Year 2, teachers (n=16) and students
(n=384) will be the treatment group, and 8 classrooms will be the comparison
groups. In Years 3 and 4, treatment groups will consist of teachers (n=24) and
students (n=576), and comparison groups will include teachers (n=16) and
students (n=384). The impact of the project is analyzed at the student and
classroom levels using a quasi-experimental design. To reduce the risk of
confounding variable due to individual differences, each student from the
comparison group will be matched with a corresponding student from the treatment
group using propensity score matching techniques. The project performs a
logistic regression analysis to produce a propensity score for each subject
using a weighted combination of covariates chosen for the theoretical influence
that they could have on the systematic differences between the treatment and
control groups. Treatment and comparison classrooms are also matched so that
subsequent analyses may be performed at the classroom level. Because sample
sizes are small, the project use covariates, including school location, school-
level SES, percentages of students by gender, and average science achievement to
match closely equivalent classrooms in the treatment and comparison groups. Data
gathering using valid and reliable instrumentation includes (a) the STEM
Semantics Survey, a 25-item semantic differential instrument containing five
scales assessing perceptions of Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics; (b) a Likert-type Career Interest Questionnaire of 12 items on
three scales; (c) a second Likert-type instrument from the TIMSS 2007
Mathematics Study (IEA, 2007); (d) the National Geographic Vampire Power Quiz to
assess STEM content gain; and (e) the Career Aspirations Survey to detect
changes due to project activities (Nolte &amp; Harris, 2010). Data are analyzed
at the matched-student and classroom levels using within-subjects analyses.
Differences between measures collected before and after participation in the
project activities are analyzed to determine the level of impact that the
project has on participants. Data interpretation strategies include quantitative
data analysis techniques, such as repeated measures analysis of variance for
comparing gains by treatment students to gains by comparison students. Also
employed are Hierarchical Linear Modeling to separate out the differential
effects of the intervention at differing school sites, as well as multivariate
techniques, such as General Linear Modeling for comparisons of the time series
(three-point) growth lines of treatment students to the same time-series points
for trend lines of the comparison groups. Qualitative data gathering strategies
from interviews and surveys data by site, date, and project objective are used
to explain the why-type of questions emerging from quantitative data analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project outcomes are: (a) a research-informed and field-
tested prototype focused on energy conservation for middle school students; (b)
data on the knowledge, skills, and dispositions needed by middle school students
to become stewards of Planet Earth; (c) relevant instructional materials; and
(d) a set of valid and reliable instruments.