* 1312548
* Materials World Network:  Fundamentals of Peptide Materials -- Experimental and Simulation Probes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* M. Scott Shell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 286,881.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network award from the
Division of Materials Research to the University of California, Santa Barbara
(UCSB) will support a collaborative computational/experimental project to obtain
a fundamental understanding of peptide-peptide interactions. This study combines
state-of-the-art atomic force microscopy (AFM) hand-in-hand with advanced
molecular simulation studies to obtain atomic-scale insights into peptide-
peptide interactions and, in particular, their ability to mediate interactions
at solid/liquid interfaces. Using a uniquely flexible model peptide repeat
scaffold, precisely controllable sequences and numbers of interacting peptides
will be examined, whereby interactions and cooperativities can be tuned with
exacting control. Targeted mutations will vary hydrophobicity, charge, and
backbone flexibility. Detailed AFM measurements will be compared to molecular
pictures developed by equilibrium, quantitative all-atom simulations that probe
true underlying, equilibrium interaction landscapes. In particular, the balance
between hydrophobic and charge interactions and the effect of cooperative,
multi-peptide interactions will be studied in a systematic and hierarchical
manner. Simulations will be performed at UCSB, while experiments will be
conducted in the group of collaborator Dr. Markus Valtiner at Max-Planck-
Institut fur Eisenforschung GmbH in Dusseldorf, Germany.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Peptides have emerged as
an important class of biocompatible, environmentally friendly, sustainable
material alternatives. They can be engineered as tissue scaffolds, biosensors,
drug delivery agents, sacrificial templates for nanomaterials, and surface
decorants that impart protecting, hydrophobic, antibiotic, or adhesive
capabilities. However, their rational engineering is limited by lack of a
detailed understanding of the ways in which their many distinct molecular
interactions act in concert or competition to produce complex behavior. This
work aims to provide a new fundamental understanding of peptide interactions
that will establish a baseline for rational peptide engineering strategies.
Thus, this project has the potential to significantly influence the next
generation of peptide materials, including new high-performance and
environmentally friendly nanoscaffolds, glues, and adhesives. This international
collaboration brings together two groups with complementary expertise in
experimental interfacial science and molecular simulation. Moreover, the
research environment will provide outstanding educational opportunities; in
particular, project graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from an
extensive cross-visitation and research rotation plan. As a part of this work,
Prof. Shell will also develop a two-week tutorial course on simulations,
including the results of this study, which will be given during an extended
rotation in Germany.