* 1312159
* Random and deterministic wave-vortex interactions in fluid dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Oliver Buhler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 371,999.00

This is a theoretical and numerical study of nonlinear interactions between
waves and vortices in two subject areas: atmosphere ocean fluid dynamics
relevant to climate science, and plasma physics relevant to tokamak dynamics and
nuclear fusion. Common to these interaction problems are the huge inherent scale
separations between the different dynamical components of the flow, which render
a direct numerical simulation hopeless and which also introduce a stochastic
component to the system dynamics because the small-scale components are only
partially observable. Hence the study involves the mathematical investigation of
various systems of multidimensional nonlinear PDEs using a combination of
asymptotic analysis, stochastic modeling, and numerical computation, all with an
eye towards ultimate applications in the real world that are relevant to climate
science and nuclear fusion. Specifically, the study consists of three projects.
The first considers a special kind of small-scale internal gravity wave in the
ocean and its interactions with mean currents near the sea floor, the second
considers random particle motion induced by deep-ocean internal waves in the
presence of forcing and dissipation, and the third investigates the wave-
turbulence jigsaw puzzle posed by interactions between strong drift waves and
strong zonal flows in the problem of plasma confinement in
tokamaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmosphere ocean dynamics relevant to climate
science contains a vast span of active dynamical scales, from millimeters and
milliseconds associated with sound waves to planetary scales and decades
associated with large-scale ocean circulations, for example. All these scales
are dynamically coupled together through a wide variety of nonlinear
interactions and this is where fundamental mathematical theory can make a
decisive contribution, namely by reducing these interactions into more tractable
and understandable components that can then be simulated with significantly
greater ease. Analogous comments apply to plasma dynamics that is relevant to
fusion research and the behavior of tokamak devices. Hence, results from this
theoretical study may feed into the future design of next generation atmosphere
ocean forecasting systems for weather and climate, which is of great societal
importance, and they should also strengthen the fundamental principles that feed
into the design of nuclear fusion devices in tokamaks.