* 1312707
* Materials World Network: A New Generation of Optical and Magnetooptical Nonlinear Materials Based on Plasmonic Gain Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Alexander Lisyansky, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2018
* USD 299,848.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The main objective of this research is to develop a
theoretical framework capable of making practical recommendations for the design
of new spaser (surface plasmon amplification by stimulated emission of
radiation) based metamaterials with strong nonlinear response to low intensity
optical fields. Since spasers were discovered only recently, their description
has relied on simplistic models. With support from the Division of Materials
Research, this Materials World Network project will carry out analytical and
numerical calculations using a realistic model that takes into account the
anisotropy of interactions of the spaser's component parts, which allow for
excitation of magnetic modes that are essential for metamaterials. Metamaterials
suffer from an unacceptable level of Joule losses. Moreover, for metamaterial
based devices it is necessary not only to overcome these losses but to achieve
exact compensation. The purpose of this research project is to demonstrate that
spasers, as active inclusions in metamaterials and magnetooptical materials, are
ideal candidates for achieving this goal. For metaplasmonics, it is important to
consider not a single spaser but a system of spasers, such as ordered chains and
lattices. The collective interaction of spasers in such a system may
substantially change generation conditions, properties of auto-oscillations, and
may engender new phenomena and instabilities. With Russian and US teams working
in collaboration, the project will study the collective behavior of a system of
spasers in an external electromagnetic field including spaser synchronization by
the external field as well as their mutual synchronization. NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY: In the last decade, the field of quantum nanoplasmonics has experienced
explosive growth due to numerous anticipated revolutionary applications in
optics, which are expected to lead to the future development of ultrafast and
supersmall optoelectronic devices. Nanoplasmonics utilizes outstanding optical
properties of metal nanoparticles, which when combined with a nanoscale active
medium, results in the emergence of a "spaser" (surface plasmon amplification by
stimulated emission of radiation), which is a nanoplasmonic counterpart of the
laser. Since spasers were discovered only recently, their description is based
on simplistic models. In this Materials World Network project, a novel realistic
model of spasers will be developed. This model will reveal new properties of
spasers, such as magnetic modes, which are crucial for applications of
artificial materials having unusual properties "metamaterials." Applications of
metamaterials have been inhibited by high levels of energy loss. The proposed
project will demonstrate that this drawback can be overcome with the help of
spasers. Metamaterials with spaser inclusions provide an ideal low-cost platform
for future optical devices. This study will extend the fundamental understanding
of the light-matter interaction at the nanoscale. This proposal will facilitate
international contacts between US and Russian research institutions. Graduate
and undergraduate students from diverse social, ethnic and national backgrounds
will be involved in the research. They will be exposed to the research at the
collaborating institutions in an effort to acquaint them with complementary
methods, approaches, and techniques that will broaden their scientific horizons.