* 1312027
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant-Trade and Social Boundaries During the Late Neolithic on the Great Hungarian Plain
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* William Parkinson, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2015
* USD 21,258.00

Social and cultural boundaries are highly contested and constantly changing.
They do not always correlate with political boundaries (e.g., the social
boundaries of former Yugoslavia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Hungary, and Romania
often cross-cut political demarcations), thus making the study of early social
boundaries imperative for scholars to understand the modern developments in the
region. With the support of her advisor, Dr. William Parkinson, graduate student
Danielle Riebe will conduct research on the relationship between boundaries and
interaction during the Late Neolithic (5000-4500 BCE) on the Great Hungarian
Plain. Archaeologists often cite interactions between people as a trigger for
emergent social complexity as seen through the dissemination of ideas and
technology and the spread of agriculture and animal domestication. The Plain
offers an ideal location to investigate how interaction, specifically trade,
impacts the formation, alteration, and destruction of social and cultural
boundaries by focusing on two archaeologically defined groups, the Tisza and
Herp√°ly.

In an area that is environmentally homogenous, these groups emerged in the
archaeological record at the beginning of the Late Neolithic and are
differentiated by very distinct material culture, including ceramics and
chipped-stone tools. As people trade these materials, their ideas, traditions,
techniques, and social practices are diffused at the same time. Analytical
techniques, including laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), will be used to assess the composition of ceramic and
chipped-stone material in order to model raw material provenience in relation to
depositional context. By analyzing how objects are created, where they are
constructed, and how they are circulated after production, Ms. Riebe will
explore how communities on the Plain differentiated themselves and their
neighbors.

In addition to investigating theoretical issues concerning the role of
interaction in social developments, this project also makes intellectual
contributions to the field of anthropology by challenging how cultural
boundaries are delineated. Traditionally, boundaries are demarcated based on the
identification of similar or dissimilar cultural material. However, this
simplistic approach does not account for how boundaries persist in spite of
trade, suggesting that more attention be given to the reconstruction of
interactions between peoples in order to understand the relationship between
regional interactions and the process of boundary formation.

This dissertation will contribute to a broader impact by promoting international
collaboration between U.S. and Hungarian citizens and scholars, in the study of
prehistoric boundaries and social change. Findings will be made available to
academics and the public through public lectures, presentations at conferences,
peer-reviewed articles and a monograph. All of the findings and interpretations
from this project will be included in Ms. Riebe's dissertation, and copies of
the dissertation will be provided to all participating institutions. Funding for
this project will allow Ms. Riebe to utilize the skills and experiences that she
has acquired during her academic training to produce a dissertation that is both
anthropologically illuminating and progressive, and that advances the field of
anthropology, our knowledge of prehistoric Eastern Europe, and our understanding
of socio-political developments in the modern world.