* 1312935
* Mathematical Modeling of Biomembranes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Miksis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2017
* USD 255,487.00

Miksis&lt;br/&gt;1312935&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objective of the project is
the development of an effective zero-thickness model for a fluid-embedded lipid
bilayer membrane. The predictions of the model equations are applied to explain
observed features of membrane behavior such as the appearance of sharp edges,
vesicle bursting, and stability of the thin liquid film between membranes
undergoing electrofusion. The dynamics of a compound vesicle are also
considered. Generalizations of the lipid bilayer model to account for pores are
studied. Mathematically, these are challenging free boundary problems exhibiting
complex dynamics. Continuum theory is used to model the motion of the lipid
membrane interface and the surrounding liquids, e.g., the Stokes equations for
the flow in the bulk and a coupled system of partial differential equations
describing the interface evolution and membrane charging. The interface
conditions are related to the jump in stress and electric potential across the
interface and they depend on the geometry of the interface and several physical
constants, e.g., the bending rigidity and membrane capacitance. A computational
method is developed to solve these complicated transient three-dimensional free-
boundary problems. Limiting cases are investigated analytically, using
asymptotic and perturbation methods. Recent experimental work is used as a guide
in selecting our mathematical models. An investigation beyond the range of the
experimental situations is done to fully understand the models and as a guide to
the development of more realistic models of cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
dynamics and stability of biomembranes is at the heart of cellular function. The
electromechanics of biomembranes is an area that is largely unexplored. This
project uses methods from applied mathematics and ideas from continuum theory,
and applies them in a biological setting. This expands the frontiers of these
disciplines. The outcomes of this project directly impact biomedical
technologies that employ membrane electroporation (e.g. gene transfection) or
cell fusion. The interconversion of electric and mechanical energies, one
example being the membrane flexoelectricity (bending in response to electric
fields), could be exploited for novel micro- and nano-fluidic designs. The
project is interdisciplinary and this is very beneficial for the education and
development of the undergraduate and graduate students associated with the
project.