* 1312240
* iDesign: Developing Technological Fluency Through Culturally-Relevant Game Design
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Xiang Fu, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,199,737.00

The iDesign project engages underrepresented youth in creating computer games
that are culturally and socially relevant. By engaging participants in the
culture of information technology, the project is designed to move them from
playing computer games to using tools that require programming and computation
skills. The project culminates in the dissemination of a game-design curriculum
that other after school programs can use.

The project, a collaborative effort between Hofstra University and seven middle
schools in the New York City area, engages 45 6th to 9th grade students and
their teachers in interactive after-school Game Design Clubs. To support the
Clubs, a summer institute introduces teachers to innovative digital pedagogy.
The project also includes a summer leadership academy for students and student
career orientation.

The Educational Development Center will conduct formative and summative
evaluation, addressing several key questions: - What changes occur in student
technological fluency? - Do student attitudes towards-STEM-related careers
change? - How did teachers implement the iDesign curriculum? - Are differences
in teacher implementation related to differential student outcomes?

Global Kids, an organization that develops after-school leadership programs
programs using gameplay, will provide the summer leadership program. The New
York State After-School Network (NYSAN) will disseminate iDesign curriculum and
games. The project will be sustained through the commitment of participating
schools to continue the program and through the dissemination of project
resources.