* 1312221
* Collaborative Research:  Using Spectroscopy of Light Echoes to Observe the 19th Century Great Eruption of Eta Carinae
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Nathan Smith, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 387,682.00

This program will perform a detailed spectroscopic study of the 19th century
Great Eruption of the famous eruptive massive star Eta Carinae, by targeting
light echoes discovered 160 years after the outburst occurred. Eta Carinae is
the prototype for a class of non-terminal eruptions that dominate mass loss in
massive stars and have been linked to violent pre-supernova ejections that yield
the most luminous supernovae in the universe. Our empirical information about
its eruption has been limited to historical accounts of its visual brightness,
since the astronomical spectrograph had not yet been invented when the eruption
occurred. However, our recent discovery of light echoes from Eta Carinae
provides a unique opportunity to get a second look with modern instruments,
because light from the 19th century eruption bounced off nearby dust clouds in
the surrounding star-forming region, reaching us now. By observing the multiple
light echoes we have discovered, we will produce a detailed spectral time-
sequence of the 20-yr long 19th century eruption of Eta Carinae, including brief
brightening events, quiescent times before and between peaks, and long-duration
bright phases. &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the 3D effects in Eta Carinae will help
us model extragalactic events where we lack any spatially resolved information
about geometry. We will directly test and refine theories for the eruption that
involve non-terminal explosions and dense continuum-driven winds above the
Eddington limit. This study is also quite timely: It will inform a rapidly-
growing interest in eruptive transient sources fueled by current transient
surveys and anticipation of LSST, it will provide important clues to the
eruptions from very massive stars that precede the most luminous supernovae
known (in advance of JWST's efforts to detect them at high redshift), and it
will provide direct tests of some very recently proposed models for the eruption
of Eta Carinae itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several aspects to the
broad scientific impact of this program. It will provide unique and timely
information about a famous massive star and its historical event that is a
benchmark for understanding transient phenomena in the universe, eruptions and
explosions associated with non-terminal transient events, and their role in the
lives and deaths of stars. Aided by professional graphics and animations
generated with the help of the STScI public outreach department, we will also
produce a series of YouTube videos of team members explaining key aspects of the
project for a non-specialist audience. Concerning traditionally underrepresented
groups in astronomy, through participation in the NSF-funded CAMPARE exchange
program between Arizona and Cal-Poly Pomona, we will recruit minority
undergraduates to be directly engaged in the research, and the Arizona graduate
student intended to be funded by this grant is female.