* 1312260
* AIR Option 2:  Research Alliance Situational Intelligence for Smart Grid Optimization and Intelligent Control
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,12/31/2020
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2020
* USD 971,770.00

This PFI: AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of situational intelligence and intelligent control technologies to fill real-
time modern power system operation technology gaps. A utility-like control
center will be developed at Clemson University to demonstrate these technologies
and for rapid prototyping of real-time technologies for smart grid control
centers. The technologies have the following market-valued features:
scalability, systems-thinking approach, and grid intelligence that will increase
real-time responsiveness to variable and uncertain generation, changing power
loads and component failures, improve the dynamic and transient behavior of the
power network, improve grid reliability, ensure local and wide area stability,
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and assist human experts in control centers to
respond quickly in a reliable and secure manner compared to the leading
competing technologies in situational awareness and control center energy
management systems (EMSs) in this market domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project accomplishes this transfer to the market by developing situational
intelligence systems and intelligent dynamic stochastic optimal power flow
control for electric power control centers resulting in creation of new jobs in
smart-grid analytics and modern power system operations, commercial products
including intelligent EMSs for control centers, and intelligent decision-making
and control tools with the potential to license, generate royalties, and sustain
an innovation eco-system for developing leading-edge modern power system control
center applications that will result in spinoffs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
partnership engaged to transfer the technologies to the market domain include
independent research laboratories and small businesses who will contribute to
the development of the technology, control center platform vendors who will
integrate the technology, and utilities that will test out the technology. The
potential economic impact is expected to be in several millions of dollars in
the next five years, which will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the
maximum penetration of variable and uncertain generation with enhanced control
center operations capability. The societal impact, both short and long term,
addresses national needs, especially for highly interconnected power system, in
terms of sustainability, security, and reliability. Our nation's critical
infrastructures depend on the electricity infrastructure to be reliable, secure
and efficient. Situational intelligence and intelligent control for the electric
power grid allows for: mitigation or even prevention of blackouts - billions of
dollars saving in losses; high levels of renewable energy penetration; softening
of negative effects of the climate change on the economy; minimization of
impacts and rapid recovery from natural disasters such as earthquakes,
hurricanes and malicious attacks.