* 1312073
* A Strategies Project - Seeding the Future:  Creating a Green Collar Workforce Through Learning about Indoor Urban Farming Technologies and Alternative Energy Sources
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Eric Strauss, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,196,874.00

This project develops an interdisciplinary and transformative in- and out of-
school science education and technology program that engages high school aged
youth and their teachers in 1) the production of food using hydroponics, and 2)
the use of green energy technologies (solar, and wind) to power hydroponic
systems. This distinctive program integrates food production, a novel model of
parental outreach, a focus on green career development, and an authentic reason
(growing their own produce for selling at a market) for learning how and why to
use alternative energy technologies. The project creates an approach to
sustainability in which students not only give back to their community, but are
in a position to provide a continuous revenue stream to the school in order to
operate their indoor urban garden indefinitely. The partnership with the Boston
Youth Environmental Network provides youth opportunities for summer internships
with green energy companies. The project builds upon a learning progressions
model in which youth gradually learn about complex scientific systems and
economic principles throughout their years in the program. Rather than a onetime
experience, youth are engaged in a long-term experience building their knowledge
and skills regarding science, economics, and college preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to impact thousands of students
informally and over 2000 students (in classrooms) directly with a minimum of 60
students receiving focused and in depth learning experiences during the summer
and on weekends during the school year. With the passage of laws encouraging
local schools to partner with local farms, the need for locally grown produce
will increase; in that context, the program brings the farm to the school in a
way that allows food to be grown year round. Thus, a model is developed that any
school or informal learning center could adopt to grow their own food while
simultaneously creating a living and learning laboratory for youth in their own
program.