* 1312963
* Nonautonomous Structured Population Models with Application to Amphibians and Associated Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Azmy Ackleh, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 235,000.00

In this project, the investigators develop a general class of structured models
which consists of a system of first-order partial differential equations coupled
to a system of ordinary differential equations. For this novel class of models,
they will study existence-uniqueness of solutions and develop a framework within
which to compute solutions and estimate parameters, which is necessary to
connect these tools to observed data. In particular, second order finite
difference methods will be developed, which are efficient in computing solutions
of these models with high accuracy. Convergence results for these schemes will
be established. Previous work has demonstrated that models falling under this
general class are successful in describing the dynamics of a green tree frog
population. The investigators will demonstrate that the application of this
class of models can be extended to the spread of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis
(Bd) among amphibians. It has been recently discovered that the symbiont
Janthinobacterium lividum (Jl) provides immunity to this disease for some
species of amphibians through the production of anti-fungal metabolites. The
numerical methods developed during this project will be used to understand the
effects the disease Bd and the symbiont Jl have on the persistence of
amphibians. Further, an important aim of this project is to train Ph.D. students
in the multidisciplinary field of mathematical biology to help carry out the
proposed research.

The decline and extinction of amphibian populations are of immense concern to
the scientific community. Because amphibians travel between terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems, and across different trophic levels, they are often the
first indicators of large-scale environmental degradation caused by climate
change, habitat loss, pollution, and non-native species. For example, introduced
diseases diminish and weaken amphibian populations, which in turn transform the
ecological landscape. The study of amphibians and associated diseases in this
project will result in structured models to understand population and disease
dynamics. The computation of solutions of these models will require novel
numerical methods, which will be developed. The extensive numerical simulations
of the models conducted during this project will provide insight as to how a
program to combat Bd with the judicious introduction of the symbiont Jl might be
carried out most effectively. Furthermore, because of the generalities of the
models developed and the abstractness of the mathematical techniques established
in this project, these tools will undoubtedly be useful to other important
biological problems. Specific examples of models that fall under the proposed
class that have already been developed include: (i) cell dynamics involved in
erythropoiesis, (ii) intra-host dynamics of malaria, (iii) the transmission
dynamics of Mycobacterium marinum (a TB-like bacterium) among fish.