* 1312539
* Materials World Network: A Novel Method for Study of Point Defects in Semiconductors Applied to Solar Cell Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Angus Rockett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 322,721.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Division of Materials
Research, this project consists of collaborative research and educational
activities that will develop a novel semiconductor characterization technique,
photomodulated photoelectron spectroscopy, study and create new understanding of
technologically important semiconductors, and foster international exchange of
researchers. It features a synergistic collaboration between the groups with
complementary skills, Rockett at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
(UIUC), and Suzer at Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. The Bilkent group has
recently introduced a novel enhancement to the well-established technique of
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), to include charge sensitivity. The UIUC
group has excellent overall materials analytical capability and the ability to
fabricate the materials proposed for study. Both groups have complementary
experience with various methods of modeling and have published together
previously. The Rockett group will fabricate complex chalcopyrite semiconductors
used in state-of-the-art photovoltaics as test materials for development of the
technique. Both groups will conduct measurements of the deposited materials
focusing on enhancements in the techniques such as time dependence that can
demonstrate charge carrier dynamics in the materials. Elemental sensitivity
coupled with charge sensitivity will show which defects are responsible for
trapping of minority carriers, which limits device performances. The educational
component of the program focuses on exchange of graduate and undergraduate
students among the collaborating groups, allowing interaction with international
scholars, and giving students the opportunity to attend conferences outside of
their home country, and establishing a long-term research relationship between
the two participating research groups and organizations, based on a preliminary
collaboration already in place. The photomodulated photoemission method is
broadly applicable to many materials science problems in optoelectronics and
provides a unique analytical method that yields understanding not accessible
based on existing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop US expertise in a new method of
analyzing the surface of light-sensitive materials created at the Bilkent
University in Ankara, Turkey. This technique shows which atoms are becoming
charged when light strikes the material, which helps to understand how energy
can be harvested from the material, as in a solar cell, and what limits that
material's performance. The results of the research will enhance understanding
and development of both light emitting (as in solid state lighting) and light
absorbing (as in solar cells) technologies that have been identified as crucial
to the long-term energy independence of the US. The broader impacts of the
program include the applicability of the analytical technique, which will
enhance the development of many technologies in the US involving light emission
or absorption devices. The project will enhance US-Turkish interactions and
intercultural understanding. Through bidirectional exchange of both graduate and
undergraduate students, future technical leaders in the US will become familiar
with an important world culture and a developing economic power in the Middle
East. The project will incorporate women as graduate students to promote gender
equity in science/engineering ("STEM"). The research will support the
development of several novel solar cell technologies with nascent industries in
the US. This can lead to the growth of a major solar cell industry and
significant job creation. At the same time the scientists and engineers trained
under the program will provide skilled employees to these companies that will
foster growth of US industry.