* 1312985
* Observational Investigation of Dynamical and Photochemical Variability in the Venus Middle Atmosphere
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* R. Todd Clancy, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2018
* USD 342,555.00

The atmospheres of Venus and Earth formed in early solar system conditions that
were fairly similar, but ended up very different. Venus's massive carbon dioxide
dominated atmosphere presents substantial observational challenges due to its
expansive vertical extent and distinct regimes of thermal, chemical, and
dynamical conditions. This project is an observational study of the Venus middle
mesosphere (at 70-100 km altitude) and lower thermosphere (100-120 km), regions
characterized by complex chlorine, oxygen, sulfur, and hydrogen photochemistry,
as well as a dynamical transition from retrograde flow (opposite to the planet?s
rotation) at lower altitudes to dayside-to-nightside circulation above. The
Principal Investigator and collaborators will use ground-based and airborne
telescopes, including the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope (JCMT), the Atacama
Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA), and the Stratospheric Observatory
for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) to measure the spatial and temporal distribution
of temperatures, winds, and molecular species. The goals are to constrain (1)
the temporal and spatial variability in chemistry and circulation, (2) the
photochemistry of the mesosphere, and (3) the physics underlying the circulation
and compositional gradients. The broader impact of the project derives from its
contribution to understanding Earth-like planets, which are now thought to be
common around stars other than the Sun; Venus provides the best opportunity to
understand how an Earth-like planet can evolve to an environment very unlike
that of Earth.