* 1312955
* Collaborative Research:  Sensory feedback loops in a swimming lamprey:  Integrating fluid dynamics, body mechanics, and neurophysiology
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Lisa Fauci, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2018
* USD 154,592.00

This project will develop multiscale mathematical models that integrate
neurophysiology, muscle mechanics, and fluid dynamics that govern the swimming
of lamprey, the most basal living vertebrate. The models will be used to develop
and test general principles for how animals manage to move stably and
effectively through complex and changing environments. The PIs have developed
the first mathematical model of a swimming organism to fully couple a
surrounding fluid with a simulated animal. In this project, the PIs will add
simulated nervous and sensory systems, in order to test broad hypotheses for how
animals must respond to perturbations for stable and effective swimming. The
approach of the project is to consider how the dynamics of swimming emerges from
the inherent coupling of all of these elements. The PIs hypothesize that sensory
feedback is necessary to support the locomotor pattern as oscillation frequency
increases, but, at a particular oscillation frequency, mechanical interactions
alone can be sufficient to stabilize the swimmer against both neural noise and
fluid perturbations. To test these hypotheses, the PIs combine two different
classes of mathematical models: (1) a high-fidelity computational fluid dynamic
(CFD) model based upon the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations to estimate
the forces and the motion of the body; (2) coupled oscillator models to describe
the neural circuit that generates the locomotor pattern, called a central
pattern generator (CPG) and its sensory inputs. The CFD model simulates aspects
of the system where the governing equations and parameters are known, while the
CPG models allow us to examine general principles about sensorimotor feedback
for aspects where fewer details are known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All animals
interact with their environment using flexible structures such as hairs,
antennae, fins, limbs, and even their entire bodies, and all of these structures
deform in response to both internal body forces and external environmental
forces. And all animals that move have nervous systems that use electrical
signals to activate muscles to produce force and to respond to sensory inputs
that result from those environmental interactions. To understand how animals
move effectively in the physical world, one must understand the interactions of
many different forces, including forces from passive tissue properties, active
muscular forces, and forces from the external environment. Such an understanding
is critical to the development of next generation prosthetic limbs that enable
adaptive and effective motion in complex environments, and to the progress of
therapies for spinal cord injury that rely on the coupling between the damaged
spinal circuits, the mechanics of legs, and the interaction with the external
world. In this project, the PIs will investigate how the coupling among these
different systems and forces contributes to the dynamics and stability of motion
in a model swimming organism.