* 1312750
* Materials World Network: New Functionality in Complex Magnetic Structures with Perpendicular Anisotropy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Eric Fullerton, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;New functionality in nanomagnetic devices requires
control of magnetic order at the nanometer spatial scale and sub-nanosecond
temporal scale. Many spin-based devices are still in their infancy and a
thorough understanding of the underlying materials and electronic properties and
their effect on device performance will be essential for future applications.
With support from the Division of Materials Research, this Materials World
Network project builds on a strong existing collaboration between the PIs
Fullerton and Lomakin in the US and Ravelosona and Mangin in France and focuses
on the study of magnetization manipulation in novel and complex magnetic
heterostructures with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. The goal of this
project will be on understanding the fundamental physics of magnetically coupled
nanostructured materials and their application for spintronic devices that will
enable energy-efficient magnetic memory, magnetic oscillators and spin logic
devices. In particular, the research team is interested in developing approaches
for actively controlling the response of composite materials through a combined
experimental and micromagnetic approach. Each materials system will be optimized
to enable new phenomena such as low critical currents and ultra-fast reversal,
resonant behavior at the nanoscale and strain modified domain wall motion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;New scientific
discoveries in nano-magnetism are enabling a range of emerging nanotechnologies
in the areas of data storage, memories, information processing and energy
efficiency in computing. Combining nano-magnetism with advances in semiconductor
science and technology, that have until recently ignored the spin of the
electron, it gives rise to the field of spintronics. Spintronics is ushering in
a range of new sensors, memories, logic devices and providing a spin-vision for
the electronics of the future. This Materials World Network project has the
transformative goal to provide the scientific underpinnings for next generation
energy efficient, ultrafast, and ultrasmall spintronic devices. The project will
promote active exchange of students, faculty and researchers between
institutions and student researchers will be exposed to a broad range of
materials challenges using novel and sophisticated equipment. A key component of
the proposal is to foster collaborations between leading international,
industrial, and national user-facility scientists. This will not only strengthen
the scientific excellence and broaden the impact of the research, but it will
also provide important educational and post-graduate career opportunities for
both graduate and undergraduate students. This project will support innovative
and sustainable partnerships between French and US research centers and
institutions of higher education.