* 1312294
* EAGER: Understanding Technological Change from the Map of Capabilities
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Aaron Clauset, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 02/28/2017
* USD 152,500.00

Technology's advance is central to economic growth and development. Furthermore,
solutions for many of the planet's most pressing challenges --economic recovery,
poverty reduction, climate change, sustainability-- require significant
additions to society's technological toolkit. Yet, our ability to quantitatively
model and forecast technological change is insufficient. The most common
perspective on technological change in economics and management science--that it
is a search on a space of technological possibilities--is more of a metaphor
than a modeling framework. And the numerous case studies of particular
innovations do not amount to a formal, quantitative and predictive theory. The
project develops a formal methodology for describing the space of technological
possibilities using a systematic, comparative analysis of U.S. Patent data
spanning 220 years that explicitly accounts for the interdependencies of
technologies at the most basic level. A major outcome of the project is a
detailed "map" of technological capabilities in which potential innovation
pathways are illuminated both visually and mathematically. The project
mathematically formalizes and statistically analyzes this map in a form of
network representation by utilizing and developing tools from mathematics,
physics, biology and computer science. This quantitative and systematic approach
is key to improving our ability to develop a predictive model that can inform
decisions on public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the fundamentalquestions
the project answers are: (1) What is the appropriate "quantum" (fundamental unit
of analysis) of technological capability required to understand invention
activities? (2) How can we best construct a technology "map" that illustrates
the complex interdependencies of these quanta, and that bridges from micro-scale
dynamics to macro-scale patterns? (3) What characteristics define "keystone"
(general purpose) technological capabilities in terms of their position within
the ecosystem? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The technology maps
produced by the project will be available to the public and to policy makers.
This information advances our ability to build a predictive model for technology
forecasting and improves the ability of the US Patent and Trademark Office to
index and monitor patterns in patent activities through time.