* 1312724
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the Reionization of the Intergalactic Medium
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Matthew McQuinn, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2016
* USD 374,140.00

Reionization is the epoch during which intergalactic hydrogen was ionized, the
period when the first galaxies formed and when the intergalactic gas was
significantly heated, to tens of thousands of degrees Kelvin, but despite its
importance, little is known definitively about this phase transition. This
project aims to resolve the impact of self-shielding systems, perhaps the
largest still unquantified uncertainty in current models of reionization,
through a rigorous program of numerical simulations. Prior radiative transfer
simulations did not have the resolution to capture self-shielding systems, and
thus misestimated the total number of recombinations, biasing their predictions
for the duration of reionization.

Starting with a physically motivated model that includes self-shielding regions
and explores parameter space with relatively inexpensive simulations, the work
will use those results to carry out the first simulations with sufficient
resolution to resolve self-shielding systems. Those simulations will verify the
results from the initial work, and will be a resource for statistical studies on
the structure of reionization. This study will understand how the violent
relaxation of gas from photoheating during reionization influences dense gas
and, hence, self-shielding systems, and will generally aid the interpretation of
all observations of the reionization era.

The data set of state-of-the-art reionization simulations will be made public
and can be analyzed by the scientific community. Past work by this team has been
used in many unaffiliated studies and the new results should also be of great
utility. Similarly, the publicly available archive of visualizations will both
educate the public and help to develop scientists? intuition. Supported
undergraduate researchers will be drawn preferentially from under-represented
groups, and the researchers intend public lectures at schools and other venues.