* 1312970
* CAREER: Brain tissue regeneration after stroke
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Ning Zhang, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 09/30/2017
* USD 389,620.00

1055922, Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A damaging or pathological process in adult
brain often results in the disruption of various tissue structures. Persistent
cell dysfunction and poor neural regenerative capabilities at the brain lesion
site and beyond lead to the formation of irregular shaped lesions comprised of
necrotic tissue and/or a fluid-filled cavity that are associated with prolonged
neurological impairment. To date, no effective treatment is available for brain
lesion in clinical settings. Current treatments, which have been focused on
anti-inflammation and neuroprotection with pharmacological agents, have failed
to produce clear improvements in the mortality and neurological outcome, perhaps
due to their inability to structurally regenerate normal brain tissue at the
lesion site. In recent attempts to repopulate the brain lesion site through
neural transplantation, poor survival and functionality of the transplanted
cells were observed due to the ongoing tissue inflammation and the lack of any
supportive tissue structures and vasculatures within the lesion. There is a
compelling need for transformative approaches to functionally regenerate brain
tissue cross lesions. The PI's long-term career goal is to develop novel
biomaterial-based engineering approaches to address life science questions
related to the potential and utilization of stem cells for human tissue
regeneration, with an emphasis on brain tissue regeneration. As a jump-start of
PI's career, this CAREER project aims to develop an injectable hydrogel-based
delivery system to manipulate brain-resident endogenous neural stem cells (NSCs)
for structural regeneration at brain lesion site. Stroke, which shares the
common pathologic sequelae and outcome of brain lesions, will be used as the
model in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall hypothesis is that a
stem cell engineering strategy aiming at functional differentiation of
endogenous neural stem cells to repopulate the stroke lesion zone in the brain
would promote neural repopulation of the lesion cavity, leading to significant
improvement in neurological outcome in stroke patients. Three research thrusts
are proposed. Goal 1: To determine the optimal conditions for neural stem cell
migration in cell culture. Goal 2: To mobilize and site-specifically control
endogenous neural stem cells to migrate to the brain stroke lesion zone. Goal 3:
To induce the differentiation of the recruited endogenous neural stem cells into
functional neural cells in the stroke zone, and promote the functional
integration of the neural cells with the host neural
circuitry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive educational plan is integrated
with the research goals of this CAREER proposal. The PI's educational activities
include: 1) development of google-searchable online tutoring programs that cover
fundamentals in diverse areas of biomedical research to provide unlimited access
from anywhere at anytime by students at all levels and world-wide self-learners;
2) expanding ongoing activities in K-12 outreach with continuing emphasis on the
participation and retention of minority students, women, and students with
disabilities into science and engineering research and educational programs; 3)
establishing a teacher retraining program for high school science teachers to
implement the biomedical educational materials in their own schools; 4)
addressing diversity in science and engineering by merging students with diverse
backgrounds in multidisciplinary projects while actively involving students from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in research; and 5)
maintaining a well-funded graduate and post-graduate mentoring program and
fostering their career development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:
The proposed research will advance science by filling the gap for structural
repair of damaged brain tissue based upon an in vivo tissue engineering concept
using the patient's own brain-resident stem cells. Fundamental paradigms
established in this project will direct future efforts for tissue engineering in
a variety of tissues for functional regeneration. The Clemson University-Medical
University of South Carolina joint bioengineering program provides an
intellectual multidisciplinary environment that fosters interdisciplinary
collaborations and mentoring to ensure PI's success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The research will generate great impact on
several scientific and technological communities, including biomaterials, tissue
engineering, stem cell biology and engineering, neuroscience, and regenerative
medicine. PI's efforts in integrating research with education would motivate
students at all levels for the passion and enthusiasm for science, and prepare
them for life-long careers in science and engineering research. Emphasis on
encouraging the participation of underrepresented populations, minorities,
women, and students with disabilities in research, incorporating research
findings into coursework and their dissemination to the public through outreach
activities would enhance the diversity in the biomedical research workforce and
benefit society.