* 1312888
* Directly Testing the Presence of Large-Scale Multiphase Flows in the Galactic Halo
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Mary Putman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 363,413.00

The circumgalactic medium (CGM), the gas reservoir outside galaxies, mediates
the interaction between galaxies and the intergalactic medium, where most of the
baryonic matter in the universe resides. Its structure and kinematics influence
star formation and the growth of galaxies; but knowledge of the CGM remains
limited both observationally and theoretically. The proposers of this project
will combine simulations and observations of the CGM to constrain theories of
galaxy formation. In the first part of the project, the team will develop new
computational schemes for selectively improving resolution in adaptive mesh
cosmological simulations and for using "active particles" to model the stellar
component including momentum feedback from supernova explosions. They will use
this approach to examine the dynamic evolution of halo gas in a cosmological
context as it is integrated into a galactic disk. In the second part, the team
will devise quantitative measures describing the distributions of gas components
in physical and kinematic space. They will use these measures to compare high
resolution simulations with multi-wavelength observations, test theories of gas
accretion, and determine whether large, organized flows are present in the halo
of the Milky Way. The project will support the work of a graduate student.
Three-dimensional visualizations of the simulations will be produced and
displayed at astronomy outreach events in New York City and at the American
Museum of Natural History; and team members will participate in an ongoing
program at Columbia University to bring graduate students and postdocs to New
York middle schools.