* 1312081
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation - High-Throughput Roll-to-Roll Atmospheric Pressure Atomic Layer Deposition for Functional Nanocoatings on Porous and Flexible Materials
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Gregory Parsons, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 05/31/2015
* USD 162,985.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating atomic layer
deposition technology (ALD) to create UV protective thin films onto porous
substrates, including nonwoven fiber mats and textiles. Materials used in
outdoor protective structures, architectural or decorative elements, and
construction are limited by degradation in sunlight or other harsh exposure. The
ALD technology is a unique approach to create ultra-thin and ultra-conformal
coating layers onto polymer fibers with complex geometries. These coatings have
the capacity to protect the underlying polymer from damaging ultraviolet
exposure from the sun or other light sources. The coatings can compete with
relatively expensive solution-dyed acrylic materials that now dominate the
outdoor textile market. The coating can work with a range of material substrates
beyond those currently used. Technology implementation requires new knowledge of
process scaling and reactor design challenges.

The project accomplishes this goal by exploring a unique "flow-through" reactor
design prototype resulting in a demonstration vehicle to evaluate materials and
process throughput capabilities to meet market demands. The project engages
VaporPulse Technologies to provide guidance in the field of coatings on fibers
as well as expertise in project commercialization and marketing as they pertain
to the potential to translate the science/technology along a path that may
result in a competitive commercial reality. The technology could have commercial
impact well beyond UV protection. Other fiber systems that can benefit from
improved coatings include filtration and separations media, personal protective
equipment, electronic and medical textiles, or engineered fibers or fabrics for
military personnel. In the long term, society will benefit by having materials
and products that provide safe and reliable operation under harsh and variable
outdoor conditions for longer times at lower cost. The work will also have long-
term impact by expanding foundational understanding of thin film reaction
science and engineering with impact in many other future fields. This project
will also help educate a PhD student in Chemical Engineering to learn the
challenges of technology translation from a lab to a small business, allowing
those skills to be expanded and passed on in the future.