* 1312402
* Warming and drying effects on tundra carbon balance
* GEO,OPP
* 11/06/2012,06/30/2016
* Susan Natali, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2016
* USD 597,680.00

Changes in permafrost carbon (C) storage are expected to be one of the most
important and rapid feedbacks from terrestrial ecosystems to atmospheric CO2
concentrations. If the availability of permafrost C increases in a warmer and
drier climate, as predicted for the study region, these systems may switch from
a C sink to source and act as a significant positive feedback to global climate
change. The objective of this research is to determine how temperature and
moisture affect ecosystem C balance in an upland tundra ecosystem. This work
will be conducted within the Carbon in Permafrost Experimental Heating Research
project, a deep-soil and ecosystem warming experiment initiated in 2008, which
was expanded in 2011 to include a water table manipulation treatment. The
research will test the hypothesis that warming and drying will increase
decomposition of soil C and decrease plant C uptake, leading to significant
ecosystem C losses. This hypothesis will be tested through measurements of
ecosystem CO2 fluxes, respiration source partitioning, plant productivity, and
ecosystem nutrient dynamics. This work will provide critical information about
climate change effects on belowground productivity and winter respiration. These
two processes contribute significantly to tundra C balance but their responses
to warming and drying are not yet quantified. Estimating the full breadth of
ecosystem C responses is critical for understanding how changes in permafrost
ecosystems will feedback to global climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
research will provide essential information on both the magnitude and drivers of
climate change impacts on tundra C balance, and will link biological carbon
cycle research with permafrost research in the physical sciences. In addition,
this project will bridge a gap between ecology research and geochemistry through
the extensive use of radiocarbon to detect the sources of respired CO2. The
research will be conducted in the discontinuous permafrost zone, in an area of
Alaska where permafrost thaw and thermokarst have been occurring over the past
several decades, and where permafrost temperatures are perched near the point of
thaw. Ecosystem changes in this region serve as an indicator of future shifts
that are expected with degrading permafrost at higher latitudes, making this
research highly relevant to changes occurring across the Arctic as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have broad impacts on the scientific
community and general public because it brings together important issues in the
global environment and raises awareness of the connection between northern
ecosystem dynamics and the global climate system. The proposed project will
provide training opportunities for one postdoctoral researcher and a diverse
group of undergraduate students, and will be widely disseminated to the
scientific community through timely publication of results, presentations at
national meetings and involvement with scientific networks. This project will
enhance scientific understanding through continued work by the PIs with
education centers, the local community and in particular, with teachers and
outreach coordinators.