* 1312310
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation Non-invasive Monitoring Nutrition Necklace: NIMON Necklace
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Majid Sarrafzadeh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2015
* USD 148,379.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a non-
invasive monitoring of nutrition (NIMON) sensory necklace with an embedded
microphone, wireless module and data processing unit to fill the need of
automatically detecting swallows and eating patterns. The translated NIMON
technology has the following unique features: low-cost, low-power, wearable,
automated filtering of noise from audio signals, detection of swallows and daily
eating patterns that provides exemplary performance, cost savings, efficiency
and efficacy when compared to the leading competing nutrition monitoring
programs or nutrition monitoring software such as DietMaster or Nutrinote, or
even the activity monitoring devices.

The project accomplishes this goal by deploying unique signal processing
algorithms providing noise-filtering of audio signals, segmentation, feature
extraction and classification algorithms resulting in a proposed necklace. The
partnership engages WearSense Inc. to provide guidance in the health and
nutrition market and commercialization and further financing as they pertain to
the potential to translate the NIMON necklace technology along a path that may
result in a competitive commercial reality. The potential economic impact is
expected to be $250 million in the next 5 years, which will contribute to the
U.S. competitiveness in the health and nutrition market. The societal impact,
long term, will be enhanced nutrition and health, the potential to diagnose
swallow and diet-related disorders while providing a foil against which several
technologies can grow.