* 1312421
* Materials World Network:  Investigations of Quantum Fluctuation Relations Using Superconducting Qubits
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Matthew LaHaye, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2016
* USD 260,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In the last two decades, the development of
nonequilibrium work fluctuation theorems has yielded new tools for the
estimation of free energy differences in molecular systems, shed light on how
microscopic systems exchange energy with their environment, and provided a
deeper understanding of the nature of the second law of thermodynamics. However,
while relations like the Jarzynski equality have been verified experimentally in
the classical limit, they remain to be tested in the quantum regime. The
experiments conducted in this project, which is supported by an award from the
Division of Materials Research's Materials World Network, will utilize state-of-
the-art superconducting microwave resonators and superconducting qubits to
perform the first systematic investigations of fluctuation theorems in the
quantum regime. The project will also provide the first experiments to probe the
quantum mechanical nature of work, which has only recently been elucidated
theoretically. Moreover, through close collaboration with theorists from the
University of Campinas (Campinas, Brazil) and The Sao Carlos Institute of
Physics (Sao Carlos, Brazil), it will provide fundamental insight into the
nature of dissipation at the nanoscale and the modeling of open quantum systems,
most notably in application to nonequilibrium fluctuation theorems, which
remains an open theoretical question. This research will support the training of
one graduate student and one postdoc in cutting-edge technologies for exploring
quantum physics at the nanoscale, including fabrication techniques and low-noise
measurement of superconducting devices at ultra-low temperatures; it will
provide training to students in advanced theoretical techniques in quantum
mechanics and statistical mechanics, including the modeling of open quantum
systems and nonequilibrium fluctuation theorems; and it will foster an
international collaboration, consisting not only of direct collaborative
research but also research student exchange and development of topical, student-
oriented research tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In the last two decades, important advances have been made in
our understanding of how systems at the micro and nanoscale exchange energy with
the environment in which they are inevitably embedded. At the forefront of these
advances has been the development of a new series of precise mathematical
relationships between certain thermodynamic quantities - e.g. between the work
that can be extracted from a system and the energy of the same system. These
developments are important both from a fundamental perspective and an applied
one. For example, these relations have refined our understanding of the second
law of thermodynamics and irreversibility (i.e. the arrow of time); at the same
time, they have provided greater insight into the limitations placed on the
efficiency of machines at the smallest scale, a question of paramount importance
as technology continues to be scaled down in size. Crucially, while these new
relationships have been tested and utilized in a wide range of classical micro
and nanoscale systems, their experimental verification in quantum systems
remains an open challenge. The experiments conducted in this international
collaborative project will utilize state-of-the-art superconducting circuitry to
perform the first systematic investigations to meet this challenge. The broader
impacts of this work are multifold: the research will provide fundamental
insight into the nature of work and energy dissipation in quantum systems, which
is of direct importance for understanding the potential of burgeoning quantum
and hybrid-quantum technologies - such as quantum-assisted sensing and quantum
information; it will support the training and education of one graduate student
and one postdoc in cutting-edge techniques and topics in quantum nanoscale
physics; and it will foster an international collaboration that promotes
research student exchange and the general education of students in these
advanced, contemporary topics.