* 1312048
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation - A Portable Treatment Planning System for MR-Guided Thermal Therapy
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Timothy Warburton, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2014
* USD 153,658.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating high
performance mathematical models of bioheat transfer for reliably and accurately
predicting and visualizing the outcome of laser induced thermal therapy.
Minimally-invasive laser ablation is a medical procedure that provides a means
of rapidly delivering heat to target diseased tissue in the body and will be
used in this project to kill focal cancerous lesions in brain as well as
diseased neurological tissue, such as epilepsy. The translated computing
technology has the following unique features: (1) the predictive capabilities of
the prototype device will assist in minimizing the surgical impact on the
patient and (2) the prototype device will be tightly coupled to existing FDA
approved procedures in humans and rigorously validated to assure accurate
predictions. This provides exemplary improvement in the efficacy of the
procedure as no comparable technology currently exists and the neurosurgeon does
not have the capability to a-priori visualize outcomes for complex treatment
scenarios (multiple lasers/trajectories) near essential anatomical structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project accomplishes this goal by utilizing hybrid
multi-core and GPU computing architectures combined with sophisticated
mathematical algorithms resulting in a portable, aggressively parallel, medical
image driven prototype simulation device. The partnership engages industry
(BioTex Inc.) and academic centers (Rice University and MD Anderson) to provide
guidance in this minimally invasive neurosurgical market space as well as to
commercialize and validate the technology as they pertain to the potential to
translate the high performance computing technology along a path that may result
in a competitive commercial reality. The potential economic impact is expected
to improve treatment effectiveness within the yearly greater than 200,000 brain
tumor cases and greater than 1 million epilepsy cases in the U.S. Within a 5-yr
timeframe, this will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in this minimally
invasive neurosurgical market space. The societal impact, long term, will
provide novel computational and mathematical tools for improving the safety and
efficacy of computer assisted image guided therapy for this important medical
application.&lt;br/&gt;