* 1312157
* AIR Option 1:  Technology Translation Development of a Prototype Solubility Enhancing Formulation for Improved drug Delivery using novel Cellulose Derivatives.
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Lynne Taylor, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 10/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating our recent
discovery of pharmaceutical crystallization inhibitors based on novel cellulose
omega-carboxyalkanoates to improve the delivery of poorly water soluble drugs by
formulating amorphous solid dispersions with enhanced processing and drug
delivery characteristics. The translated novel polymeric materials have the
following unique features: tailored amphiphilicity and high degree of
substitution with carboxylic acid groups that provides exemplary crystallization
inhibition of supersaturated solutions of hydrophobic drugs when compared to the
leading competing polymer, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose acetate succinate, used
in the formulation of amorphous solid dispersions in this market space. The
project accomplishes this goal by synthesis of novel derivatives of cellulose
designed to interact with poorly water soluble drugs which will be used in
prototype amorphous solid dispersions formulations which are expected to lead to
elevated concentrations of the drug and ultimately improved delivery of the
therapeutic agent to the patient. Demonstration of the successful production of
prototype formulations using common processing techniques will lead to
partnerships and licensing agreements with specialty chemical and pharmaceutical
companies. The potential economic impact is expected to be improved efficiency
of the drug development process in the next decade, which will contribute to the
U.S. competitiveness in the area of drug development. The societal impact, long
term, will be the availability of new and improved medicines that might
otherwise have never been made available to the public because of their poor
aqueous solubility.