* 1312636
* Recovery of high frequency wave fields, kinetic theory of photons and entropy satisfying methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Hailiang Liu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,185.00

This research project develops mathematical tools and numerical algorithms to
study multiscale problems governed by a selected set of partial differential
equations arising in diverse applications. The proposed work consists of three
projects: recovery of high frequency wave fields governed by a variety of wave
equations, including hyperbolic equations such as the acoustic wave equation,
dispersive equations such as the Schroedinger equation, and the time independent
Helmholtz equation; development of kinetic theory of photons in the transport of
energy; and design of entropy satisfying discontinuous Galerkin methods for
kinetic Fokker-Planck equations, with emphasis on kinetic models arising in
polymeric fluids and collective motions in biology.

Each of the proposed projects has the potential to have a significant impact on
problems that are both fundamental and technologically important. Recovery of
high frequency wave fields is a fundamental problem in high frequency wave
propagation, the study of which can provide a deeper understanding of high
frequency wave dynamics occurring in various applications. The study of
condensation of photons would result in methods which may potentially be
suitable for designing novel light sources. Entropy satisfying methods are
important in capturing the right physics in long time numerical simulations. The
design of such methods has the potential to elucidate many aspects of the
physical process. The theory will be applied to and driven by identified
practical applications.