* 1312863
* Collaborative Research:   Stellar Clouds as New Probes of the Milky Way's Accretion History and Mass Distribution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Steven Majewski, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2016
* USD 79,446.00

What are the radial profiles, shapes, extents and orientations of the dark
matter halos that surround galaxies? This fundamental question is particularly
difficult to address in the outskirts of galaxies where there are few visible
tracers. Perhaps the most promising approach is to use stellar debris from the
destruction of satellite galaxies, and the most promising place to try this
approach is the Milky Way - the one galaxy in the Universe where a halo's
3-dimensional structure (rather than a 2-dimensional projection) can be directly
probed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a combined observational
and theoretical approach to providing a new and powerful perspective on accreted
halo substructures, and, in particular, poorly-studied stellar clouds. The
observational program focuses on obtaining radial velocities for stars in known
stellar clouds, and making connections between debris structures - from the
Solar vicinity to the outer Galaxy, and from one side of the Galaxy to another.
Such connections will yield the first comprehensive maps of these stellar debris
structures on Galactic scales. Interpreting these maps with a systematic suite
of simulations will fill in our missing knowledge of the Galaxy's accretion
history and matter distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support
the training of one minority student in their transition from undergraduate to
graduate school through participation in Columbia's "Bridge to the PhD" program.
It will also enable the PIs to actively engage students, amateur astronomers and
the general public in building an understanding of the history of our home
galaxy.