* 1312441
* Solving the Nebular Abundances Anomaly: New Features in Photoionization and Recombination
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2020
* Sultana Nahar, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2020
* USD 390,247.00

This project aims to resolve longstanding discrepancies in the abundances of
common elements such as carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and neon in photoionizaed
diffuse nebulae, particularly planetary nebulae. The ionization structure in
optically thin environments is governed by photoionization and recombination.
The physical processes underlying spectral line formation are electron impact
excitation (EIE) or electron-ion recombination (RC), and radiative decay rates.
A perplexing discrepancy in abundances, of up to an order of magnitude of more,
is found between those derived from emission lines excited due to EIE and those
from electron-ion recombination lines of the same atomic species. This not only
calls into question the basic physics of photoionization and recombination, but
also the interpretation of the physical structure and distribution of elements
within gaseous nebulae. This project will examine the former in order to address
the latter. Specifically, calculations will be based on: i) the unified theory
of electron-ion recombination that subsumes radiative and dielectronic
recombination processes, and provides a self-consistent set of atomic data for
photoionization, recombination and excitation processes, (ii) recent extensions
in the state-of-the-art R-matrix method including relativistic effects not
heretofore considered, and (iii) pilot calculations for photoionization and
recombination demonstrating the role of low-energy resonances that may be
crucial to resolving the abundance(s) anomaly problem. The project will involve
large-scale and high-accuracy calculations of the critical atomic parameters for
a number of elements. High precision is imperative since astrophysical models
need to rule out atomic physics as any significant source of uncertainty. The
focus will be on some of the most prominent elements in low ionization stages:
carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, neon, magnesium, silicon and sulfur. The project will
result in extensive and self-consistent sets of high-accuracy radiative and
collisional atomic parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through analysis of their
optical and infrared spectra, astronomers attempt to understand the abundances
of the elements in diffuse insterstellar clouds or "nebulae" in which hydrogen
is ionized. They do this by measuring the strengths of the characteristic
emission from ions of different elements and use these to determine the physical
properties within the nebula including the abundances of the constituent
elements. These emission lines can be excited via several processes and there is
a long standing discrepancy between the abundances measured using spectral lines
excited by collisions versus those due to electron capture. This project aims to
remove one level of uncertainty by calculating the theoretical values for the
atomic parameters that relate the excitation to the strengths of the emission.
The results of this research will be applicable across a number of sub-fields
within astrophysics ranging from studies of our own galaxy to abundances in the
most distant quasars.