* 1312651
* Three Dimensional Radiation GRMHD Simulations of Accretion Flows Around Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Ramesh Narayan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2019
* USD 697,704.00

Some of the most luminous objects observed in the universe are associated with
black holes accreting near or above the Eddington mass accretion rate. Computer
simulations have contributed greatly to our understanding of this accretion, and
general relativistic (GR) magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) codes have been developed
and applied widely. However, most methods do not include radiation, and the few
that do can handle only limited regimes of optical depth. This project will
develop a GR radiation MHD (GRRMHD) code that can handle all optical depths, and
use it to study a suite of problems related to luminous accretion disks. The
research group already has a radiation module developed for GR hydrodynamics,
which they will add into their existing GRMHD code. While that code development
is underway, the team will study hydrodynamic disks with radiation and viscosity
using their pre-existing methods. Once the new technique is ready, it will be
used for work on radiative magnetized disks, focusing on the structure of thin
and thick radiation-dominated disks, the role of instabilities in these disks,
and the generation of winds and jets by radiative acceleration. The team has
some in-house computer capacity for code testing and less demanding
computations, but production runs will use NSF's XSEDE supercomputer
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will improve our understanding of
these high-luminosity accretion flows, and even though the work is very
technical, the major advances it represents should spark public interest. The
results will help to interpret the observational data that has been collected
over the years, and will be very valuable for modeling quasar mode feedback in
studies of galaxy formation and evolution. The principal researcher has a strong
track record in mentoring young scientists, especially women, and will actively
seek opportunities to involve more of them in this research.