* 1312822
* Isolated Neutron Stars: The Impact of Magnetic Field Decay
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Kaplan, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 254,800.00

Neutron stars are Nature's laboratory for extreme conditions: the high central
density probes particle physics in a theoretically intractable regime, and the
extreme magnetic fields require the inclusion of quantum electrodynamics. For
over two decades, astronomers have attempted to use X-ray observations of
neutron star surfaces to measure their radii and cooling rates, as these can
strongly constrain the interior structure and properties of the stars. However,
the vast majority of the known neutron stars are not ideal for these
measurements, as their surfaces are obscured by emission from their magnetic
fields (in the cases of rotation-powered pulsars) or by matter orbiting and
falling onto their surfaces (in the cases of accretion-powered X-ray binaries).
The Isolated Neutron Stars (INSs) are a particular sample of young (&lt; 1 Myr),
nearby (&lt; 1 kpc) cooling neutron stars discovered via their soft X-ray
emission. They differ from most pulsars in that they have long periods (&gt; 3
s), no radio emission, and X-ray emission that appear to come directly from
their surfaces. They are interesting both because of their apparent abundance
(comparable to normal pulsars), and because of the promise of inferring neutron
star parameters from their thermal emission. However, no consistent
interpretation of the thermal emission has emerged, with the difficulty mostly
related to their complicated, highly-magnetized atmospheres. Moreover, recent
evidence suggests that the magnetic fields we measure now are in fact the
results of complicated, non-linear magnetic field decay. Such behavior has been
long suspected in neutron stars but never previously observed at this level, and
it presents a number of challenges and opportunities. This project will address
three broad questions: (1) What is the composition of INS atmospheres, and how
can we measure their radii? (2) How important is magnetic field decay to the
population of neutron stars inferred from X-ray surveys, and how do their
properties compare with those of the population as a whole? (3) Can we constrain
the surface magnetic fields (which affect X-ray emission), independent of the
dipole fields (which affect timing)? The observations will comprise related
radio, optical, and X-ray observations of the INSs and radio pulsars with
similar properties. In particular, studies of radio pulsars allow detailed
constraints from radio astrometry and polarimetry that are not available for the
INSs but will uniquely help us understand their thermal X-ray emission. This
work will provide vital clues to a number of outstanding questions in neutron
star astrophysics. Only by obtaining consistent results for a number of
disparate sources (each with its own peculiarities and systematic uncertainties)
will we have robust astrophysical results that can inform the broader physics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also continue work with the
astronomy club, broadening the range of topics and engaging students in analysis
of recent results; recruit undergraduate students for summer projects focusing
on specific objects or data-sets, where they will participate in the end-to-end
research process; broaden the awareness of and participation in these
opportunities through outreach to introductory astronomy classes and other
likely interested groups; and assist with the development of shows at the
Manfred Olson Planetarium at UWM, which has nearly 10,000 visitors a year. All
of these efforts are part of a larger plan to increase the presence of astronomy
at UWM through curriculum development, outreach, and mentoring of students from
under-represented populations. The PI will also engage in outreach activities
with high school students and the general public.