* 1312869
* RUI:   Asteroseismology of subdwarf B stars as representatives of high-temperature physics and horizontal branch stellar cores.
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Reed, Missouri State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 156,977.00

The researchers will analyze data already in hand from the Kepler satellite of
sdB stars, obtain new ground-based high-speed multicolor observations of these
stars to supplement the observations for further analysis, and generate
perturbed atmospheric models to interpret all the observations. Finally, they
will generate evolutionary models which match the data and test the physics
within sdB stars. Subdwarf B (sdB) stars are horizontal branch stars that are
low mass white dwarf precursors. They are envelope-stripped objects which are
very blue and UV bright yet retain sufficient mass to be core helium burning
stars. Their progenitors are stars like our sun and are responsible for the UV
excess detected in some elliptical galaxies and globular clusters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will take part in the proposed
research program by obtaining, reducing and analyzing data and then
disseminating results at conferences and in papers. The PI will work to increase
the participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. Additionally,
the PI and his team (including undergraduate students) will collaborate with
scientists on a national level (including in Iowa and with the Whole Earth
Telescope), and international level (including N. Ireland, Belgium and Poland,
and the Nordic Optical Telescope).