* 1312951
* Inter-Science of Learning Centers Conference-February 21-23, 2013, Philadelphia, PA
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Kristin Gagnier, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 01/31/2015
* USD 114,962.00

This grant funds the sixth annual inter-Science of Learning Center (iSLC)
Conference hosted by the Spatial Intelligence and Leanring Center (SILC) in
Philadelphia, PA on February 21-23, 2013. The iSLC Conferences are vital to the
graduate students and postdocs who attend them, to the six NSF-funded Science of
Learning Centers (SLCs), and to the emerging interdisciplinary field of learning
science. Individual students and postdocs attending iSLC 2013 will benefit from
visiting Philadelphia, learning from the experiences of their peers, and by
being exposed to new and alternative methodologies and paradigms. Most
importantly, they are provided with an incredible opportunity to form cross- and
inter-disciplinary networks that will serve them and the fields to which they
belong for the rest of their careers. Since most graduate students and postdocs
typically attend field-specific conferences with little opportunity to interact
with peers outside of their respective niches, this is invaluable. This
opportunity also allows students to gain practice with presenting their research
to a diverse audience, a skill that is of great importance as a scientist. The
conference will also promote the understanding of the scientific language used
in each center. Career development will be promoted as junior researchers gain
experience presenting research, networking with SILC PIs, and through the SLC
alumni workshops. One of the goals of the SLC program is to advance scientific
discovery while promoting teaching, training and learning. To advance scientific
discovery, the researchers attending iSLC 2013 will share and discuss new
research findings from the different centers who have related but different
perspectives on science of learning research. Discussion sessions will raise new
questions that can be investigated in future research. This conference will also
promote other goals of the SLC program such as the advancement of scientific
discovery while also promoting teaching, training, and learning. A second goal
of the SLC program is to enhance the infrastructure for research and education
by developing partnerships with researchers in industry and government
laboratories. In the researcher's effort to incorporate this goal into iSLC
2013, the researchers have purposely selected three alumni who are currently
working in industry. Finally, a third goal of iSLC 2013 is to continue the
efforts to build a professional community of young scholars working towards
developing an interdisciplinary understanding of learning. The researchers view
the networking opportunities afforded by iSLC as an important step towards
sustainability for the field. The critical purpose of iSLC is training a new
generation of researchers. The researchers see this as the central purpose of
iSLC and have thus structured the conference to maximize training opportunities.
Not only are participants from difference perspectives brought together, but
also from different stages in their careers: graduate students beginning their
training, students about the graduate, newly minted Ph.Ds and alumni. By
encouraging exchanges between participants, opportunities for training and
learning are provided. Students also have the opportunity to serve as
discussants. This provides training synthesizing themes and information across
presentations -- a skill which is critical for academic success.