* 1312160
* Materials World Network:   Crackling Noise
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* James Sethna, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Crackling noise is the intermittent, scale-
invariant response of materials systems to external forces. The Earth's crust
crackles through earthquakes when sheared by continental drift; paper crackles
when crumpled; iron crackles (Barkhausen noise) when magnetized; nanowires
crackle when bent; bones crackle before they fracture. The broad range of event
sizes in each of these systems reflects emergent scale invariance, which we
understand using scaling methods underpinned by renormalization-group theory.
The field of crackling noise is maturing scientifically, where identification
and quantification of universal scaling functions and corrections to scaling are
playing a central role in future applications. With support from the Division of
Materials Research, the investigators in the US/Italian Materials World Network
project will develop and hone methods to find effective, powerful multivariable
scaling functions to describe the effects of long-range fields on crackling
noise in magnets and glassy metals, to understand crossovers between different
types of emergent scale invariance, and to test basic assumptions in the field
about the relation of continuous evolution models and lattice models. In each
project, they propose to systematically analyze analytic, singular, and
subdominant corrections to the theory, rigorously assess statistical and
systematic errors, and extend the realm of applicability of these powerful
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Many systems,
when squeezed, stretched, or twisted, emit crackling noise. The earth's crust
crackles through earthquakes as the continents drift apart; bones crackle before
they break, paper crackles when crumpled. While a nuisance in many practical
applications, this noise can also be useful in testing and predicting failure in
materials. The noise also becomes more severe the smaller the system, and can be
dominant for some nanoscale systems (forming wires on integrated circuits in
modern electronics, for example). Crackling noise happens when a slow force
produces a series of sharp events with an enormous range of sizes. In the past
two decades, the investigators have explained why crackling noise arises, using
tools from statistical mechanics. In this joint international project, they will
lead a team of graduate students and post-docs from the US and Italy to turn
this explanation into a quantitative tool for predicting and controlling
crackling noise. This interdisciplinary project will expose theoretical physics
students both to state-of-the art tools in statistical mechanics and to
practical materials problems in engineering fracture, nanotechnology and
microelectronics.