* 1312215
* Strategies: Teaching Engineering Concepts to Harness Future Innovators (TECHFIT)
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Alka Harriger, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,199,969.00

The TECHFIT proejct fosters middle school student enthusiasm for STEM
disciplines. This is accomplished by equipping teachers with skills and tools to
engage their students and show them how engineering technology knowledge can
help them become innovators of interesting, fun, and valuable products. TECHFIT
recruits teams of 2-5 science, technology, math, and physical education teachers
from partner schools to complete a 6-day, professional development summer
workshop. The workshop provides teachers with the information, instruction,
lessons, and practice required to deliver a ten-week afterschool program for 6th
to 8th grade students in which they design and build
exergames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programs are needed to make study in STEM areas
more appealing to America's youth. TECHFIT addresses this need by equipping
middle school teachers with the skills and tools to educate students and spark
their students' interest in STEM by showing how these skills contribute to the
creation of interesting and functional technology-based fitness games. The
TECHFIT program is designed to enrich the knowledge base of young students by
stimulating their interest in STEM subjects through an after school program run
by TECHFIT-trained teachers. By partnering with schools that have large
underrepresented, underserved populations, TECHFIT can reach the populations in
greater need of programs to interest students in STEM. By giving students an
important, appealing reason to pursue these often neglected STEM subjects,
students who may not have considered STEM careers will begin to take these
subjects more seriously and will be more likely to study STEM in college, thus
addressing society's future workforce needs.