* 1312913
* Collaborative Research:  CDS&amp;E: Evolution of the High Redshift Galaxy and AGN Populations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Laxmikant Kale, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 05/31/2016
* USD 90,000.00

The Cold Dark Matter (CDM) paradigm for the formation of structure in the
universe has had many successes, from predicting the spectrum of fluctuations in
the Cosmic Microwave Background to explaining the clustering of galaxies. But
CDM theory is still at odds with the observed properties of galaxies on scales
where the baryonic physics of gas cooling, star formation and feedback are
important. Modeling these processes in the cosmological context is extremely
difficult owing to the immense dynamic range and resolution needed, and requires
the most advanced computational hardware available as well as new computing
techniques and algorithms. The proposing team has developed smooth-particle
hydrodynamics (SPH) codes addressing these processes at the galaxy scale, and
plans to adapt their algorithms to new architectures in order extend them to
cosmological volumes. In addition to moving their star formation and feedback
algorithms from legacy message-passing interface (MPI) codes to a parallel
language (CHARM++), they intend to implement faster algorithms that can achieve
the needed dynamic range and take full advantage of the hundreds of thousands of
processing cores on the Blue Waters system. The results will be processed by a
parallel pipeline that creates simulated observations. The simulations will also
be used in a program targeting science pre-majors from under-represented groups,
introducing them to the use of computer simulations in astrophysics and
encouraging them toward technically oriented majors.