* 1312508
* Generation and control of rhythmic activity in respiratory and motor networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Jonathan Rubin, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2016
* USD 289,982.00

A variety of repetitive behaviors fundamental to animals' interactions with the
environment are driven by the rhythmic activity of networks of coupled neurons.
This project will focus on the generation and control of rhythms in neuronal
networks associated with two classes of repetitive movements, namely respiration
and limb motion. In the neuronal rhythms, multiple populations of neurons
activate sequentially within each cycle, and the activity within each population
is synchronized when it arises. This work will explore the mechanisms underlying
the synchronized bursting of respiratory neurons in the pre-Bötzinger complex
(preBötc), which occurs during the inspiratory phase of breathing. Doing so will
involve novel mathematical analysis of three time scale dynamics and of the
interaction of multiple burst-generation mechanisms in single neurons. New
results will be attained about how synchronized bursting in neuronal networks
depends on features of network coupling and on intrinsic properties of the
neurons involved. Additional modeling and analysis will consider how the preBötc
interacts with neurons in other respiratory areas and participates in a closed
loop feedback control system to achieve robust respiratory rhythms that respond
flexibly to changing demands. In the area of limb motion, coordination of muscle
groups controlling multiple limb segments and limbs is critical for effective
behaviors. This project will analyze how correctly timed rhythmic activity of a
particular joint emerges from the interaction of top-down neural commands for
muscle activation with feedback signals from movements of other joints. We will
also study how different stimuli can reconfigure a particular rhythm generation
circuit to yield diverse movements of a single limb, as needed for behavioral
flexibility. The analysis performed will provide new results on how to handle
forcing in multiple time scale dynamical systems and will suggest general
mechanisms that underlie coordinated rhythm generation in neuronal
networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Respiration and locomotion are among the many
rhythmic neuro-mechanical processes that can be maintained without direct
conscious control. This automation is made possible by particular sets of
neurons in the brain and spinal cord, which are specialized to produce the
signals that drive these behaviors. There are many unanswered questions about
how these neurons generate activity with the appropriate features in a way that
adapts fluidly to altered conditions, such as changes in terrain encountered
while walking. This project will use the development of mathematical models
constrained by experimental data as well as computer simulations and
mathematical analysis of these models to address several such questions. In the
context of respiration, the results of this project will help explain how output
from different groups of respiratory neurons is produced with the correct
intensity and timing to drive normal breathing. They will also provide new
understanding of how signals related to the levels of gases in the blood and the
amount of stretch in the lungs and chest wall feed back to tune the neuronal
outputs and maintain successful breathing under changing respiratory demands, as
well as how this system may fail in certain breathing disorders. These results
will be attained in collaboration with experimentalists, who will provide direct
access to data and testing of model predictions. The project will also study two
classes of problems related to repetitive limb movements. First, behaviors such
as walking require activation of multiple muscle groups, controlling multiple
limb segments and joints, in an appropriate sequence. We will use modeling and
mathematics to explore how this coordination is achieved. Second, animals
achieve a diverse range of behaviors using a small set of limbs by activating
their limb control muscles in a variety of different patterns. We will use
mathematical analysis to test the hypothesis that a single neuronal rhythm
generation network can generate multiple such patterns, selected by input
signals that trigger different behaviors. Our analysis will supply predictions
that can be tested by our experimental collaborators to gain a better
understanding of how limb motions are generated, which can provide useful
information for robotics and for efforts to restore limb movements compromised
by disease or injury.