* 1312252
* Tri-C Youth Technology Academy: STEM Academy for Youth featuring Youth Essential Skills - SAY - YES!
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Majid Rashidi, Cuyahoga Community College
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,179,151.00

This ITEST strategies project is providing high school students with experiences
in robotics to galvanize their interest in STEM and prepare them for STEM
programs at the college level. The project is delivering a pre-engineering
experience, advanced math coursework, and project-based instruction. High school
teachers receive technical training to build their STEM teaching competencies.
112 underrepresented students are being recruited from 5 high schools in the
Cleveland Metropolitan School District. The project plan includes dual-
enrollment, tutoring, mentoring and other support mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal builds on the successes of a previous
project (ATE-0603427) and addresses the lessons learned from that project. That
project successfully stimulated STEM interest in about 200 high school students
from Cleveland. It is remarkable that 100% of the students who completed the
project graduated from high school and 87% enrolled in higher education, 70% at
Cuyahoga CC. However, a follow-up study revealed that only 6 students completed
a 2-year degree in a STEM field, because most of the rest were unable to
overcome barriers, particularly the remedial mathematics courses. This proposal
addresses the need to better prepare students for college, especially
mathematics, and provide better supports while continuing with the activities
that were successful at generating student interest in STEM. The project team
includes Cuyahoga Community College, Cleveland MSD, and Cleveland State
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation will addresses the following
goals: 1) Encourage students' readiness for and interest in STEM careers and
increase the number of students pursuing technical/engineering degrees; 2)
Decrease the need for remedial math coursework in post-secondary education; 3)
Equip teachers with the resources to ensure that their students consider and are
prepared for the STEM workforce of the future; and 4) Develop a new robotics
competition based on the Arduino platform, and measure its efficacy to engage
youth.