* 1312576
* Model Reduction and Statistical Closure of Turbulent Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Bruce Turkington, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 318,805.00

This project aims to develop and apply a new methodology of model reduction and
statistical closure for deterministic, nonlinear dynamical systems. The overall
objective of this work is to derive coarse-grained equations that approximate
the effect of interactions between resolved and unresolved scales of motion from
given, fine-grained, physical equations of motion. For a typical complex system,
say a Hamiltonian system with many degrees of freedom, the method of reduction
proceeds as follows: a vector of resolved variables is selected to describe the
coherent, slow behavior of the system, and a parametric statistical model is
canonically associated with this resolved vector; the predicted, or estimated,
evolution of the mean resolved vector is defined by that path in the statistical
parameter space which optimally fits the Liouville equation for the given
dynamics. A cost functional is introduced to quantify the lack-of-fit of
parameter paths; it is an information-theoretic metric on the Liouville residual
containing weights that determine the adjustable constants in the ensuing
closure. The desired equation for the mean resolved vector is derived by
applying Hamilton-Jacobi theory to the optimization principle defining the best-
fit closure. Recently the best-fit theory has been validated on a prototypical
turbulent dynamics (truncated Burgers-Hopf equation), for which it produces a
coarse-grained dynamics having novel dissipative effects and modified nonlinear
interactions. Effective coarse-grained equations will be derived for barotropic
and baroclinic quasi-geostrophic flows, and these closures will be tested
against benchmark numerical simulations of fully-resolved ensembles. The best-
fit approach will also be applied to represent approximate nonequilibrium
spectra for these models, after first investigating these questions on some
simpler turbulent wave dynamics.

Mathematical models of many physical phenomena such as geophysical fluid
dynamics, which are used to predict the motions of the Earth's atmosphere and
oceans, typically display very complex, turbulent, behavior. It is therefore
important to design appropriate reduced models of such complex systems that
capture, at least approximately, the coherent behavior of the full system in
many fewer variables. The P.I.'s research is directed towards developing general
mathematical and statistical tools for constructing reduced models of this kind.
Specifically, the research endeavors to simplify nonlinear dynamical models of
the atmosphere and oceans by devising effective computational schemes in which
unresolved turbulence is parameterized by statistical models that best fit the
full equations of motion. A reduction method of this kind would furnish a
mathematically justified technique for improving the performance of numerical
models of the large-scale, low-frequency dynamics of weather and climate.
Specifically, the work seeks to build up an understanding of model reduction and
closure through a hierarchy of simplified, prototype problems examined using a
systematic and robust methodology that draws on physical concepts from
nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and thermodynamics, mathematical techniques
from optimization theory and dynamical systems, as well as tools from statistics
and information theory. A postdoctoral research associate will be hired to
collaborate with the P.I., and the training of the postdoc in these interrelated
topics will be an important outcome of the project.