* 1312817
* Analysis of stochastic context-free grammars for RNA secondary structure prediction
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Svetlana Poznanovikj, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2017
* USD 129,020.00

The objective of the project is a rigorous mathematical analysis of stochastic
context-free grammars for RNA secondary structure modeling. An accent is put on
the analysis of the dependency of the prediction on the type of production rules
and the probability parameters used, with the goal of better understanding the
limitations of the choices made during the grammar design. The results should
suggest ways of modifying the grammars that would lead to improvement in the
prediction.

The scientific view of RNA molecules as passive transmitters of the genetic code
has drastically changed during the last few decades and the known biological
functions of RNA continue to grow in number and expand in scope. To perform the
necessary function, the RNA nucleotide chain must fold into a specific three-
dimensional functional shape. Thus, understanding the ways RNA performs its
function is tightly related to knowing its structure. Since experimental
determination of the structure is expensive and time consuming, the problem of
predicting the structure of the RNA molecule is an important problem in
computational biology. This project will investigate computational methods for
RNA structure prediction based on stochastic context-free grammars and the
effects of changing different components of the model on the accuracy of the
prediction.