* 1313718
* Early Childhood Education in the Context of Mathematics, Science, and Literacy
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Julie Sarama, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,974,247.00

The Mathematics, Science, and Literacy (MSL) curriculum project is using
empirically-tested mathematics and science programs and research-based
approaches to develop a six module interdisciplinary curriculum for pre-K
students. Mathematics and science content is included with literacy/language and
social-emotional development. The curriculum is being designed to counter the
frequent situation of devoting most pre-school instructional time to literacy by
having activities that join literacy with mathematics and science. The project
is housed at the University of Buffalo, but also has sites at Rutgers University
New Brunswick and Michigan State University. A detailed process, a curriculum
development framework that has been used to develop prior curriculum materials
is being used for developing the MSL curriculum. The design of the materials is
giving strong attention to being viable for at-risk students.

The MSL materials are research-based and incorporate learning trajectories
developed from prior work. The materials are being developed in the first two
years of the project and piloted by a four teachers at each of the three sites.
In the third year of the four year project, the materials will be piloted by
four different teachers at each of the three sites. Formative evaluation data
are being used to revise the materials. Pretests and posttests in each of the
three content areas are being used to measure improved learning. An external
evaluator is verifying the analyses of data and that valid conclusions are being
made. The development effort includes attending to the professional development
needs of teachers who will be using the six module pre-K curriculum and teachers
who will have students who have completed the curriculum.

The main deliverable will be the research-based six module curriculum for pre-K
mathematics, science, and literacy. In addition, a detailed formative evaluation
of the curriculum's creation and implementation is being produced along with a
detailed description and evaluation of the curriculum model used. A publisher
has indicated interest in publishing the materials and is interacting with the
developers throughout the process. There is a potential that the
interdisciplinary curriculum will be widely used. The curriculum is being
designed using the most current learning trajectories with the expectations that
these will particularly helpful for at risk students.