* 1313877
* RAPID: Collection of Data on Flood and Hydrodynamic Impact on Coastal Infrastructures in the New York City Metropolitan Region during the Hurricane Sandy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Anil Agrawal, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 35,000.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) will collect perishable damage data
caused by Hurricane Sandy that made landfall on October 29, 2012. It was a very
large storm (almost 800 miles in diameter according to National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration) that affected large areas of coastlines of New York
(Long Island and New York Metropolitan area) and New Jersey. The storm was
judged to be Category 1 based on its wind speed. However, because of its size
and coinciding with high lunar tide, it generated high storm surge. The New York
Metropolitan area sustained severe damage to coastal structures due to surge and
wave actions. Most of the Metropolitan area lost electrical power and the
transportation system became inoperable because of flooding of tunnels and loss
of power. The project will collect data on flooded areas, high water marks and
structural damage. Field trips are planned to collect flood records,
hydrodynamic load estimates and damage to infrastructure. A number of students
from regions severely affected by the Hurricane Sandy will participate in the
data collection efforts.

The data collection effort will proceed with reviews of news reports, assessment
of damage through field observations, records of government agencies, and
discussion with city officials. A preliminary investigation on the validation of
the computational model developed by PI will be pursued with collected data. The
project will have a significant broader impact because of a unique opportunity
of collecting real life data. The personnel participating in the damage data
collection will have an excellent experience in effects of hurricane on urban
area.