* 1313693
* CNH: Linking Livestock Markets and Grazing Practices with the Nutritional Ecology of Grasses and Locusts Under Alternative Property Rights Regimes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* James Elser, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 955,001.00

Research has recently shown that overgrazing of livestock in a grassland in
China lowered the nitrogen content of the grasses and that this caused a rise in
the abundance of a locust likely to lead to locust swarms. This proposal will
test whether this is also true for related species of locust in Australia and
western Africa, and link both grazing practices and locust swarms to economics
and social policy in the three contrasting regions. Three biologists and three
social scientists will team up to help answer: (1) How do insect-nutrient
relations and livestock grazing strategies interact to affect food prices, food
security, and rangeland degradation? (2) How do property rights regimes affect
the adaptive capacity of societies to respond to the link between overgrazing
and locust outbreaks? Because both market forces and locust swarms operate over
long distances, these effects are likely to be global.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Locust outbreaks have had devastating effects on food
security, impacting crop and livestock yields. This proposal aims to develop
new, sustainable strategies to understand and manage locust outbreaks,
accounting for feedbacks among ecological, agricultural, and economic systems.
Results will be translated directly into management and policy recommendations
through collaborations with agricultural agencies. The project will also
strengthen international scientific collaboration, train undergraduate and
graduate students, and develop a multi-media outreach program for K-12 students
and teachers.