* 1313822
* CNH: An Ecological Trap for Parasites and Its Impacts on Human Disease Risk, Nutrition, and Income
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Gretchen Daily, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project focuses on the measurement of the wide variety of products and
services, including benefits to human health that natural ecosystems provide and
on which humans depend. For savanna ecosystems worldwide, an important ecosystem
service is the production of forage for consumption by domestic livestock. While
this form of resource extraction often is thought to conflict with the
conservation of wildlife, recent evidence suggests that livestock and wildlife
may sometimes improve forage quality for one another. In addition, recent
research suggests there may be an additional benefit to the integration of
livestock and wildlife in savanna ecosystems: control of ticks and tick-borne
pathogens that affect wildlife, livestock, and human health. In the Laikipia
District of Kenya, preliminary evidence suggests that the presence of cattle
treated with acaricides (tick-specific pesticides) greatly reduces the abundance
of ticks in the environment. For both livestock ranches and wildlife
conservancies, this finding offers a potential management tool with important
implications for the control of parasite populations that may threaten economic
benefits from both wildlife ecotourism and livestock production. Ticks and tick-
borne pathogens are only one of many factors that influence human well-being in
savanna ecosystems, however. Despite great interest in the sustainable
management of ecosystems, many of the services most critical to rural well-
being, such as those that contribute to agriculture and livestock production,
are missing from existing measurements of ecosystem services. In order to
understand how diverse biological and social phenomena interact to determine
human well-being within savanna ecosystems, this interdisciplinary research
project will use an integrated approach drawing from expertise in the ecology of
infectious diseases and modeling of ecosystem services to better understand the
interactions between all of the ecosystems services generated by savanna
ecosystems that influence human health and well-being. The researchers will
experimentally manipulate the distribution of an ecological trap (acaricide-
treated cattle) to rigorously assess the consequences of management strategies
for tick abundance and forage quality. They will evaluate tick abundance and
forage quality on ranches with a suite of replicated approaches to cattle and
wildlife management, and they will develop simple production function models of
this coupled natural-human system that capture forage-livestock-wildlife
interactions, contributions of wildlife to tourism visitation and income,
contributions of livestock to income and human nutrition, and wildlife-
livestock-tick interactions that determine tick-borne disease risk. They also
will employ production function models through scenario analysis to explore the
consequences for wildlife and human well-being of different management
strategies across the Laikipia District.

This project will integrate social and ecological approaches to advance
understanding of systems in which the health of humans and nature are strongly
interconnected. This project will experiment with a novel approach to parasite
control that may yield numerous unintended benefits, and it will be among the
first projects to attempt to assess the value of multiple different ecosystems
services within a common ecosystem. The project will provide diverse educational
opportunities for both U.S. and African students and scientists. The project
holds promise for yielding significant benefits for society by characterizing
the elements of potential win-win scenarios between natural and human components
of an ecosystem, with positive ramifications for livestock husbandry, wildlife
conservation, livestock and wildlife health, and human income, nutrition, and
well-being. Project findings will have utility in other regions with similar
socioecological contexts, possibly providing a new model for the sustainable
management of coupled natural-human systems. This project is supported by the
NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.