* 1313888
* Translation Regulation of Gene Expression in Toxic Dinoflagellates
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Allen Place, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,369,515.00

A number of dinoflagellate species are known to produce potent neurotoxins.
Their blooms are commonly referred to as "red tides". An understanding of the
genetic regulatory mechanisms that affect bloom growth and in particular the
development of biomarkers to assess bloom growth status are essential for the
development of scientifically sound management and mitigation policies. The
genetic organization and regulation of these organisms has been shown to be
distinct from nonprotist eukaryotes. Dinoflagellates are remarkable for their
extremely large genomes that show little transcriptional regulation and with
genes present as multiple tandem copies that are polycistronically processed
through coupled trans-splicing and polyadenylation. A broad range of
investigations has implicated mRNA recruitment as a major site of regulation of
gene expression. However, relatively little is understood regarding
translational initiation and its regulation in these organisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team centered at the
University of Maryland Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology will
attempt to unravel the roles of the likely key players in translational
regulation, eIF2 and eIF4, along with the spliced leader cap structures in
regulating gene expression. Using the icthyotoxic dinoflagellate, Karlodinium
veneficum and the toxin producing Karenia brevis, they will (1) determine
whether changes in eIF2รก phosphorylation underlie diel changes in gene
expression or responses to different stressors; (2) begin characterization of
the eIF2รก-kinases from K. veneficum; (3) characterize the ability of K.veneficum
eIF4E family member to bind to cap structures and translational binding
partners; and (4) assess the role of K.veneficum eIF4E members in mRNA
recruitment. Given the central role of translation in dinoflagellate gene
expression, this should provide significant insight into mechanisms relevant to
dinoflagellate growth, toxicity, and the regulation of harmful algal blooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results are expected to define a new paradigm for
translational regulation in dinoflagellates, thus offering an innovative
approach to bridge the gap between genomics and physiological complexity in
dinoflagellates. Understanding the mechanism of translational regulation of
dinoflagellate gene expression may begin to provide insight into the regulation
of toxin production by these organisms and may be of direct use in
monitoring/managing harmful algal blooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The studies will provide critical insight into mechanisms relevant to
dinoflagellate growth, toxicity, and the regulation of harmful algal blooms,
with a long term goal of providing avenues for intervention. The project will
provide research experiences/training to high school students, undergraduate
interns and area high school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JOINT FUNDING BY
NSF AND NIEHS: The original proposal on which this project is based (R01
ES021949-01) was submitted to the National Institutes of Environmental Health
Sciences (NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding Opportunity Announcement RFA-
ES-11-013 , "Oceans, Great Lakes and Human Health (R01)", an opportunity jointly
sponsored by NSF. This project is cooperatively funded through separate awards
from NSF and NIEHS.