* 1313477
* Multiscale Asymptotic Analysis of  Tropical Atmosphere Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Joseph Biello, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2018
* USD 276,370.00

Our understanding of tropical meteorology and its ability to influence the
middle latitudes is the major stumbling block to increasing medium term (two
week) weather prediction over the United States (midlatitudes). In this project,
the PI proposes to study multiscale asymptotics for the PDEs which govern
tropical atmospheric waves and their connection to midlatitude waves, extending
the PI's previous work in the field. The three aspects of this project are: (1)
A boundary layer asymptotic analysis connecting tropical waves in the weak
temperature gradient approximation to quasi-geostrophic mid-latitude waves
through a new subtropical matching layer; (2) The effect of the (large scale)
climatological flow (the Hadley circulation) and the sub-grid circulation (moist
convection) on the Intraseasonal Multiscale Moist Dynamics models of tropical
waves and the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO). This involves the derivation of a
closed planetary scale description of the MJO using the PI's stochastic sub-grid
models and multi-scale asymptotic theory; (3) The analytic and numerical study
of three non-linear PDEs - two of which are non-local - which arise from the
analysis of tropical atmospheric waves.

The dynamics of the atmosphere in the middle latitudes has long been studied as
a problem of both practical interest (for understanding weather patterns over
North America and Europe) and of theoretical interest (since the equations which
govern atmospheric dynamics displayed a rich set of behavior as soon as
scientists began studying them). More recently, however, we have realized that
the tropical atmosphere also provides an enormous set of unsolved problems both
for practical purposes and for mathematical theory. Computer simulations have
shown that a better understanding of tropical atmospheric dynamics will not only
improve our understanding of tropical weather but it will greatly increase our
understanding of weather patterns in the middle latitudes, thereby improving
weather predictions over North America and Europe. This project focuses on two
general phenomena: (1) how tropical weather is organized on very large scales
and (2) how tropical weather patterns interact with midlatitude weather patterns
and thereby modify midlatitude weather. In the process of studying these
phenomena, the PI has found new simplifications to the complicated equations of
atmospheric dynamics - these equations are approximations which elucidate the
important aspects of tropical organization and tropical/midlatitude
interactions. This work is an example of scientific problems creating new
mathematics and careful mathematical analysis creating better scientific
theories.