* 1313551
* Supporting US-Based Students to Attend the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2013)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Bhavani Thuraisingham, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 26,001.00

This award provides travel support for U.S. based graduate student participants
to attend the 2013 International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2013), which
will be held in Dallas, Texas, from December 9-12, 2013. ICDM has established
itself as the world's premier research conference in data mining. The total
number of ICDM participants in the past has been in excess of 500, with a
majority of the participants coming from the U.S., followed by Europe and Asia.
The award provides travel scholarships to 16 U.S. based graduate student
participants to attend the ICDM conference and participate in the Doctoral
Forum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICDM provides an international forum for
presentation of original research results, as well as exchange and dissemination
of innovative and practical development experiences. The conference covers all
aspects of data mining, including algorithms, software and systems, and
applications, as well as related areas such as data management, machine learning
and bioinformatics. The conference proceedings are published by IEEE. The
conference seeks to continuously advance the state-of-the-art in data mining.
With the growth of the Web, the Internet, and data intensive technologies such
as sensor networks and bioinformatics, data mining has become an extremely
important area in information technology. Besides the technical program, the
conference features workshops, tutorials, panels, data mining contest. Since
2007 the conference has included a data mining contest, and since 2011, it has
also included a Ph.D. forum that provides valuable feedback on preliminary
research methods and results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong representation of
U.S. researchers, especially graduate students, in ICDM 2013 is critical for
maintaining U.S. competitiveness and for nurturing the next generation of young
researchers in an increasingly important area. The award also helps broaden the
participation of women and members of underrepresented groups in data mining
research.