* 1313627
* CNH: Small Natural Features with Large Ecosystem Functions in Urbanizing Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Malcolm Hunter, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,488,951.00

This project focuses on the management of small natural features with large
ecosystem functions in urbanizing landscapes. Many landscapes have small natural
features that are far more important for maintaining biodiversity or for
providing ecosystem services than one would expect based on their size. Examples
include small pools in upland landscapes and coral heads in an extensive bed of
sea grasses. Many landscapes are becoming more urban as communities grow and
their development patterns change, so effective management of smaller natural
features presents important challenges and opportunities. The small size of
these features often means they can be conserved while allowing activities like
development, forestry, or agriculture to continue. Prevailing conservation
strategies do not fully take advantage of these opportunities, however, often
because managers have limited scientific knowledge, especially of mechanisms
linking ecological and social processes. In northeastern forests, vernal pools
provide a model system in which to study the dynamics of small natural feature
management. Building on numerous ecological and economic theories, this
interdisciplinary research project will examine dynamic interactions associated
with vernal pools (seasonally inundated wetlands) in forested landscapes of the
urbanizing northeast of the U.S. Their overarching goals are (1) to explore the
biophysical and socioeconomic components of vernal pool ecology and management
as a coupled-systems model and (2) to improve strategies for conserving vernal
pools and other small natural features with large ecosystem service
significance. The investigators will couple spatially explicit ecological and
economic models within a dynamic system simulation model to examine the
interactions among regulator, community, and landowner decision-making and the
resulting landscape impacts on vernal pool species and broader-scale ecosystem
functions. Results from the simulation model will provide information to assess
the efficacy of strategies for conserving natural resources.

This project will provide the intellectual foundation for advances in amphibian
meta-population theory and microeconomic theories of land use and institutions.
It also will assess the utility of a relatively novel approach for managing
natural resources that extends far beyond vernal pools to analogous systems
around the globe, from prairie potholes in central North America to desert
springs in southern Africa. By focusing on small natural features with
disproportionate significance in urbanizing landscapes, the project will offer
insights to help transform the way society approaches resource conservation,
especially on private lands. By examining the merits of alternative management
strategies, the investigators will provide stakeholders with more efficient and
flexible management tools. They will test these tools by supporting policy
experiments on the ground in Maine. Sharing the experiences of Maine communities
with communities throughout New England and eastern Canada as well as with
academics and practitioners from around the globe will broaden the impact of
these activities. This project will support and mentor high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, and it will facilitate in-service training
of teachers from rural and Native American schools. This project is supported by
the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.