* 1313932
* SEES Fellows: Understanding Farmers' Valuation of Environmental Services and Forest Sustainability: Governance and Institutions in the Selva Zoque, Mexico
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Claudia Rodriguez-Solorzano, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2017
* USD 524,880.00

In this Award from the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows Program) Dr. Claudia Rodriguez-Solorzano from Dartmouth
College will study the factors that govern individual farmers decision making
when it comes to land-use decisions, how these farmers weigh the benefits of
providing environmental services, balanced against benefits that they derive
from using land for agricultural activities. This award has support from: the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, the Office of International and Integrative Activities, and
the Office of Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project will contribute to
local and global social-environmental sustainability by advancing our
understanding about motivations of human behavior associated with the provision
of environmental services. For this purpose the research will answer two
interrelated questions: 1) how do governance and institutions affect farmers
valuation of environmental services provided by forests? and 2) for those
farmers who value environmental services, what factors influence their decisions
on their land use? The project ties together current research on farmer behavior
from anthropology, collective action and institutions from political science,
and environmental services for economics. This multidisciplinary approach
provides a platform for developing an empirically based framework for developing
policies that will enhance sustainability of ecosystem service provision. The
proposed extensive empirical work will provide opportunity to test and refine
the framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses the Selva Zoque, a highly
biodiverse region of intact tropical forest in southern Mexico, as its
laboratory. Divided among the states of Oaxaca, Veracruz, and Chiapas, different
governance mechanisms are in place to support farmer provision of environmental
services, including community-based management and protected areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Rodriguez-Solorzano will be working with collaborators
Richard Howarth (Dartmouth College) and Eduardo Brondizio (Indiana University),
as well as young scientists (research assistants and students) on this
research.&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering
and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal
of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to
environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the necessary
workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project
will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an
independent research career related to sustainability.