* 1313558
* Development of Novel Toxin Detection Methodologies Applicable to Marine and Fresh Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Judy Westrick, Lake Superior State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2016
* USD 272,054.00

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) can have severe ecological, economical, and human
health impacts. At least 32 states have reported human or mammal exposures to
HAB toxins. Furthermore, studies suggest that the frequency and intensity of HAB
events have increased over the past few decades and will continue to increase
this century. Knowledge gaps remain regarding the ecological drivers of these
events which have hindered the development of successful mitigation strategies.
Most HABs are comprised of several genera with each species containing toxic and
non-toxic strains. This has made understanding the ecology of these events using
traditional methods extremely difficult. Advances in molecular techniques (e.g.
quantitative PCR) have facilitated the first steps towards a deeper
understanding of these complex events although previous studies have generally
focused on a single organism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers
at Lake Superior State University and the Texas A &amp; M University at Corpus
Christi will develop and employ a flexible real-time multiplex quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (MqPCR) assay for the simultaneous quantification of
co-occurring toxic HAB genera. This will facilitate the next important step in
furthering our understanding of these complex events and will significantly
improve the integration of HAB activities into existing state and federal
monitoring and observational programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four
primary objectives: (1) to develop MqPCR specific TaqMan primers and probes for
the detection of anatoxin-a producing cyanobacteria as well as toxic eugleniods
to incorporate into the existing MqPCR method; (2) to design and field validate
a flexible MqPCR that can be tailored to specific HAB events; (3) to use the
MqPCR to investigate the response of microcystin/nodularin-,
cylindrospermopsin-, saxitoxin-, and anatoxin-a-producing cyanobacteria as well
as potentially toxic euglenoids to environmental variables individually, as well
as in relation to each other, over the course of a bloom; and (4) to identify
the role of poorly understood toxin-producing algae with U.S. freshwaters. This
study is expected to provide important data for the modeling and prediction of
future HAB events as well as the development of early warning networks to
protect humans from exposure to HAB toxins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This work will further our understanding of the environmental drivers
forcing shifts in HAB genera in the Laurentian Great Lakes and other important
commercial, economical, and recreational freshwater resources systems across the
USA. As different regions of the country have problems with different suites of
toxins, the flexible MqPCR to be developed will give researchers and water
managers the ability to tailor the MqPCR assay to suit specific bloom situations
as needed. More generally, this work should significantly advance current
understanding of the complex ecology of these events, enable better prediction
of bloom toxicity, and improve the integration of HAB activities into existing
state and federal monitoring and observational programs. The project would also
provide for the training of a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JOINT FUNDING BY NSF AND NIEHS: The original
proposal on which this project is based (R01 ES021968-01) was submitted to the
National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences (NIH/NIEHS) in response to
Funding Opportunity Announcement RFA-ES-11-013 , "Oceans, Great Lakes and Human
Health (R01)", an opportunity jointly sponsored by NSF. This project is
cooperatively funded through separate awards from NSF and NIEHS.