* 1313862
* Collaborative Research: Fine-scale crustal accretion processes and rates of magma supply and replenishment at the southern Juan de Fuca Ridge neovolcanic zone
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Julie Bowles, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2015
* USD 22,925.00

A great deal has been learned about ridge morphology, volcanism, and magmatic
processes since the advent of seafloor observation, yet fundamental finer-scale
crustal accretion processes and their rates remain largely unknown. This
proposal leverages recent technological and methodological developments to
quantify the spatial, morphological, and geochemical variance within the
neovolcanic zone of three segments of the intermediate-spreading southern Juan
de Fuca Ridge (JdFR) to evaluate five hypotheses about crustal accretion and
melt supply: Hypothesis 1: Crustal accretion at intermediate-spreading ridges is
episodic on timescales of decades to hundreds of years. Hypothesis 2: Crustal
accretion is distributed across the &lt;8km width of the JdFR neovolcanic zone.
Hypothesis 3: Crustal accretion at intermediate-spreading ridges is mainly
accomplished during infrequent large-volume, large-effusion-rate eruptions
rather than the more common small-volume small-effusion-rate eruptions.
Hypothesis 4: Magma reservoir replenishment occurs on ~decadal time scales at
normal ridge segments, but ~millennial timescales at inflated
segments.Hypothesis 5: Source compositions are more variable than melting
processes at intermediate rate ridges.To evaluate these hypotheses, we propose a
synthesis of our time-constrained geologic and volcanologic data for each
segment to assess how their structural and magmatic evolution has fluctuated
over thousands of years. We propose high-precision trace element and radiogenic
isotope analyses to integrate geochemical and morphological variability with
seismological observables to assess crustal-level magma replenishment rates and
differentiation. We propose uranium-series analyses for the dual purpose of
supplementing eruption age constraints and evaluating how mantle-melting
processes compare between adjacent ?inflated? and ?normal? ridge segments. We
also propose to use targeted magnetic paleointensity measurements to measure
ages when neither radiocarbon nor U-series will work. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
brings two early career researchers Brian Dreyer and Julie Bowles further into
mid- ocean ridge science with the guidance of two senior scientists, Clague and
Gill. Undergraduate student will be involved in laboratory training, data
analysis and interpretation, and presentation of results. Results and public
outreach items will be posted on the Submarine Volcanism Project webpage at
http://www.mbari.org/volcanism. Our results are particularly significant for
Axial Seamount as it is a terminus for the regional cabled ocean observatory of
the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) designed to address fundamental
questions key to understanding the evolution of oceans and submarine volcanoes
over the next 25-30 years. Our proposal complements that objective because it
develops the volcanological and geological understanding of how the magmatic
system arrived at its present configuration over the last several decades to
millennia. This proposal supports the major objectives of both the Marine
Geology and Geophysics and Ridge2000 Programs. Dissemination of high-resolution
(1-m) bathymetric and geologic maps, volcanologic histories, and geochemical and
geomagnetic data for CoAxial segment, Axial Seamount, and northern Cleft
segments will offer an unparalleled view of the processes that shape the mid-
ocean ridge system, providing context and developing synergic interaction among
the ridge science community.