* 1313656
* CNH-Ex:   Coping with Change:  Water Availability and Arid Land Management
* GEO,ICER
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Kimberly Kirner, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 07/31/2016
* USD 249,934.00

Rapid changes in water availability, due to climate change or land and water
management practices, can present extreme challenges to arid land agricultural
systems, ecosystems, and economies. In the American West the existing risks of
water shortage, desertification, and low sustainability in arid lands have been
compounded over the last hundred years by the increased removal of water
resources from rural watersheds for use in cities. Agricultural arid land
communities struggle as they simultaneously face climate change, variable water
availability, encroaching urban development, increasingly polarized agricultural
politics, and rapid inflation in the costs of business. Climate change and
changes in water and land management policy can result not only in
destabilization of local agriculture and economies, but can also have
detrimental environmental effects, altering ecological systems and processes. In
the face of these challenges, households, communities, and governmental resource
management agencies will have to make changes in order to cope; however,
strategies to adapt to new conditions will depend on perceptions of climate
change, water availability, and how these affect the local agricultural resource
base. Studying the effects of changes in water availability on arid lands and
their key stakeholder groups has been particularly challenging because the
impacts of climate change and water policy are felt at a variety of scales,
including Federal, State, regional and local. At each scale individuals perceive
the changes differently and respond in unique ways shaped by cultural and
institutional influences. This project will examine how various stakeholder
groups at different scales perceive climate and water policy changes and how
these perceptions affect natural resources and management decisions. The
investigators will examine historical data on climate, water availability, and
vegetation, combining this with interviews, participatory GIS, documented water
management policies, and historical personal accounts of environmental change
and response in order to assess the relationship between measured and perceived
environmental change as well as to understand better how people's perceptions
shape the effectiveness and long-term sustainability of coping strategies. By
studying the human and natural systems together, the investigators will be able
to examine the complex feedbacks between them through time and across spatial
scales.

This project will have significant implications for land management, water
policy, and biodiversity conservation planning in semi-arid lands and other
water-limited environments. Our empirical analysis will allow replication and
model development for other systems or locations to examine the resilience and
sustainability of local practices and government policies. The results of this
study will contribute to developing sustainable approaches to coping with
variable water availability and policy shifts by helping land managers
understand the past and plan for the future. The results will also contribute to
better understanding of the dynamic relationship between climate, water
availability, and vegetation communities in the Eastern Sierra region, which
will be of interest to land managers developing conservation and range
management plans. Water policy and conservation planning have traditionally been
a top-down exercise, ignoring scale, changes through time and from place to
place. This project will generate new knowledge about how environmental
perception and response vary with scale and time, and how this knowledge can be
used to adaptively manage coupled natural and human systems.