* 1313485
* A Multi-Wavelength Observing Program of Io Using Adaptive Optics and Interferometric Techniques
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2020
* Imke de Pater, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 12/31/2020
* USD 544,242.00

Io is one of the most remarkable bodies in our solar system, with volcanoes
driven by tidal heating and complex interactions with Jupiter's magnetosphere.
Despite extensive studies from the ground and from spacecraft, fundamental
questions, concerning the nature and location of internal dissipation, the
composition of the dominant magma, and the interactions among the volcanoes,
surface frost, atmosphere, and Jupiter's magnetic field, remain unanswered. The
proposing team will conduct an extensive observational program of imaging and
spectroscopy to monitor Io's volcanoes and atmosphere, making use of a wide
range of telescope facilities including the Atacama Large
Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA), the Combined Array for Research in
Millimeter-Wave Astronomy (CARMA), the Infrared Telescope Facility (IRTF), and
the Gemini and Keck Observatories. These observations will yield (1) global maps
of Io at 1-5 microns, at least once a year, to map and monitor volcanic
activity; (2) determinations of the sulfur monoxide gas distribution while Io is
in Jupiter's shadow; (3) observations of sulfur monoxide and sulfur dioxide
gases to constrain the structure of and dynamics in Io's atmosphere; and (4)
correlations of atmospheric sulfur monoxide and sulfur dioxide gases with sulfur
dioxide ice and volcanic hot spots. The global infrared maps of Io, will be
integrated into the USGS global Io database. The project will support the work
of undergraduate and graduate students, and proposing team members will be
involved in a variety of public outreach activities.