* 1313375
* I-Corps:  OceanComm: Reliable, High Data Rate Underwater Communications and Positioning
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Andrew Singer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Salt water is a conductor and as a result, currently only extremely low
frequency radio based communication technologies work underwater: These have not
been able support GPS, Wi-Fi, or any high data rate communications.

One of the only practical methods to carry information wirelessly undersea is
through acoustic wave propagation. Acoustic waves can travel for hundreds of
miles, but are five orders of magnitude slower than radio waves. This gives rise
to severe reverberation and inter-symbol interference, especially over long
distances. Existing acoustic modems can only achieve data rates of a few 100s of
bits/second. The research team investigated the development of turbo
equalization - a technique that not only mitigates inter-symbol interference but
also leverages the diversity for error correction. Additionally harsh Doppler
effects warp the time-scale of the waveform randomly, which can be catastrophic
for communications if not compensated dynamically. This team developed a turbo
equalizer that constantly tracks and compensates for Doppler effects and then
built a wireless underwater modem prototype integrating this algorithm. The
modem prototype has undergone extensive US Navy field-tests demonstrating that
it is both highly reliable and 100 times faster than existing commercial modems.

The oceans cover 71% of the Earth's surface, carry 90% of international trade,
are the home for over 95% of the world?s living biomass, and hold the vast
majority of its mineral and fossil resources. The exploration, utilization and
protection of this space is important to society, but any coordinated effort
undersea will require positioning, navigation and communication. Therefore,
technical innovation in underwater communication will have profound impact on
many fronts: environmental monitoring, scientific exploration, marine renewable
energy generation, commercial fishing, defense, shipping route protection and
security, and resource discovery and production.

The military, resource discovery and production industries are among the broad
user-base that would benefit greatly from this technology. This project brings
together researchers from signal processing, communications, and oceanography to
provide unprecedented capabilities to the underwater environment.