* 1313565
* CAREER: Engineering Bacteriophage as Amplifiable Platforms for Analyte Sensing and Identification
* MPS,DMR
* 07/31/2012,03/31/2016
* Jennifer Cha, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2016
* USD 373,207.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1056808 PI: Cha, Jennifer ORG: UC San Diego

Title: CAREER: Engineering Bacteriophage as Amplifiable Platforms for Analyte
Sensing and Identification

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: It is proposed to investigate the M13 bacteriophage virus as
a biological platform that will provide amplified, optically-detectable
responses to the binding of biological analytes. The bacteriophage will be
engineered to bind antigenic species with very high specificity through its pIII
protein peptide tails; the correct sequence to obtain specific analyte binding
will be found using phage display. Moreover, because the body of each M13
bacteriophage contains over 2700 pVIII coat proteins, each of which can either
be genetically engineered or chemically modified to react with a given set of
nanomaterials, it is possible to obtain a large amplification in signal
detection in response to a single binding event, allowing for rapid visible
readouts with high sensitivity and high throughput. For the samples that
generate a positive optical signal, the identity of the antigens in solution
will be obtained by labeling bacteriophage with specific DNA oligonucleotides
and nanoparticle reporters that will be detected with high sensitivities by
surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). Because the SERS analyses need only
be performed after a positive optical signal is obtained, the need for expensive
spectrophotometric sample testing will be greatly reduced. This sensor design is
made possible by the dual, orthogonal biomolecular recognition of the
bacteriophage to both the antigen and the nanomaterial developer. The proposed
research will be divided into the following four phases: (1) discovery and
isolation of antigen-specific binding bacteriophage with pH-sensitive
affinities, (2) study of nanoparticle aggregation by modified bacteriophage to
create easily observed visible changes in solution color, (3) implementation of
these viruses into enzyme-free amplifiable sensors for rapid detection and
maximum sensitivity, and (4) engineering of these viruses to couple qualitative
detection with highly sensitive, amplified modes for antigen identification.

BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed biosensing scheme has easily recognized advantages
over so-called "sandwich" assays that have been used to sense the presence of,
and identify, specific proteins/antigens. These methods involve relatively
unstable components, e.g., enzymes that catalyze reactions needed to amplify the
signal. Such methods are therefore not practicable in environments where
refrigeration and specialized detection apparatus are not available. An
important feature of this proposal lies in the promise of providing selective
and highly sensitive sensors sufficiently robust to be used under sub-optimal
conditions in the field to identify antigenic agents and other disease markers.
The PI is a member of the new Nanoengineering Department at UCSD. She will
contribute to building the undergraduate and graduate curricula of this
department through courses in Intermolecular and Surface Forces and Advanced
Nanofabrication that she is teaching. In efforts to broaden participation in
science and engineering, she has established relationships with the UCSD Society
of Women Engineers, the National Society of Black Engineers, and the Society of
Hispanic Professional Engineers. These organizations provide direct access to
underrepresented undergraduate students and also a bridge to the local K-12
community. As a specific K-12 outreach activity, the PI will work with the UCSD
BioBridge program to integrate the proposed sensing diagnostics into existing
middle and high school chemistry and biology classes. She is also a participant
in the annual San Diego Science Festival that hosts high school students for
science demonstrations in working laboratories. A particularly important feature
of her plans for integration of research and education involves her prior
experience as an industrial scientist and her desire to convey to her students
the challenges associated with implementing nanoscience and nanoengineering into
real-world, commercially viable technologies.