* 1313936
* Linking Limnology to Cyanotoxins in Drinking Water Using Buoy Sensors and Auto-Sampling
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Gabriella Pinter, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2018
* USD 352,527.00

In the United States, the number of lakes supporting accumulations of toxic
cyanobacterial is on the rise. Consequently there is increasing human health
risk associated with lake recreational activities as well as the consumption of
fish. The physicochemical factors associated with cyanotoxin production are ill-
defined at time-scales relevant to cyanobacterial ecology (i.e., minutes to
hours). Moreover, in the U.S. lakes provide source water for drinking water
treatment plants (DWTP); acute poisonings are well documented, but chronic
exposure to low levels of cyanotoxins in drinking water is not. Lake conditions
(limnological variables) that support cyanotoxin production are intrinsically
linked to the occurrence of cyanotoxins in drinking water because these
conditions also influence cyanotoxin removal efficiency by DWTP
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at the
University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee (UWM) will use high-resolution sensors on
buoys and a new automated sampling device to investigate relationships between
limnological variables and the presence of cyanotoxins in lakes and drinking
water. Lake Winnebago in the Lake Michigan watershed and a DWTP drawing water
from the lake will serve as the model system. The in situ sensors will measure
physical environmental variables and algal pigments; nutrients, community
composition, and cyanotoxins will be measured in preserved water samples
collected by the automated sampler. A zebra fish assay will be used to detect
unknown toxins and overall water toxicity. This approach should significantly
advance our understanding of lacustrine cyanotoxin dynamics at sub-daily time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will leverage the
support of other ongoing projects, including the NSF Undergraduate Research and
Mathematics program at UWM as well as resources, facilities, and services
provided by the Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network and the Children's
Environmental Health Sciences Core Center at UWM. The latter two organizations
will disseminate data and findings to the external community, thereby reaching a
wide network of transdisciplinary scientists involved in human and ecological
health research. The project will provide training and support for a female
graduate student and several undergraduate interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JOINT
FUNDING BY NSF AND NIEHS: The original proposal on which this project is based
(R01 ES022075-01) was submitted to the National Institutes of Environmental
Health Sciences (NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding Opportunity Announcement RFA-
ES-11-013 , "Oceans, Great Lakes and Human Health (R01)", an opportunity jointly
sponsored by NSF. This project is cooperatively funded through separate awards
from NSF and NIEHS.