* 1313692
* CONFERENCE:  2013 FASEB Conference on Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangements to be held July 21-26, 2013 in Steamboat Springs, CO
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Wolf-Dietrich Heyer, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology
(FASEB) conference on Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangements will be
held July 21-26, 2013 in Steamboat Springs, Colorado. Genetic recombination
plays a key role in molding genome structure and maintaining genome integrity in
all organisms. DNA damage can be produced by environmental agents or by
endogenous processes, most notably by errors and mechanistic failure during
chromosome replication. Genetic recombination, both homologous and non-
homologous, repairs this damage. These repair events have the potential to
create genetic change, and chromosome rearrangements caused by inaccurate repair
are often associated with the transition to cancer. For sexual reproduction,
homologous recombination ensures proper chromosome disjunction during meiosis
and generates genetic diversity. Programmed chromosomal rearrangements generate
diversity in cells of the immune system, as well as in disease-causing
microorganisms. While considerable progress has been made in understanding the
mechanisms and biological consequences of genetic recombination, much remains to
be learned regarding the underlying mechanisms and regulation of this
fundamental biological process, and the conference is devoted to progress
towards this goal. Topics to be covered include biochemistry and mechanisms of
recombination, connections between replication, repair and recombination in
eukaryotes and prokaryotes, meiosis, genome rearrangements and evolution, and
maintenance of genome integrity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Progress
in any scientific field is fostered by communication between researchers, and
this is an important aim of the conference. It will assemble about 200
investigators who study diverse aspects of recombination, in a range of
biological systems and with different experimental approaches. All attendees
give platform or poster presentations covering new and unpublished work, and
there is ample opportunity for discussion from all participants. An abstract
book will provide abstracts and participant contact information, to facilitate
interaction beyond the time frame of the meeting. Progress also requires the
incorporation of researchers who are new to a field. Special efforts are made to
include young investigators and members of underrepresented groups, including
women; for many, this will be their first opportunity to present. To further
promote this goal, one in six platform slots are allocated to talks selected
from abstracts, and are expected to be directed to young investigators. A "Meet
the Experts" session is dedicated to fostering interaction between speakers and
other attendees, especially graduate students and postdocs. In addition, travel
scholarships will be used to encourage participation by young investigators,
trainees and by members of underrepresented groups.