* 1313703
* CNH: Diversity and Disease in a Post-Trauma Urban Landscape
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Caroline Taylor, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,410,363.00

This interdisciplinary research project will focus on ecological and
socioeconomic processes following the catastrophic flooding in New Orleans
associated with Hurricane Katrina in August 2005. Urban landscapes are excellent
settings within which to examine interactions ecological and human communities.
Urban areas that have experienced a traumatic event can be highly tractable
systems for studying potential parallels between ecological and socioeconomic
systems as well as feedbacks among them. With acute trauma resulting in an
initial state change, the assembly and reassembly of proximate or coincident
urban ecological and human communities can be a coupled dynamic, where outcomes
are contingent on responses to common forcing factors or interactions arising
from management interventions. The catastrophic flooding of New Orleans
following Hurricane Katrina resulted in a natural laboratory for investigating
assembly and reassembly of coupled natural and human systems. The investigators
will determine the extent to which ecological and socioeconomic diversity
exhibited parallel responses to Katrina-related flooding. They also will examine
how interventions executed as public health measures shaped relationships and
interactions between ecological and socioeconomic diversity. They will conduct
geographic information system-based analyses of landscape heterogeneity and
socioeconomic variation before and after Hurricane Katrina as well as plot-based
inventories of post-Katrina plant communities while accounting for flooding and
socioeconomic stratification. They will examine the ecology and demography of
Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus), a habitat-dependent primary reservoir of
zoonotic pathogens, in order to understand human health outcomes of flooding.
This facet of the research will involve a trap-based census; population genetic
analysis of abundance and dispersal, and histological analysis of pathogen
prevalence. Mail surveys and in-person interviews of households proximate to
plant inventory and trapping sites as well as households in four neighborhoods
having different income and ethnicity characteristics will be administered to
determine how perceptions of risk compare to physical measures of exposure risk
across the city. Information gained from these studies will be integrated into a
spatially explicit predictive model of Norway rat demography to assess
ecological and human-health outcomes of alternative control scenarios reflecting
habitat suitability, movement, and risk perceptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trauma
can have enduring consequences on environments and societies. Understanding the
interplay between ecological and human communities will better prepare societies
to anticipate and manage trauma inflicted by catastrophic events. This project
will help catalyze conceptual unification of disparate fields of research on the
composition, assembly, and structure of communities, and it will generate new
information and insights needed to foster and inform societal action at a time
when unprecedented resources are being invested to rebuild New Orleans. By
involving community partners, cross-university academic and public outreach
programs will provide opportunities to promote awareness of trauma, diversity,
and public health across stakeholder and underrepresented groups in the city.
With urbanization placing an increasingly greater proportion of the global
population at risk because of catastrophic events, lessons about the traumas
experienced by New Orleans will provide new knowledge of scholarly and practical
value to residents and decision makers in communities around the world. This
project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
(CNH) Program.