* 1313958
* SEES Fellows: Living with locusts: Training an ecophysiologist to incorporate bioeconomic modeling and collaborative with applied food security and agricultural agencies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Arianne Cease, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 338,921.00

In this Award from the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows Program), Dr. Arianne Cease from Arizona State University
will investigate the interesting dynamic coupling between land use for
agriculture (grazing of livestock) and the outbreak of swarms of locusts. This
award is supported by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences and the Office of Integrative and
International Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will (1)
develop a bioeconomic model to investigate the interactions between human
behavior, insect-nutrient relations, and food security, via mathematical
modeling of this complex system; (2) investigate how rangeland management
impacts Oedalus locust outbreaks and migration through changes in macronutrients
available in their food plants; and (3) work with stakeholders to devise policy
which takes into account livestock-locust interactions and disseminate these
findings through aid agencies to populations impacted by
locusts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of studies like that proposed in this work
is to develop better land management practices that take into account the
unusually complex couplings between agricultural activities and ecological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Cease will be working with collaborators Prof.
Jon Harrison of the School of Life Sciences of Arizona State University as well
as Prof. Eli Fenechel at the School of Forestry and Environmental Studies of
Yale University. The work will also involve collaboration with Profs. James
Elser and Asst. Dean Charles Kazilek at Arizona State University; Prof. Stephen
J. Simpson of the School of Biological Sciences, University of Sydney and Dr.
James D. Woodman of the Australian Plague Locust Commission; and Dr. Todd Crosby
of USAID/Project Yaajeenda and Dr. Aliou Diongue of the Plant Protection
Service, Senegal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows)
program, with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions
that lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating
the necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support,
this project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish
themselves in an independent research career related to sustainability.