* 1313049
* Various Aspects of the Water-Wave Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Katie Oliveras, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2017
* USD 153,764.00

The research outlined in this proposal addresses two separate aspects of the
water-wave problem within the framework of Euler's Equations. First, the
spectral stability of both two- and three-dimensional periodic traveling waves
will be examined. Results will be obtained numerically and analytically using a
nonlocal formulation of the water-wave problem due to Ablowitz, Fokas, and
Musslimani. Second, this proposal will develop methods for the reconstruction of
surface waves from pressure measurements. Building upon previous work with
collaborators, this proposal will generalize the relationship between pressure
and the surface elevation to allow for pressure measurements to be taken at
arbitrary depths (not just the bottom). In addition, physical parameters that
are difficult to physically measure a priori will be formally eliminated from
the model without approximation. Asymptotic models will also be derived and
compared with numerical experiments. Understanding the physical conditions
necessary to generate rogue waves or tsunamis aids in predicting when these
events could occur. This proposal seeks to better understand these physical
conditions by investigating the mathematical models that describe surface water
waves. Due to the complicated nature of these equations, techniques such as
stability analysis increase our understanding of how waves behave over some
period of time. This project will investigate the stability of traveling wave
solutions in order to gain better insight into the physical parameters and types
of perturbations that could give rise to rogue waves or tsunamis. Alone, this
information is not sufficient in practical use. One must also rely on real-time
measurements the current ocean state as part of any prediction or forecasting
system. As part of this proposal, fast and accurate methods of reconstructing
the current wave-height from pressure data will be identified and compared with
numerical and field data.