* 1313908
* SEES Fellows: Integrating biology and econometrics across multiple scales for sustainable wildlife trade management
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mary Blair, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2017
* USD 418,464.00

In this Award from the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows Program) Dr. Mary E. Blair from the American Museum of
Natural History will carry out genetic measurements of slow lorises combined
with socioeconomic studies of those people involved in the trade of these
animals. This award has support from: the Biology Directorate, the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, and the Office of International
and Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will combine
genetic information from slow lorises as well as socioeconomic data for
individuals involved in the trade of these species, to test the hypothesis that
the trade in these species is concentrated in Vietnam, which serves as a major
transit market for trade within Southeast Asia and to study whether regional and
international demand are more important than local factors in driving this
trade. The work is unique in that it integrates socioeconomic and biological
analyses at multiple scales to develop a better understanding of wildlife
trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of studies like that proposed in this work
is to better understand the socioeconomic drivers that influence the trade in
wildlife. The ultimate aim of work like this is to better inform policy makers
about the underlying social and economic drivers of this trade, with an eye
towards developing sustainable management strategies to mitigate the threat to
species from this trade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Blair will be working with
collaborators Dr. Eleanor J. Sterling of the Center for Biodiversity and
Conservation at the American Museum of Natural History, Prof. Gautam Sethi at
Bard College's Center for Environmental Policy and Dr. Minh D. Le from the
Centre for Natural Resources and Environmental Studies at Vietnam National
University. Dr. Blair will also be mentoring young students in this project, and
she will develop outreach materials for use in the United States and
Vietnam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Science,
Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program,
with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that
lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the
necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this
project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves
in an independent research career related to sustainability.