* 1313514
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrated Paleoceanographic Analysis of the Late Paleozoic Midcontinent Sea
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Achim Herrmann, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 05/31/2016
* USD 220,001.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrated Paleoceanographic Analysis of the Late
Paleozoic Midcontinent Sea&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achim Herrmann, Arizona State
University. EAR-1052988&lt;br/&gt;Thomas Algeo, Univ. Cincinnatti,
EAR-1053449&lt;br/&gt;James Barrick, Texas Tech University,
EAR-1053042&lt;br/&gt;Bernd Haupt, Penn State University,
EAR-1052998&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Due to different
environmental conditions and paleogeographic settings of ancient times, some
past sedimentary environments have no good modern analogues. For instance,
previous interpretations of environmental conditions of black shale deposition
centered on applying modern analogs of coastal upwelling or ?Black-Sea type?
silled basin topographies. However, a superestuarine circulation model has been
proposed recently to explain the abundant and widespread Paleozoic black shale
deposits of Midcontinent North America. It is the purpose of this research
project to use an interdisciplinary approach to investigate paleoceanographic
conditions during the deposition of Pennsylvanian cyclothems of Midcontinent
North America and to test the ?superestuarine circulation hypothesis?. This work
is a comprehensive data-model synthesis study and geochemical proxies (strontium
and oxygen isotopes of biogenic apatite; bulk major- and trace-element abundance
data, TOC-TIC-S concentrations, and petrographic data) will be compared to
biofacies distribution patterns and to results of numerical ocean circulation
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding provides research opportunities for
undergraduates at several universities and will support one PhD thesis.