* 1313756
* CNH: The Effects of China's Grain-for-Green Program on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural-Human System in Rural China
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Richard Bilsborrow, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,164,984.00

Perverse economic effects can create strong negative feedbacks between natural
and human systems. For example, short-term, fine-scale, net economic benefits
from uses of natural resources that compromise the future supply of related
resources can reduce long-term, large-scale economic benefits. Numerous
governmental programs have effectively tested the hypothesis that such negative
feedbacks can be eliminated with economic counter-incentives, but few if any of
these programs have been suitable for and subjected to the rigorous scientific
analysis needed to determine the true results of the test and help generalize
results. This project will analyze what is probably the largest program within
the most widely used type of counter-incentive, the Sloping Lands Conversion
Program of China, a program of payment for environmental services. Under this
program, the government pays farmers to convert cropland on sloping or otherwise
ecologically sensitive areas to forest or grassland. Researchers will survey
farmers and local governmental agencies in three provinces to determine how the
program was implemented and affected the decisions of farmers, detect changes in
land cover using satellite imagery, and model carbon storage and water
availability based on field measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this
project will be of great value to policy makers and land use managers in the
U.S., where similar programs have been tried and are envisioned in the context
of ecological restoration and protection. The research also will help inform the
global discourse on reducing carbon emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation. This project will strengthen scientific collaboration in both
social and natural science between the U.S. and China, and train numerous
undergraduate and graduate students.