* 1313783
* Development of Novel Detection and Prediction Algorithms for Microsystis Blooms
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Michael Twardowski, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2017
* USD 382,869.00

Cyanobacteria-dominated harmful algal blooms (HABs) currently pose a serious
health and economic risk to inhabitants and users of the Great Lakes, often
producing toxins in sufficient quantity to cause severe health problems to
humans and animals. The Great Lakes are a vital national resource, given they
are the largest surface freshwater system on earth and provide drinking water
for more than 40 million people. Current observational platforms have been
focused on the nutrient and phytoplankton ecology measurements. There has been
very little effort to characterize the optical variability associated with the
HABs in the Great Lakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team
at the University of New Hampshire and the University of Wisconsin - Madison, in
collaboration with the NOAA Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory, will
develop these capabilities with state-of-the-art instrumentation aimed at
detecting HAB events as they initiate while capturing the environmental
conditions that promote them. There are two main objectives: (1) to develop a
new quantitative detection algorithm for HABs in the Great Lakes based on remote
sensing imagery by refining and augmenting currently qualitative algorithms; and
(2) to develop an ecological niche model to predict the onset of HABs in the
Great Lakes with inputs from remotely-sensed data products and state-of-the-art
in-situ environmental measurements. One component will consist of implementing a
monitoring program consisting of autonomous measurements - combined with ship
measurements - of environmental parameters in western Lake Erie and Saginaw Bay
critical to HAB initiation and promotion. These measurements will be used in the
development of new satellite products that can provide synoptic observation of
environmental signatures of these toxic algal blooms. They will combine these
new satellite products with other synoptic satellite environmental products and
available in-situ environmental measurements to construct an historical data set
that characterizes HAB events in the context of associated environmental
conditions that cultivate the blooms. This data set will guide the development
of an innovative ecological niche model based on multivariate analysis that will
predict the spatial and temporal distribution of imminent HAB events from real-
time environmental inputs. The overall intellectual merit of the work lies in
enhanced observational and detection approaches through remote sensing
technology application, and an improved understanding of bloom development
leading to better predictive tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This
work will add considerable observational information related to HABs for this
and future studies in the Great Lakes and other freshwater systems. Secondly, it
will lead to increased understanding of the ecology of these blooms that will
better assist and inform water quality policy decisions. Our ultimate aim is to
develop a critical set of tools for effectively managing human health risks
associated with cyanobacterial blooms in water bodies around the
globe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JOINT FUNDING BY NSF AND NIEHS: The original proposal
on which this project is based (R01 ES021929-01) was submitted to the National
Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences (NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding
Opportunity Announcement RFA-ES-11-013 , "Oceans, Great Lakes and Human Health
(R01)", an opportunity jointly sponsored by NSF. This project is cooperatively
funded through separate awards from NSF and NIEHS.