* 1313589
* RAPID: Network Improvisation in Emergency Response: An Application to Debris Removal Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2012,11/30/2014
* David Mendonca, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 11/30/2014
* USD 49,999.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) will investigate decision making
processes within the emergent multi-organizational network that is undertaking
post-Hurricane Sandy debris removal operations in the State of New York. The
research is expected to contribute to an expanding body of research on how
organizations improvise: that is, how they take creative and useful action under
time constraint, with little or no possibility of undoing previous actions. This
work will discover and examine relationships between degree of organizational
improvisation and overall organizational performance, focusing specifically on
tradeoffs between efficiency, effectiveness and distribution of effort by debris
removal teams in the field. Detailed performance data will be extracted from
records of loads hauled (as collected using existing computer-based systems),
supplemented with questionaire data and cost estimates. The work will employ and
extend methods drawn from research on queueing networks to analyze debris
removal activities, supplemented by statistical- and simulation-based methods
for characterizing the behaviors of individuals and groups within these
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will include outreach to practicing
professionals concerning the methods and results of this research. It will
produce validated data sets for addressing improvised behavior within complex
queueing networks, along with results that will be broadly disseminated through
publications and presentations in academic and practitioner venues. Finally,
this work is expected to contribute to society's ability to plan for and respond
to large-scale disasters, particularly by improving understanding of the
determinants of debris removal performance.