* 1313804
* CNH: Experimental Frameworks for Evaluating Net Effects of Hydrologic Service Payments on Coupled Social-Ecohydrological Systems
* GEO,RISE
* 01/15/2014,09/30/2019
* Russell Congalton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,475,000.00

As global concern over water scarcity and declining water quality grows, payment
for hydrological services (PHS) programs, whereby land users receive payments in
exchange for adopting practices favorable to water resources, offer a potential
solution for ensuring clean and plentiful water. However, because PHS programs
seek to influence both human behavior and the environment, they are extremely
complex, and the scientific understanding needed to maximize their effectiveness
is lacking. The goal of this project is to analyze the interacting social,
economic, ecological, hydrological and policy impacts of Mexico's PHS programs,
which have been operating for over a decade and thus represent some of the
longest running programs of their kind in the world. The project will focus on
two types of PHS programs operating within the Pixquiac and Gavilanes watersheds
near Xalapa and Coatepec, Veracruz: 1) the "national" program, which is
centrally organized and administered by the Mexican government, and 2) the local
"matching" program, which requires greater involvement of diverse local
institutions in the financing, planning, and execution of the program. Impacts
of the PHS programs on water and other (e.g., biodiversity, carbon) ecosystem
services will be assessed using a combination of field data collection and
modeling. Interviews and surveys will be used to assess the influence of the two
PHS programs (national and local) on people's decisions, as well as interactions
with other social qualities such as perceptions of equity and well-being,
health, income opportunities, and social organization. The information collected
for the human and natural systems will be integrated through the application of
spatial mapping tools, watershed modeling, and participatory workshops involving
multiple actors in order to identify the key factors that determine the long-
term success and cost-benefit trade-offs of PHS programs. This integrated
approach will also be used to test the effects of different PHS policy and land
use change scenarios on ecosystem services and long-term watershed
sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute significantly
to enhancing society's ability to protect water resources by developing an
interdisciplinary approach for understanding how PHS policies both shape - and
are shaped by - the coupled human and natural systems they seek to influence.
Additionally, an important aspect of this research is that it will advance the
current level of knowledge about PHS programs to encompass the larger concept of
watershed sustainability, which to date has not been an integral component of
PHS yet is crucial to protecting water resources. Results will be integrated
into two science-based decision support tools that can be used by landowners and
decision makers achieve desired watershed management and policy goals while
avoiding unintended consequences: an aggregate sustainability index that
provides concise information on watershed health, and a GIS-based mapping
framework that spatially integrates impacts of land use change on ecosystem
services and their relationship with coupled human and natural systems. Given
that PHS programs are rapidly becoming an important policy mechanism worldwide
for addressing critical environmental issues related to water supply and
quality, the findings from this research will have broad impacts by helping to
guide the design of more effective PHS policies across the globe. To ensure
successful local and global application of this research, findings will be
widely disseminated through diverse portals, including policy forums, news
media, interdisciplinary and disciplinary scientific journals, an edited book
volume on global PHS programs, and a series of educational modules and seminars
developed for both the middle school and university levels. Finally, this
project will train and mentor one postdoctoral research associate, four graduate
students, and several undergraduate students, all of whom will gain valuable
skills in interdisciplinary thinking and analysis and sustainability science
within the context water resource management.