* 1313896
* Contextual Research-Empirical--A Direct Method for Teaching and Measuring Engineering Professional Skills
* EDU,DRL
* 10/31/2012,04/30/2014
* Ashley Ater-Kranov, Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology Inc (ABET)
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 04/30/2014
* USD 244,354.00

The investigators propose to create a method to teach and measure the
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) professional skills in
the form of an undergraduate group learning intervention called the curricular
debrief (CD) method. No direct method for teaching and measuring the
simultaneous presence of these skills, which are now generally recognized as the
standard in the undergraduate engineering education field, has existed in the
literature prior to the CD method &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
expand, empirically study, and refine the CD method and Engineering Professional
Skills Rubric (EPS), which is the accompanying measurement instrument. The
primary research goal is to determine the instructional and educational impacts
of the integration of the CD method into freshman to senior level courses across
the undergraduate curricula.. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing research conducted
at WSU to establish the initial reliability and validity of the CD method has
shown its potential for significant nationwide impact. Yet, more research is
needed to provide strong evidence that the CD method as a performance task and
the EPS Rubric as a measurement instrument are reliable and valid. This study's
primary research goal is to rigorously establish the reliability and validity of
the CD method and the EPS Rubric. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A descriptive collective
case study methodology and a randomized design will be used. This methodology
will allow the investigators to establish efficacy and validity while
understanding the contexts in which parallel performance tasks are implemented
in three distinct sites and four distinct course-type settings. The settings are
WSU, the University of Idaho, and Norwich University in Vermont.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will directly contribute to fundamental
research in engineering education on a problem of national importance and
interest---how the nation can prepare future engineers with the skills they need
for work in a global context.