* 1313319
* Astrophysical and Cosmological Information Content in Anisotropies of the Near and Far-IR Background and Intensity Fluctuations of Atomic and Molecular Lines
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Asantha Cooray, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 333,051.00

This award will support theoretical and data analysis studies to understand the
spatial fluctuations of the unresolved cosmic near and far-infrared backgrounds
and the intensity mapping of atomic and molecular lines. The infrared background
at optical to near-IR wavelengths is the direct starlight emission from
galaxies, while the far-infrared background is mainly due to reprocessed light
by the intervening dust. The work will enable us to better understand intrahalo
light, intrahalo dust and faint reionizing galaxies at redshifts greater than 6
through measurements involving anisotropies of the near and far-infrared
backgrounds. The research team will (1) measure or improve the existing
measurements, (2) interpret unresolved fluctuations seen in Spitzer, Hubble, and
CIBER data, and (3) conduct a multiband study from 0.5 to 4.5 microns to measure
the spectral energy distribution of the fluctuations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the high-redshift universe is one of the
most pressing priorities in contemporary astronomy. This work has great
significance because an improved understanding in our knowledge of the infrared
background will have significant consequences for our knowledge of how galaxies
form and evolve. The broader impacts of this work include an ongoing research
program that involves undergraduate students. The research program and other
topics in cosmology will also be integrated into a Computational Physics course
at UC Irvine.