* 1313861
* Mechanisms of frequency preference in neurons and networks: biophysics and dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Horacio Rotstein, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Rhythmic oscillations at characteristic frequency bands are ubiquitous in the
nervous systems. They emerge from the cooperative activity of the participating
neurons and network synaptic connectivity. Understanding how the intrinsic
biophysical properties of neurons interact with oscillatory input currents and
synaptic conductances is essential to understand the mechanisms by which
preferred frequencies are selected in oscillatory neuronal networks. Resonance
refers to the ability of a neuron to exhibit a preferred frequency response to
oscillatory inputs. Existing mathematical studies on resonance have focused
primarily on linear models or linearized conductance-based models. Nonlinear
effects have been examined using numerical simulations. A general theory of
resonance in neuronal models is lacking, as are appropriate mathematical tools
to answer key biophysical and dynamic questions. The aim of this project is to
develop general theoretical principles for the generation of preferred frequency
responses in neuronal systems that incorporate the effects of nonlinearities and
the diversity of time scales, and to expand existing dynamical systems tools in
ways that allow for the investigation of the underlying mechanisms. This project
has three specific aims: (i) to identify the neuronal subthreshold mechanisms of
generation of preferred frequency responses in both amplitude and phase to
oscillatory inputs, (ii) to identify the mechanisms by which subthreshold
resonances are communicated from the subthreshold to the spiking regimes, and
(iii) to evaluate how resonance and synaptic currents interact to generate
preferred frequency responses to oscillatory inputs in networks of neurons. The
models in this project have two levels of description. Biophysical models are
used to understand the effect of the participating currents on the network
dynamics and to make experimentally verifiable predictions. Minimal models are
used for mathematical analysis using dynamical systems tools. The mathematical
tools to be developed will provide a theoretical framework for the investigation
of preferred frequency responses in models with higher levels of descriptions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rhythmic oscillations at characteristic frequency bands
have been observed in various areas of the brain and have been implicated in
cognition and motor behavior in both health and disease. Network oscillations
result from the cooperative activity of the participating neurons, but how these
neurons interact to produce coherent activity in the brain is only beginning to
be understood. This project deals with the responses of neurons to oscillatory
inputs, and how these responses can be used to understand the dynamics of
neuronal networks. As test cases, we focus primarily on neurons of the
hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex. Rhythmic oscillations in these areas of
the brain have been implicated in various cognitive processes including
learning, memory and navigation. Neuronal networks in these areas are also the
focus of diseases of the nervous systems such as epilepsy and Alzheimer's
disease. The purpose of this project is to understand the biophysical and
dynamic mechanisms that underlie the generation of preferred frequency responses
to oscillatory inputs in neurons and neuronal networks, and to develop the
appropriate mathematical tools to answer key mechanistic questions. This work
will be carried out in the context of ongoing collaborations with experimental
neuroscientists, and is designed to achieve a close integration between our
modeling and theoretical efforts and the experimental efforts of various
collaborators so that findings from one side will inform the other. Students
participating in this project will be trained at the interface between
Mathematics and Neuroscience in the well-established interdisciplinary
environment at the NJIT/Rutgers campus, and will be prepared to join the
scientific task force in the mathematical and biomedical sciences.