* 1313261
* RUI: Experiments on Cooled Cosmic Dust Analogs to Determine their Optical Properties in the Millimeter/Sub-Millimeter
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Thushara Perera, Illinois Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2018
* USD 178,261.00

This project will study the millimeter/sub-millimeter optical properties of
cosmic analog dusts at low temperatures. A dry cryocooler will be purchased so
that work on this project can continue, free from the expenses of perishable
cryogens. In addition, a Fourier Transform Spectrometer, designed specifically
for this work, will be constructed in PI's research lab. Once these apparati are
in place, the mm/sub-mm opacity and emissivity of many dust samples, made
internally or obtained from external groups will be measured, using an
innovative program of study. The main goals of this work are to (A) utilize the
rich set of tools and expertise developed within the observational cosmology
community to measure the above properties to unprecedented accuracy, (B) analyze
dust species produced by different methods and different investigators under the
same experimental conditions in order to clearly understand common trends and
basic difference between the samples, and (C) implement an efficient
experimental scheme for analyzing a large number of dust candidates, which would
naturally lead to the creation of a database on the measured
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At visible wavelengths, dust obscures many
interesting astronomical environments such as molecular clouds, star forming
regions, young and old stars enveloped by dust, and young ultra-luminous
galaxies in the early universe. The mm/sub-mm spectral region is a good regime
to study these objects because dust is more transparent at these wavelengths.
Information on the nature of interstellar dust is useful in and of itself
because dust is an important component in galactic and stellar evolution as well
as in the complex chemistry present in space that ultimately gives rise to
prebiotic molecules, and this information can reveal more about the nature the
objects/environments that are obscured by dust. Recent laboratory studies have
shown that the properties of dust in the mm/sub-mm spectral region is more
complicated than previously thought. Therefore, detailed studies dust species
that can serve as analogs for cosmic dust such as those that will be undertaken
in this project are needed before astronomical data on such environments can be
interpreted with any confidence. This need has been intensified recently due to
the availability high-quality mm/sub-mm data from new observatories such as the
Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array.