* 1313625
* EAGER: Highly Doped p-type Distributed Bragg Reflectors based on AlGaN for Deep UV Optoelectronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2013,09/30/2014
* Theodore Moustakas, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 09/30/2014
* USD 130,939.00

Objective: This program focuses on the development of a novel class of p-type
conductive and highly reflective AlGaN-based distributed Bragg reflectors to
enable a host of deep ultraviolet optoelectronic devices, including efficient
deep ultraviolet light emitting diodes, vertical-cavity-surface-emitting-lasers,
and Fabry-Perot based optical modulators. The proposed project is transformative
because it will create the foundations for a new family of efficient deep
ultraviolet optoelectronic devices and will usher a host of new industrial
applications including water / air / food sterilization and free space
communications.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the proposed project is the
utilization of polarization enhanced ionization of dopants, a unique property to
AlGaN alloys, to develop an innovative design of deep ultraviolet distributed
Bragg reflectors for a number of optoelectronic devices. The work will also
advance the development of AlGaN alloys, which are of great scientific and
technological interest.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research promotes the promotion of education
through the training of students in a variety of disciplines, ranging from
epitaxial growth, to quantum engineering, and semiconductor device physics. To
increase the effectiveness and scope of the program, the involvement of
undergraduates and high-school interns will be emphasized by taking advantage of
several existing channels at Boston University, many of which have a strong
focus on the recruitment of underrepresented minorities. Finally, the proposed
research will have a strong impact on the environmental and medical sectors, due
to specific applications to water / air / food sterilization and for diagnostic
and therapeutic uses.