* 1313871
* RUI: Topology, Gauge Fields and Phase Coherence in the Transport Dynamics of Ultracold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kunal Das, Kutztown University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 143,868.00

Confined ultracold atoms provide the unique capability to create designer
systems that can be tailored to provide direct access to quantum mechanical
properties that may be otherwise obscured. An important class of such properties
is topological in nature in the sense that they are primarily defined by the
structure of the abstract space of their defining parameters. Since topology is
the most general description of any structure, real or abstract, such features
can be used to find connections among phenomena that may seem unrelated, and
thereby provide powerful insights into them all. The goal of this research is to
analyze several such phenomena, some newly proposed here and some well-known but
not well-understood, comparatively from a topological perspective. The method
will be to recast them as generalized transport problems, tracking how the
system and its parameters evolve in time, which will then be related to
dynamical experiments with cold atoms. The study will involve the intrinsic
quantum characteristic of phase in the context of creating gauge fields
associated with varying local phase, and coherence effects associated with
quantum systems. Whether the topological properties survive the loss of phase
coherence in the presence of nonlinearity or in taking the classical physics
limit is an essential fundamental physics question that will be examined for all
mechanisms studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this study has potential
for applications in creating novel materials and devices that take advantage of
the newly available topological and phase properties, as well as, for
significantly broadening our understanding of fundamental physics, since many of
these issues have relevance across all areas of physics. Some aspects of the
research have technological applications potential for improved sensors and
gyroscopes, and in the emerging field of atomtronics, the atomic analog of
electronics. A high priority of the research will be to engage multiple
undergraduate students at a public university attended by many first generation
and at-risk students who often do not get the opportunity to participate in
scientific research. The goal is to continue and expand on the success of a
prior grant to attract and channel such domestic students into careers in
science and technology.