* 1313890
* Combined Cognitive Neuroscience/International Virtual Rehabilitation Conferences: Student Support
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2013
* William Wright, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2013
* USD 20,386.00

The past decade has witnessed numerous developments in technology that can be
applied to rehabilitation practice. The biennial International Conference for
Virtual Rehabilitation (ICVR) evolved from the desire and need for
rehabilitation practitioners to play an integral role in the development and
evaluation of new technologies, which incorporate virtual reality (VR)
technology. One goal of the conference is to assist engineers who develop the
technology to recognize the value they could derive by consulting with
rehabilitation professionals in order to make their machine-user interfaces more
efficient, user friendly, and effective for specific disabilities. Another goal
is to advance translation efforts that bridge the gap between knowledge
generation from research and knowledge uptake in clinical practice so that
rehabilitation professionals become more comfortable with technology and
recognize how to incorporate it into their individualized interactions with
patients. ICVR 2013, the 9th conference in the series, will be collocated with
the 8th annual Saffran conference entitled "Virtual Reality Technology and
Rehabilitation of Speech and Language Disorders," which will focus on virtual
reality applications being developed for rehabilitation of aphasia. The joint
ICVR-Saffron conference is a 4-day event which will take place August 26-29,
2013, in Philadelphia. A combined attendance of approximately 150-200 at the two
conferences is expected from clinical practitioners, scientists, faculty and
students with interest in the many disciplines ICVR has historically embraced,
such as motor rehabilitation with virtual technology, brain-computer interfaces,
rehabilitation robotics, haptic interfaces, novel applications of game consoles,
psychological and environmental rehabilitation in virtual reality, cognitive
rehabilitation in virtual reality, tele-rehabilitation, balance and gait
rehabilitation in virtual reality, regulatory and educational efforts to promote
virtual rehabilitation, and sociological, demographic and legal aspects of
virtual rehabilitation. More information about the ICVR conference is available
online at http://virtual-rehab.org/2013.

This is funding to promote student involvement and educational initiatives in
these conferences. Aside from the usual reduced student registration fees and
stipends to assist with hotel and travel costs, four novel events are planned
for ICVR 2013, three of which are specifically designed with student and post-
doc advancement in mind. First, there will be two moderated poster sessions with
one session dedicated specifically to student presenters. Posters will be
grouped by topic area with teams of two senior investigators assigned to all
posters within a topic area, who will facilitate discussion following a brief
presentation by the investigator. Coffee breaks and dessert will be provided
during poster sessions to encourage attendance. Second, lunch on Day 3 will be
lengthened and held in the room with the commercial exhibitors, who will be
encouraged to provide hands-on experiences with their technologies. Third, on
Day 4 an oral platform session by graduate students and post-docs will give them
the opportunity to present their research; student presentations will be
selected by members of the organizing committee based on a written
recommendation by the student's mentor and a one-page abstract. (these abstracts
will be uploaded as part of the conference proceedings). Lastly, Day 4 will
conclude with a panel-led discussion where clinicians, scientists, and
technology developers can generate ideas about future promotion of technology
transfer into the clinical environment; one student and one post-doc will be
invited to serve on this panel. The net result of these innovations is that
ample opportunities will exist for students and young investigators to interact
with the keynote speakers, established scientists and clinicians throughout the
conference. The organizers expect these initiatives will encourage more students
to attend, both by reducing financial burden and by rewarding meritorious
scientific achievements.

Broader Impacts: Raising awareness for science and technology students of the
need for their skills in the interdisciplinary field of technology-oriented
rehabilitation science is a necessary step to promoting interest in the field.
Informing students at the earliest possible stages of their education about the
opportunities that will be available to them later will help remove one major
barrier to interdisciplinary collaboration, which is student readiness to engage
in this type of research. This conference will create a forum whereby students
and experts alike can gain interdisciplinary knowledge and develop a common
language. Not only will this conference increase the opportunity to form
interdisciplinary partnerships, but it will also help bridge any generational
gap that exists as we transition from the traditional compartmentalized modes of
research to new cross-disciplinary modes. The conference organizers will take
special steps to encourage the participation of racial/ethnic minorities and
persons with disabilities.