* 1313687
* Deterministic and stochastic magnetization dynamics in thin ferromagnetic films and devices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Cyrill Muratov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2017
* USD 375,577.00

Muratov 1313687

Magnetization reversal in thin ferromagnetic films is often mediated by the
appearance and motion of domain walls, which are narrow transition regions
separating different magnetic domains. Under previous NSF funding, the
investigator developed a basic mathematical understanding of Neel walls in
arbitrary applied fields and 360-degree walls in the absence of the applied
fields in uniaxial materials and studied their role in magnetization reversal in
ferromagnetic nanorings, both in the absence and in the presence of small
thermal noise. In this project, he further investigates the properties of the
domain walls in materials with four-fold magnetocrystalline anisotropy
characteristic of materials of technological interest, such as cobalt, and
undertakes more detailed modeling, computational, and analytical studies of the
magnetization dynamics. In particular, the new models incorporate spin
precession, spin torque, and stochastic effects, as well as the effect of the
film topography and polycrystalline structure in as-grown ferromagnetic films.
The investigator develops new numerical and asymptotic tools to tackle the
challenges coming from these new aspects of modeling. As part of the training
process, he develops courses in applied sciences and takes part in
interdisciplinary training of mathematics and engineering graduate and
undergraduate students and postdocs. The project helps foster closer
interactions between researchers in applied mathematics and experimental
scientists.

Thin film ferromagnetic materials are at the core of a large array of data
storage applications of modern digital technology. The widespread use of these
materials is due to their ability to retain information in the form of distinct
magnetization states, without the need of being powered, and the possibility to
read and write information in a fast and reliable way. This project is strongly
motivated by the efforts to develop a new, universal computer memory based on
thin film ferromagnetic materials, the Magnetoresistive Random Access Memory
(MRAM). The investigator addresses the questions of feasibility and reliability
of the designs that use ferromagnetic nanorings as storage elements. Progress on
these problems has high potential impact for the computer industry. In addition,
a key aspect of the project is the training of a new generation of applied
mathematicians in this highly interdisciplinary area of research.