* 1313036
* A Theory for Core-collapse Supernova Explosions
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jeremiah Murphy, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 346,644.00

A major challenge for theoretical astrophysics is to explain how massive stars
end their lives. The death of massive stars, core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe),
are some of the most energetic explosions in the Universe; they herald the birth
of neutron stars and black holes, are prodigious emitters of neutrinos and
gravitational waves, influence galactic hydrodynamics, trigger further star
formation, and are a major site for nucleosynthesis. Though these explosions
play an important and multifaceted role in many cosmic phenomena, the details of
the explosion mechanism have remained elusive for many decades.&lt;br/&gt;We
outline a theoretical campaign to deepen our understanding of the mechanism of
explosion. Current theory indicates that aspherical instabilities are a major
ingredient in aiding successful explosions, but exactly how they aide the
explosion remains uncertain. The main objectives of this proposal are to
identify which instabilities are most relevant for the explosion, develop a
theory for the nonlinear instabilities, and incorporate the instability theory
into a theory for successful explosions. Fully developing this theoretical
framework will require both analytic theory and numerical
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a society, we face a moral dilemma; nearly
1% of the U.S. population is incarcerated in prison. This is the highest
incarceration rate in the world, and even more troubling is the fact that poor
and minority communities make up a disproportionately large fraction of the
incarcerated population. The reasons for these disproportionate incarceration
rates are complex, but one contributing factor is a lack of access to high-
quality education. To help address this problem, members of the Princeton
University faculty, staff, and students have formed the Princeton Prison
Teaching Initiative (PTI). The mission of the PTI is to "reduce the
incarceration rates in New Jersey by increasing access to outstanding post-
secondary education." In many ways, the PTI is a great success, and is lauded as
a role-model for other programs across the nation. These successes are
encouraging, but to ensure that these students live productive, crime-free
lives, we must use all tools at our disposal to help them exceed expectations.
To this end, the PI will travel to Princeton and develop inquiry-based
educational techniques to improve the effectiveness of an already successful
prison education program.