* 1313588
* Improvements and upgrades to the NSF-Arizona Accelerator Mass Spectrometry Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2014,10/31/2019
* George Burr, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2019
* USD 343,810.00

This award will provide funding to support four equipment-based upgrades at the
Arizona Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) laboratory. The purpose of these
requests is to support the research and educational role of the laboratory, as
well as its service to other users. The Arizona AMS laboratory functions as a
service, research and educational laboratory. A key component is providing
educational opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students from around the
country to learn AMS techniques. Many students who have benefited from these
programs have gone on to start their own research with applications in AMS. The
lab also provides key support to users, including interpretation and
understanding of their results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will support
equipment and related support for four majors areas of study: low-voltage AMS,
Iodine-129 measurements, sample automation and dissolved inorganic (DIC) and
organic carbon (DOC) in groundwaters. These areas all represent areas of
emphasis that have been highlighted at recent AMS and Radiocarbon conferences.
The development of AMS capabilities at lower energies can lead to development of
smaller machines or new experimental approaches, as has already been
demonstrated. Sample automation is vital for more rapid sample preparation, and
the improvements to 129I, DIC and DOC measurement capability will directly
impact Arizona's ability to serve the needs of our own research, and those of
our users.