* 1313695
* Using Rule Space and Poset-based Adaptive Testing Methodologies to Identify Ability Patterns in Early Mathematics and Create a Comprehensive Mathematics Ability Test
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Douglas Clements, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 02/28/2018
* USD 2,148,857.00

A new assessment for children ages 3-7 is being developed to provide teachers
with diagnostic information on a child's development of mathematics facility on
ten domains such as counting, sequencing, adding/subtracting, and measurement.
The Comprehensive Research-based Mathematics Assessment (CREMA) is being
developed using innovative psychometric models to reveal information about
children on specific attributes for each of the 10 domains. The CREMA will
produce information based on carefully developed learning trajectories in a
relative short period of time by using computer adaptive testing. The project is
guided by two goals: 1) to produce a cognitively diagnostic adaptive assessment
that will yield more useful and detailed information about students' knowledge
of mathematics than previously possible, and 2) subject the developmental
progressions to close cognitive diagnosis using cutting-edge psychometric
approaches. An item pool of about 350 items is being developed that can be used
to identify the level of understanding children ages 3-7 have on the 10 domains
that have been identified as foundational to further learning in mathematics. A
research team headed by Dr. Douglas Clements at the University of Buffalo is
conducting the development work while being assisted by Dr. Curtis Tatsuoka, a
statistician at Case Western Reserve University.

The CREMA is being developed using leading-edge psychometric models based on
Q-Matrix theory, rule-state models, and posets. The initial item pool includes
items from the REMA, a previously developed instrument based on unidemensional
IRT models. New items are being piloted with at least 200 students from a group
of a total of 800 students evenly distributed among pre-K to grade 2. The
successful items then are used to create the new CREMA. The new assessment is
being field tested with 300 children, pre-K to grade 2. A random sample of 50
students (at least 10 from each grade) is being video taped as they work the
items. Specific criteria of convergence are being used for feedback on how
specific items are performing to meet the required specifications. An external
evaluator is auditing the process and is doing spot checks of item codings and
other analyses performed.

The main product will be the CREMA that will be made widely available. This
instrument using computer adaptive testing will provide teachers with ready
information on young children's understanding of critical mathematical ideas.
The new psychometric models that will be used and developed to process multiple
attributes from individual items will make large strives to move forward the
field of mathematics assessment of young children. A publisher has expressed
interest to make the assessment widely available that increases the likelihood
the assessment will have large impact on early childhood mathematics learning.