* 1313603
* NSF Workshop: Drilling active tectonics and magmatism (Volcanics, Geoprisms, and Fault Zones Post-SAFOD)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* John Shervais, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,150.00

This award will provide funds to organize and convene a workshop that will
explore how continental scientific drilling can be used to better understand
active tectonic processes expressed by faults, volcanoes, and volcanic
provinces. This workshop will build upon successful efforts such as SAFOD (San
Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth), the Chelungpu fault drilling project, the
Alpine Fault drilling project in New Zealand, the Gulf of Corith project, the
Unzen volcanic drilling project, and the Hawaiian Scientific Drilling Project
(HSDP). Participants will be expected to define significant scientific
justifications for examining the active tectonics and magmatic processes related
to faults and volcanoes that can be addressed by a coordinated program of
continental scientific drilling and related site investigations. Workshop
participants will prioritize these processes, and propose the types of faults
and volcanoes that would be targeted by these efforts. We envision these efforts
to comprise interdisciplinary programs that can be directly related to on-going
NSF initiatives (e.g., Geoprisms; IRIS; Earthscope), and which can be applied at
a range of scales, from localized fault systems to plate boundary faults, and
from small monogenetic vents to super-volcanoes. The goal for this workshop is
to examine these issues in detail and to provide a roadmap of specific projects
that address the most pressing issues in active tectonics drilling.