* 1313638
* Interference Selection and the Statistics of Evolution in Microbes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Michael Desai, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2016
* USD 480,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Michael Desai at Harvard
University.

In the large and mostly asexual populations characteristic of many microbes and
viruses, multiple mutations are often present simultaneously. Natural selection
cannot act on each separately, but rather only on combinations of mutations
linked together on physical chromosomes, an effect known as interference
selection. Evolution in these populations involves a complex balance between the
accumulation of beneficial mutations (adaptation) and the stochastic
accumulation of weakly deleterious mutations (Muller's ratchet). In this
project, the PI will develop mathematical models to predict how this
interference selection among the full spectrum of beneficial and deleterious
mutations alters evolutionary dynamics and genetic diversity in microbial
populations, and test these predictions using experimental evolution of budding
yeast as a model system. The project will focus on (1) the distribution of
fitness within a population, (2) the distribution of fitness effects of fixed
mutations, and (3) the within-population patterns of genetic diversity.

This research will also have significant broader impacts. It will involve
graduate students and postdocs, providing interdisciplinary training involving
the integration of methods from statistical physics, evolutionary biology,
population genetics, and applied mathematics. The PI will also develop new
course curricula to help physical scientists transition into research in
evolution and population genetics. This will include an undergraduate course
providing a mathematically sophisticated but biologically na√Øve introduction to
the quantitative basis of evolutionary theory. In addition, the PI will co-
organize a summer school in Cargese, France, to serve the broader community of
physical scientists at the graduate and postdoctoral levels seeking to
transition into evolution and population genetics. The summer school will use
the research in this proposal as one of several case studies illustrating how
population genetic theory, bioinformatics, and quantitative experiments can all
contribute to our understanding of evolution.