* 1313370
* Scanning-releasing the full-sky-century database to DASCH for TDA
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2013,02/29/2020
* Jonathan Grindlay, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,882,133.00

This is the last stage of a NSF supported effort. The Digital Analysis of a Sky
Century @ Harvard (DASCH) project is now fully ready with its hardware, software
and personnel resource planning and full production scanning, processing and
data distribution and archiving can begin. This final grant will bring the
world's only full-century Time Domain Astrophysics (TDA) database and analysis
tools on line for the full community to utilize as a key survey that complements
current surveys (PTF, CRT and PS1) and provides long-term context for LSST. The
high speed precision DASCH scanner (two 8 x 10in imaging plates digitized into
11&#956;m pixels in 90 sec) and initial astrometry and photometry have now i)
improved astrometry that allows multiple exposure plate solutions as well as
initial astrometry essentially independent of what the plate jacket might have
indicated, ii) improved photometry. We build the Pipeline and Database software
and hardware to enable the original goal to scan and fully process ~400
plates/day, which would enable the full collection of ~450,000 direct imaging
plates to be scanned and fully reduced, with rapid access to images
(thumbnails), lightcurves , and data products on spinning disk. The present
effort will finish the production scanning, overnight processing, and full data
releases (DRs, in 10 installments) of the ~375,000 plates remaining. Although a
single field (6o centered on M44, our first "development field") is now in the
public domain, the limited coverage presents the novel TDA surveys that DASCH
can do for discovery and study of rare classes of variables which require larger
survey coverage.

DASCH incorporates students at every stage and a vigorous program of Public
Outreach. This research will open the astronomical window of time variability on
long timescales (months-100y) from currently existing, but inaccessible and
barely-mined data. Digitization is the key and can now be done with our new
ultra-high speed scanner and high speed processing and database. Accessing the
past data complements present (e.g. PanSTARRS) and future temporal surveys
(LSST). Opening this new temporal window has already revealed new phenomena; it
will surely excite new students and the public at large. This project will
awaken the public awareness that the universe is not static. Evolution and
change are the rule, not the exception. The impact on science education can be
large: by showing on the project website segments of the "cosmic movie" of giant
flares from quasars or stars, or the heart beat pulsations of Cepheid variables,
students will better understand the excitement of current astronomy. Physical
understanding of the dynamic universe is even more enticing than the immutable
sky. The public website to be fully developed by this investigation will be
fully accessible to the public and astronomical community. DASCH will have
significant impact on the general drive to Temporal Surveys for a number of
projects now in development. It makes available the truly unique dataset that
only a century of sky coverage can provide.