* 1313596
* Extreme Values For Random Processes of Tree Structure
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Jian Ding, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 131,850.00

The proposed project aims to study extreme values of random processes, which
arise naturally from many areas such as combinatorial optimization, pure
probability theory, and statistical physics. Recent study on this topic by the
PI and his collaborators has led to solutions for a number of long-standing open
problems including an approximation of cover times up to multiplicative constant
posed by Aldous-Fill, the Winkler-Zukerman blanket time conjecture, the
asymptotic relation between cover times and discrete Gaussian free fields for
bounded degree graphs, the order of the variance for the maximum of the two-
dimensional discrete Gaussian free field, and the critical behavior for Aldous'
percolation of averages in the mean-field setting. A general underlying
principle in the aforementioned works is to employ tree structures associated
with the random processes, highlighted by an application of Fernique-Talagrand
majorizing measure theory in the study of cover times of random walks. The main
focus of the project is to understand extreme values of various processes via
further exploring associated tree structures. Despite efforts by the PI and a
list of other researchers, a number of outstanding questions remain open in this
area, such as the asymptotics and concentration phenomenon for cover times in
general graphs, the limiting law for the centered maximum and the scaling limit
of the extremal process for 2D discrete Gaussian free field, as well as
percolation of averages in high dimensions and first passage percolation on
social networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research on extreme values has a
number of facets including the typical magnitude, the concentration phenomenon,
and the limit in law. While the proposed area is rich both in theory and
examples, the proposal features the models/processes that possess tree
structures, implicitly always and well hidden in most examples. Special
attention will be devoted to cover times of random walks, discrete Gaussian free
field, percolation of averages, as well as first passage percolation on social
networks. From a theoretical perspective, our study reveals conceptual
connections among topics that have been studied separately, and further
understand interesting aspects of important random processes such as random
walks (arguably the most studied stochastic processes by mathematicians) and
Gaussian free fields (an object that is of fundamental interest in statistical
physics). From a practical perspective, the research is motivated by
applications in areas including computer science, operation research and social
network. For instances, the cover time of a random walk has applications in
computer science such as testing graph connectivity and protocol testing;
studying first passage percolation on social networks is of significance to
understand the spread of information/epidemics, and in turn is likely to provide
insight on optimal strategies to manage the flow of information or to preclude
infections of diseases.