* 1313115
* MPS-BIO: Dynamics and stability of plant-pollinator mutualistic networks in response to ecological perturbations
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2017
* USD 306,000.00

This project will advance the theoretical framework of network analysis aimed
toward the study of ecological communities, in order to answer basic and applied
questions concerning the impacts of extinctions and invasions on community
stability and biodiversity. The investigators have introduced a dynamic Boolean
network model of plant-pollinator mutualistic ecosystems that describes their
formation and stability. They will expand the model to examine perturbations to
ecosystem structure, specifically the permanent or temporary removal
(extinction) or introduction (invasion) of one or more species. This will allow
for assessment of which species and ecosystem properties contribute to the
susceptibility of an ecosystem to catastrophic failure, and which contribute
most to stability. The project will make use of high-performance computing to
model the formation and dynamics of diverse ecological communities. The results
of the dynamic simulations will be distilled into novel graph theoretical
analyses and measures. This project will also inform a number of related
theoretical studies on the importance of transient species (those absent from
stable communities, but temporarily present during dynamical re-equilibration),
the role of other mutualistic and natural enemy interactions, composite
interactions, and context-dependent interactions. This project is based upon an
application of dynamic network theory to mutualistic ecological networks, the
unique challenges of which will also expand the body of knowledge concerning
network theory's general applications and uses. The need to address the impacts
of environmental perturbations is increasingly urgent; the addition or loss of
species to existing ecological communities can have far-reaching consequences
for both the community and the greater ecosystem in which the community is
embedded. For example, the recent, rapid decline in pollinator levels poses a
serious risk to global agriculture and food security. This project will advance
our knowledge of how these complex systems function; only if we can anticipate
the effects of environmental perturbations can we act to prevent or ameliorate
undesired outcomes. This project will not only address species and community
structures that are critical to community stability, but will also facilitate
assessment of community manipulations, such as floral resource provisioning for
native bees to benefit fruit growers, that bring about desired management
outcomes in the face of perturbations.