* 1313847
* WORKSHOP: Student Consortium at the 2013 ACM Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Henry Lieberman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2015
* USD 10,368.00

This is funding to provide financial support for 10 graduate students (at least
8 of them registered at U.S. universities and working towards either their
Master's degree or a Doctorate) to attend the 2013 International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 2013), to be held March 19-22 in Santa Monica,
California, as participants in a special Student Consortium (workshop), as
presenters in the main conference, and as attendees at the conference for
general training purposes. Sponsored by ACM, the annual IUI conferences
represent the growing interest in next-generation intelligent and interactive
user interfaces; they are the premier forum where researchers from academia and
industry, who work at the intersection of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and
Artificial Intelligence (AI), come together to exchange complementary insights
and to present and discuss outstanding research and applications whose goal is
to make the computerized world a more amenable place. Unlike traditional AI the
focus is not so much on making the computer smart all by itself, but rather on
making the interaction between computers and people smarter. Unlike traditional
HCI, there is a focus on solutions that involve large amounts of knowledge and
emerging technologies such as natural language understanding, brain computer
interfaces, and gesture recognition. To this end, IUI encourages contributions
not only from computer science but also from related fields such as psychology,
cognitive science, computer graphics, the arts, etc. IUI 2013 will be the 16th
conference in the series; topics of interest this year include: intelligent
interactive interfaces, systems, and devices; ubiquitous interfaces; smart
environments and tools; human-centered interfaces; mobile interfaces; multimodal
interfaces; pen-based interfaces; spoken and natural language interfaces;
conversational interfaces; affective and social interfaces; tangible interfaces;
collaborative multi-user interfaces; adaptive interfaces; sensor-based
interfaces; user modeling and interaction with novel interfaces and devices;
interfaces for personalization and recommender systems; interfaces for plan-
based systems; interfaces that incorporate knowledge- or agent-based approaches;
help interfaces for complex tasks; example- and demonstration-based interfaces;
interfaces for intelligent generation and presentation of information;
intelligent authoring systems; synthesis of multimodal virtual characters and
social robots; interfaces for games and entertainment; for learning-based
interactions and for health informatics; empirical studies and evaluations of
IUI interfaces; and new approaches to designing intelligent user interfaces.
More information about the conference is available online at
http://iuiconf.org/.

The IUI 2013 Student Consortium will build on the success of the first such
event last year. The heart of the Consortium will be a full-day workshop on
March 19, immediately preceding the conference, and will be structured to give
student trainees exposure to their new research community by giving a 20-30
presentation on their work and receiving feedback from peers and a panel of 4-5
senior researchers. Group lunch and dinner will encourage social interaction
among the student cohort and informal personal interaction with the mentors. The
students' work will also be featured during the main conference in a poster
session, where they will gain additional experience explaining their work to
others in the field. The IUI conference organizers will pay for audio-visual
services, two coffee breaks, and space for accommodating attendees in the
student session; no funds are requested for these items from NSF.

Broader Impacts: This funding will enable attendance at the IUI conference by
students who might otherwise be unable to do so for financial reasons. It will
enhance the educational experience of funded participants, by bringing them into
contact with leading researchers in the field and by exposing them to the lively
discussion during the course of the conference that often leads to opportunities
for career advancement. The quality of the conference itself will be enhanced as
well, thanks to a broadening of the base of institutions represented and
increased diversity of participants. The rich exchange of ideas at IUI has
previously proven to be a valuable source of ideas for future research, as well
as leading to collaborative efforts; this funding will extend the opportunities
for collaboration and provide intellectual stimulus to programs that have
previously sent few or no representatives to this conference. The organizing
committee has undertaken to proactively recruit student participants from
schools that have not traditionally been well represented in the IUI community.
Women, minority students, the disabled, and veterans all will be encouraged to
participate. To further assure diversity, no more than one student will be
accepted from any given institution.