* 1313217
* CAREER: An Integrated Study of Biological Fluid Dynamics in Nature
* ENG,CBET
* 08/27/2012,05/31/2017
* Haibo Dong, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2017
* USD 192,991.00

1055949 Dong

Changes in the dynamic morphology of the wings directly affect the instantaneous
aerodynamic forces and therefore flight behavior. As most natural fliers (e.g.
dragonflies, hummingbirds and etc.) are equipped with flexible or deformable
wings, it is widely believed that mechanism of wing flexibility and wing
deformation can provide new mechanisms of aerodynamic force production over
completely rigid wings. This proposed research intends to advance the knowledge
of biological fluid dynamics in freely flying animals through an integrated
computational and experimental approach. As of today, few works have been done
on detailed measurements of 3D wing deformation during flapping and the
associated aerodynamic benefits in the study of animal free flight. This is
mainly due to the small wing size, fast motion of the wings, and unpredictable
motion of flying insects/birds which makes it very hard to perform high-speed
visual tracking of the details of wing flexions. To make this study possible,
two sets of techniques composed of experimental measurement and computational
flow simulation/analysis are currently being developed. Equipped with such tools
and advancements, it is now possible to reveal the mysteries surrounding complex
flight dynamics and the fundamental physics behind insect flight.

Intellectual merit: Most previous studies were limited to near-field vortex
formation mechanisms of a single rigid flapping wing. The PI's current research
explores freely flying animals on full-field vortex structures and associated
aerodynamics of deformable flapping wings together with bodies. The fundamental
mechanism of correlation between vortex structures and aerodynamic force is
being explored through a state-of-the-art immersed boundary computational fluid
dynamics solver and fluid-field analysis tools. Teamed up with biologists and
experimentalists, this proposed research will conduct comparative studies on
wing morphology and kinematics for two-winged flyers such as hummingbirds and
hawk moths, as well as four-winged flyers such as dragonflies and damselflies. A
better understanding of how animal wing deformation impacts the efficiency of
flight and how moving wings affect their ambient fluid environment will be
developed across the animal sizes and species. This work intends to finally
advance the development of a comprehensive theory of animal flight aerodynamics
in the aspect of low speed low Reynolds number flow physics and dynamic force
generation associated with vortex dynamics of deformable control surfaces.
Methods and findings from this work could be used by scientists in different
areas to study the biological aspects of animal flight in ways previously not
possible, and therefore significantly advance the design of current flapping-
wing micro air vehicles with superior performance.

Broader impacts: This proposed research will enhance the infrastructure for
research and education through the interactions between the PI and
collaborators' expertise in biology, applied mathematics, and engineering, both
nationally and internationally. The research effort fully integrates with an
education and outreach program to meet the ever-increasing educational demands
of bio-engineering. New courses and hands-on senior capstone projects will be
developed to attract students of all backgrounds at Wright State University and
be utilized by collaborators from other institutes. A more aggressive goal of
this research project is to build a web-based interactive platform for
biological fluid dynamics related activities, which is accessible to not only
the engineering research community but also to the biological research
community, as well as teachers and students at many levels. The tools built in
this proposed work have the potential to be used to study other low speed low
Reynolds number fluid dynamic problems such as swimming, efficient wind energy
conversion, damage prevention from gusts, internal biomedical fluid dynamics
applications and more.