* 1313814
* EAGER:  Hormetic Responses and their Regulation in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Thomas Eulgem, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2014
* USD 43,717.00

Low doses of toxic chemicals have often been shown to enhance the biological
performance of organisms. This phenomenon, which has been termed hormesis, seems
to be based on compensatory processes following an initial disruption of
cellular functions. Hormesis may thereby enable organisms to adjust to sudden
environmental changes. Although hormetic phenomena have been described for a
wide variety of organisms and stimuli, only few studies have addressed details
of the biological basis of hormesis and it is unclear, if distinct forms of
hormesis are mediated by common genetic processes. Biological mechanisms
underlying hormesis in plants are completely unknown and have never been
systematically analyzed. This project utilizes Arabidopsis, the most advanced
experimental plant system, to initiate detailed studies on the genetics of plant
hormesis. The main goal of this initial project phase will be to establish
unequivocal evidence for hormesis in Arabidopsis and to provide preliminary
insights on the types of biological processes that mediate these hormetic
responses. Following the identification of disparate agents potently inducing
hormesis in Arabidopsis, mutants of this species with defects in genes involved
the control of hormesis will be identified and characterized. This will allow
researchers to uncover genes critical for plant hormesis and will reveal if
distinct types of hormesis are controlled by common or distinct processes. These
results will provide a foundation for future expanded studies on plant hormesis
and its relevance for hormesis in other types of organisms. This project is
likely to impact medical research and will serve as a basis for future
approaches utilizing hormesis for enhanced crop production. The project will
provide training to graduate students as well as undergraduate students, mainly
from minority groups that are underrepresented in the sciences. This study will
be linked to classes on plant biochemistry and genetics taught for undergraduate
and graduate students.