* 1313529
* A Proposal to Provide Leadership Development and Technical Assistance to TCUP Faculty and Students
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2013,09/30/2020
* IVORY TOLDSON, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,160,935.00

To enhance the quality of STEM programs at TCUP institutions, QEM will design
and conduct two workshops for TCUP project staff, in Years One and Two
respectively: Strategic Planning Within/Sustaining Enhancements Beyond TCUP-
supported Projects and Financial Management Within TCUP Projects. To increase
the participation/quality of preparation of Native individuals in STEM careers,
QEM will design and conduct two professional development workshops to support
STEM faculty at TCUP institutions: The Fundamentals of Education Research and
Assessment and Evaluation of TCUP-supported STEM Instructional Strategies (in
Years One and Two respectively).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QEM will continue a
Faculty Fellowship initiative that supports the six-month placement each year at
NSF of a STEM faculty member from a TCUP-supported institution to provide the
Fellow with exposure to, and immersion in, the Foundation?s programs, policies,
and procedures. This initiative provides NSF program directors and staff the
opportunity to interact directly with and gain insight from a TCUP faculty
member. QEM will to continue offering, in each of the three years, ten-week
summer internships at QEM for five STEM students from TCUP institutions. The
TCUP Internship program is focused on activities and experiences that encourage
the participating students to persist in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. In implementing this project, QEM will utilize/build on experience
gained, through prior TCUP support, in working with faculty, staff,
administrators, and students at TCUs. The project?s faculty-focused workshops
will advance participants? knowledge and understanding of STEM education
research methodologies as well as of assessment and evaluation of the
effectiveness of STEM pedagogical strategies, while workshops for TCUP project
staff will strengthen their strategic planning and management skills to benefit
both current and future STEM initiatives. The Faculty Fellowships and Student
Internships will continue to offer the reciprocal benefits of new experiences
and shared/diverse perspectives for the Fellows, interns, and NSF Program
Directors and staff. The project will be enriched by the advice and counsel of
an External Advisory Committee composed of Tribal College leaders and others
with first-hand knowledge and experience working with Tribal
Colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The Project?s initiatives will
impact the way that STEM is taught at TCUP institutions; enable faculty to gauge
the effectiveness of their approaches to STEM teaching; increase familiarity
with other NSF funding opportunities as well as with the Foundation?s proposal
review process; increase the project staff?s understanding of strategic planning
and sustainability strategies as well as of effective financial management and
increase student understanding of/interest in pursuing STEM careers. Workshop
information, registration and presentations; information on the faculty
fellowship/internship opportunities; and other project-related information will
be available at QEM?s website to ensure broader dissemination of this
information beyond email communication with STEM faculty and project staff.