* 1313968
* SEES Fellows: Sustainable Nanosilicon Production through the Electrochemical Reduction of Diatoms and Integration into Wastewater Remediation and Biofuel Industries
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Steven Girard, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2014
* USD 146,497.00

Project Summary

SEES Fellows: Sustainable Nanosilicon Production through the Electrochemical
Reduction of Diatoms and Integration into Wastewater Remediation and Biofuel
Industries PI: Steven N. Girard, University of Wisconsin Madison

Nanostructures of abundant and non-toxic silicon can serve a significant role in
various renewable energy technologies, including solar cells, Li-ion batteries,
and thermoelectric materials. To realize the potential of nanosilicon for
renewable energy applications, mass quantities must be economically and
sustainably produced. Current silicon production relies on an energy- and
material- consuming carbothermal reduction process, in which the reaction
between carbon and sand (silica) at very high temperatures yields metallurgical
silicon and carbon dioxide. Metallurgical silicon is subsequently dissolved,
refined, and recrystallized in multiple energy- and material-consuming steps to
generate nanosilicon for renewable energy applications. For nanosilicon to be
used for renewable energy, the large scale production of silicon must be
redesigned from a sustainability perspective. I propose to develop an altogether
new process of direct electrochemical conversion of nanosilica-to-nanosilicon
that will be energy and material efficient, and therefore inexpensive and
sustainable. In collaboration with industrial partner AlgaXperts, we will also
analyze the scalability and feasibility of this approach through the integration
into existing wastewater remediation and algae-for-biofuel industries by
essentially recycling the nanostructured diatoms (silica) from these processes.

Intellectual Merit. A novel process of sustainable and direct nanosilicon
production through the electrochemical reduction of nanostructured silica
frustules of diatoms will be developed. The naturally nanostructured silica
microshells of diatoms (unicellular algae) are inexpensive and easily obtained
either from mined diatomaceous earth deposits or from diatom algal cultures.
Under host mentor Prof. Song Jin, Department of Chemistry at UW-Madison, the
proposed research seeks to develop electrochemical reduction of nanosilica
within novel eutectic salt electrolytes, which will enable single-step
nanosilicon production at very low temperatures, consuming considerably less
energy. If the starting nanomorphologies can be retained following conversion to
silicon, this process will represent the most sustainable means of nanosilicon
production to date.

Broader Impact. The proposed research will be immediately useful for a variety
of industrial applications and expose the SEES fellow new chemical techniques.
We further propose harvesting specific diatom genera from industrial-scale algal
cultures used for the bioremediation of wastewater effluent and production of
lipids for biofuels. Obtaining specific diatom genera allow control over the
types of nanostructures obtained. In collaboration with partner mentor Jun
Yoshitani, President of AlgaXperts LLC, we will analyze the feasibility of the
integration of these approaches at a Midwestern water treatment facility.
Furthermore, this collaborative research will involve chemical analysis of the
wastewater effluent nutrients, selectivity of specific genera in industrial-
scale cultures, and analysis of the associated costs. The SEES fellow will gain
a better understanding of the industrial considerations connected to
implementing large-scale sustainability technologies.

Educational Outreach. In collaboration with Prof. Greg Nemet, Nelson Institute
of Environmental Studies at UW-Madison, and Dr. Andrew Greenberg, Director of
REU programs at UW-Madison, a highly interdisciplinary summer practicum focusing
on public policy and sustainability science will be designed and implemented.
Lessons learned in the primary research will be integrated into the REU summer
practicum. In collaboration with Dr. Greenberg, underrepresented minority
undergraduate researchers will be mentored by the SEES fellow in summer research
projects related to the proposed research. The SEES fellow will gain experience
in sustainability policy, teaching, course design, integration of teaching and
research, and undergraduate mentoring.