* 1313870
* Collaborative Project: EarthCube Education End-User Workshop
* GEO,ICER
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Cheryl Peach, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 01/31/2014
* USD 52,998.00

This award is being used to convene a workshop of ~40 participants to define
end-user needs related to geoscience education within the EarthCube initiative.
The workshop brings together disciplinary faculty in the geosciences, educators
experienced in teaching with geoscience data and developing associated
curricula, representatives of NSF-sponsored research programs involved with
generation of large data sets, as well as technologists, STEM education
researchers, and learning scientists. The workshop is being held at the Scripps
Forum (Scripps Institution of Oceanography) during the Spring of 2013. The
workshop seeks to explore both the educational opportunities offered through the
cyberinfrastructure capabilities of the EarthCube program and identify the
educational needs for preparing undergraduate students and faculty to be the
future contributors to the scientific research enabled by EarthCube. A major
goal of this workshop is to establish an initial roadmap for educational
activities that should be associated with or enabled by EarthCube. The workshop
will consider the educational and instructional strategies not only to prepare
students in undergraduate programs to be technologically-savvy users of
EarthCube data and models, but also to build the future scientific capacity to
advance Earth systems scientific research. Consideration will also be given to
how EarthCube may serve as a platform for advancing STEM education research.