* 1313761
* CNH:   Ecosystems and Societies: Divergent Trajectories and Coevolution
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Yaoqi Zhang, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 03/31/2015
* USD 1,364,000.00

The Mongolian Plateau includes two regions with similar ecological systems but
contrasting socioeconomic systems: Mongolia and Inner Mongolia. The Plateau has
increasingly received worldwide attention due its rapid biophysical and
socioeconomic changes. Building upon intensive previous work in the region, the
purpose of this study is to bring together a multidisciplinary research team to
examine and model the changes of the natural and human systems on the Plateau as
well as the critical feedbacks between them over recent decades. The project
team hypothesizes that while climate change has created pressure on ecosystems
and societies in the Plateau, the distinct socioeconomic conditions and
development paths of the different administrative units involved have also had a
significant effect on the relationships and feedbacks within the human and
natural systems. The team will also test the hypothesis that the human
influences on the systems exceeded those of the biophysical changes but the
significance varies in time, location, and ecological setting. The five major
underlying processes studied for the natural systems will include the changes in
water fluxes, radiation, soil heat fluxes, primary production, and carbon loss,
while the five processes for the human systems are economic growth, population
growth, urbanization, technology advancement, and lifestyle change. The system
functions and changes will be examined by the life expectancy index, income
index, education index, net primary production, evapotranspiration, and
ecosystem carbon loss. More importantly, the project team will focus on the
relationships between these functions, such as the productivity vs. income
index. The connection between the human and natural systems will be viewed
through the lens of land use cover and land use change. The progression of
causes and consequences will be examined at various levels through three tasks:
1) modeling household behaviors and surrounding ecosystems; 2) studying
divergent trajectories for Mongolian systems from past to future; and 3)
understanding the vulnerabilities within the system and possible future
adaptation strategies toward a sustainable Plateau. The multiple dimensions of
the systems will be integrated together systemically, holistically, and across
disciplines.

The results of this study will have global implications, especially to this and
other regions that are vulnerable to climate and socioeconomic changes. The
project will strengthen interdisciplinary collaboration between ecology,
economics, anthropology, sociology, and demography and will provide a great
opportunity for junior scholars as well as graduate students to conduct
interdisciplinary research. Data and findings will be disseminated through a
series of transformative activities that benefit the people on the Plateau,
students in the US, China, and Mongolia, the scientific community, and
stakeholders and policymakers worldwide. Recognizing past difficulties in
accessing the data for the Plateau, the project team will first develop a
comprehensive database that can be shared with the entire scientific community.
Intensive training classes and cross-campus courses will be made available
through a virtual classroom using state-of-the-art cyber technology to link
researchers and students in the US, Inner Mongolia, and Mongolia. Researchers
will deliver invited guest lectures at least twice per term via the virtual
classroom and students from the participating universities will be
simultaneously exposed to diverse views from each other?s institutions. These
lectures will also be openly available to other institutions.