* 1313197
* The Broader Impacts Network:  A national infrastructure model
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Linda Blockus, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

The America Competes Reauthorization Act of 2010 (ACRA) requires NSF to include
the broader impacts criterion in its proposal review. Furthermore, ACRA
suggested that NSF encourage "institutions...to develop and provide, either as
individual institutions or in partnerships thereof, appropriate training and
programs to assist Foundation-funded principal investigators...in achieving the
goals of the Broader Impacts Review Criterion." ACRA also requires that
investigators applying for NSF funding must show institutional support for their
broader impacts plan, and the legislation included provision for broader impacts
support to originate at the home institution or "another institution or
organization with relevant expertise." To begin to meet these needs on a nation-
wide scale, this Broader Impacts Network (BIN) Project will bring institutions
together under a national umbrella to share information, tools and resources and
to avoid duplication of effort. The project has two goals: to create and
cultivate a national Broader Impacts Network infrastructure and to strengthen
and grow the broader impacts infrastructure at the local institution level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the BIN Project support the aims of
the project and are directly related to the scope of the project. The BIN
Project will disseminate information on best practices and effective tools for
broader impacts to members of the national community through an active listserv,
a monthly newsletter, and a broader impacts website. A newsletter, as well as a
section of the broader impacts website, will also be created for individual
investigators. Information on this section of the website and the newsletter
will be tailored to the needs of individual investigators, such as training
information, funding deadlines, and examples of successful broader impacts
activities. The project will also support the annual Broader Impacts
Infrastructure Summit. The Summit has three goals: bring broader impacts
infrastructure professionals together to share best practices, ideas, and
challenges; set the course for the future of broader impacts infrastructure
support; and provide the NSF with feedback regarding the realities of supporting
broader impacts at the institutional and principal investigator levels. The
National Science Board has recognized that meaningful assessment of broader
impacts activities may best be achieved at the institutional level instead of at
the individual project level. To that end, the University of Missouri will pilot
an institutional tool for aggregating broader impacts evaluation that has
potential for national implementation. The specific deliverables of this project
are a BIN website, monthly newsletter, broader impacts community listserv, and a
pilot evaluation tool for aggregating broader impacts activities at the
institution level that can be implemented nationally. Broader Impacts Networks
that leverage existing resources and avoid duplication of effort will help
researchers with addressing the broader impacts criterion in unique and creative
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms and
Molecular Biophysics Clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.