* 1313490
* RUI: Development of Sparsity-Inducing Dual Frames and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Shidong Li, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 166,647.00

Li 1313490

The investigator studies the new notion of sparsity-inducing dual frames and
their applications. Theme 1 defines sparsity-inducing dual frames of a non-exact
frame. Preliminary studies show that if a signal has a sparse frame
representation, then there is a sparsity-inducing dual frame (sparse dual) that
produces the exact sparse coefficient when applied to the signal. Optimality
issues of sparse duals and common sparse dual frames to classes of signals are
examined. Theme 2 develops iterative algorithms for a sparse-dual-based analysis
approach in sparse signal recovery. Improvement and convergence analysis of an
alternative iterative algorithm are among the goals here. Theme 3 aims to
understand the greatly improved sparse signal recovery capacity of the sparse-
dual-based analysis method. This appears to be related to some geometric
properties of the sparse hyperplane -- the affine subspace of the sparse
representation fused with sparse dual information. One goal is to derive
algorithms that adaptable to the geometric properties of the sparse hyperplane
for greater effectiveness. Theme 4 develops the notion of sparse duals for
practical scenarios where signals are merely approximately sparse with frames.
Theme 5 develops "arbitrary" filter banks for multi-channel signal/image
requisition and multi-channel communication applications. These systems exhibit
arbitrary inter-channel relationships because they generally do not satisfy the
commonly known multi-rate filter bank constraints rooted in wavelet theories.
The challenge lies in actual constructions of realistic or FIR synthesis filters
for these systems.

Signal processing generally refers to making a signal easy to handle or of
better quality. It is a common task in modern systems that transmit or store
information. In this project, the principal novelties introduced to signal
processing are the new notion of sparsity-inducing dual frames (sparse duals)
and ideas of recovering underlying signals from much smaller samples of the
signal. Sparsity-inducing dual frames are sets of optimal and basic signal
components used in obtaining the sparsest (the smallest number of nonzero)
signal decomposition coefficients. An advantage of sparse duals is that they can
improve the recovery of a signal from a small number of samples of the signal.
The investigator develops effective methods of sparse signal recovery. Results
of the project could lead to simpler and more effective sampling devices, radar
systems, commercial imaging techniques, geographic survey and mapping systems,
wireless communication systems, multi-sensor/camera surveillance systems, and
multi-channel medical image requisition methods. The project provides training
opportunities for undergraduate students.