* 1313285
* Collaborative Research:  Abacus: A New State-of-the-Art Cosmological N-body Code
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Daniel Eisenstein, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2017
* USD 354,448.00

This project will further the development of a new computer code for
cosmological N-body simulations. Abacus implements a novel method for computing
gravitational forces that is a hundred times faster and substantially more
accurate than current methods. It can be run on commodity graphics processing
units and offers a vast improvement in price-performance. Observational surveys
of large scale structure rely on cosmological simulations to calibrate their
statistical estimators and compute accurate error bars, making it essential to
run large grids of highly accurate simulations in order to realize the potential
of current and future cosmological surveys. Abacus relies on a mathematical
breakthrough that accomplishes a clean split between the near-field and far-
field force on particles. The present work will add essential support for
individual particle time steps, on-the-fly group finding and merger tree
building, and light-cone outputs. The study will also extend Abacus to a
parallel implementation, and allow release of a public version of the code.

The research team will use Abacus for a first suite of large simulations, whose
resulting halo catalogs, merger trees, and light-cone outputs will be made
public as a direct benefit to current and future survey projects. Abacus is a
game-changer, opening up the ability to do large simulations to many more
astrophysicists at exactly the time that the need for large sets of large
simulations will intensify. The mathematical approach of Abacus opens up
substantial new possibilities in the solution of elliptic equations, one of the
most common computational tasks across a wide range of scientific and
engineering disciplines. Along the way, the project will train a post-doctoral
researcher and a graduate student.