* 1313252
* Kozai-Lidov Oscillations in Triple and Quadruple Systems of Stars and Their Compact Objects
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Todd Thompson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2019
* USD 271,977.00

Close stellar and compact object binaries are important to an extremely broad
variety of astrophysical phenomena. Yet, most close binaries are not binaries.
They are triple systems. Moreover, triple and quadruple systems are common on
aggregate, representing roughly 10% and 3% of stellar systems on the sky,
respectively. Most importantly, the long-term dynamics of multiple systems is
not understood and fully characterized. Very recent advances in our
understanding of the Kozai-Lidov resonance (and its extensions) have the chance
to dramatically reconfigure our understanding of the production of close compact
object and stellar binaries of all types. The investigators are at the forefront
of these developments. They suggested that triple systems could produce "prompt"
mergers of WD-WD binaries, perhaps leading to the Type Ia supernovae that are
observed to immediately follow episodes of star formation. They also showed that
mass loss in binaries could instigate the "Eccentric Kozai Mechanism," (EKM)
producing close WD and NS-stellar binaries. Finally, and speculatively, they
also suggested a triple or quadruple origin for Tycho B, an exceedingly rare
low-metallicity A-star at the center of Tycho's supernova remnant that may be a
blue straggler. The investigators propose a broad suite of projects aimed at
understanding the demographics, evolution, dynamics, and implications of triple
and quadruple systems composed of stars and their compact objects. They will do
both broad sweeps through parameter space, and focused studies of individual
systems. Among the projects they will pursue, they will (1) map the space of the
EKM and the Mass-Loss Induced EKM for the first time, (2) calculate the
gravitational wave background and foregrounds from eccentric compact object
binaries in triple systems, (3) explore the origin of the enigmatic ms-pulsar
PSR J1903+0327, (4) attempt to understand the period commensurability observed
in the recently discovered doubly-eclipsing quadruple A-star system CzeV343, (5)
develop evolutionary scenarios for Tycho B and explore the implications for
other Ia remnants, (6) expand the secular dynamics of 3-body systems to higher
order, (7) compute the delay-time distribution of Ia supernovae formed from
white dwarf-white dwarf mergers in coeval and dynamically formed triple systems,
(8) attempt to understand the evolution of massive star triple systems with
explosive mass loss and neutron star kicks, and (9) understand if direct compact
object collisions can be driven by Kozai-Lidov oscillations.

A significant part of the work will be carried out by graduate and undergraduate
students, providing extensive training in cutting-edge scientific research.
Results from this research will be broadly disseminated by publication in peer-
reviewed journals, conference proceedings, and by the press. In addition, the
investigators propose an interesting education and outreach component that
targets the public broadly, called "Ask An Astrophysicist!"