* 1313728
* CNH: Assessing Vulnerability of Provisioning Services in the Southern Highlands of Ethiopia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* David Swift, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

Use of natural resources and lands by humans is decreasing biological diversity
with unknown but potentially large effects on the future availability of
resources to humans. This project will investigate the feedback loop between
biodiversity and the usefulness of natural areas for people. The study area in
the Bale Mountains of Ethiopia is a good example of an area where biodiversity
is high but decreasing. It is an area where humans use natural species for food,
medicine, and fuel and also use lands for settlement, agriculture, and grazing.
Researchers will interview local residents to learn how they use and value wild
species of plants and animals and where they gather and hunt them, and survey
the area to map the distribution and abundance of these and other native
species. From these data, together with likely scenarios of local human
population growth and climate change, it will be possible to assess the risks of
further loss of species and the consequent risks of loss of usefulness of the
area for people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has immediate importance for
society -- it will improve understanding of how human well-being depends on
nature, and enhance our ability to predict the future societal costs of various
present uses of natural resources. The research also has specific importance for
the conservation of both nature and culture in an area that is rich in both. As
part of an ongoing collaboration between scientists and educators in the U.S.
and Ethiopia, the work will strengthen international scientific cooperation.