* 1313185
* RAPID: Impact of Hurricane Sandy on the Ecology of the New Jersey Shorelines: Recovery and Resilience
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Nancy Jackson, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

CBET - 1313185&lt;br/&gt;Michel C. Boufadel&lt;br/&gt;The New Jersey Institute
of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ecological resilience of the North Jersey
shorelines was evaluated following Hurricane Sandy. Three locations were
selected each representing a different ecosystem: Sand beaches in Raritan Bay, a
wetland system, and a site on the Passaic River a mile inland of Newark Bay.
These systems were historically freshwater to brackish, and it was important to
quantify the stress within them as a result of the intrusion of large volumes of
seawater and sand onto them. Sampling transects were set across sand beaches
whose inland areas where flooded, and the flooding persisted one week after the
end of the storm. The hypothesis was that this residential flooding altered the
ambient flux of chemicals in terms of quality and quantity. Measurements of pore
water are being acquired, and they are analyzed for nutrients, metals, and
salinity. The wetland system was brackish, and the hypothesis to test was that
the behavior of the wetland switched from methanogenesis to sulfate reduction.
Sediment samples are being analyzed for sulfide, nutrients, metals (Iron,
Manganese, etc), and PAHs. The model MARUN, a finite element model for density-
dependent flow in variably-saturated media will be used to interpret the
results. The hypothesis being tested is that the impairment of the Passaic River
due to Hurricane Sandy is more severe than that due to Hurricane Irene due to
the large storm surge of the prior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal areas in urban
centers are being stressed by increased population density and activity. While
the quantification of this stress is challenging, it becomes extremely difficult
in the presence of major but infrequent stressors such as hurricanes. In
addition, urban coastlines consist of a mixture of anthropogenic structures,
controlled (or regulated) estuaries, beach face morphology, and wetlands.
Maintaining such a system whole requires various tools and measurements, each
adapted to a particular ecosystem. In this project, site-specific measurements
were made in three ecosystems: Beach face, wetland, and estuary residential
areas, and the goal of the project is to provide data that could be used to
better construct a model for coastline sustainability. The results of this study
will be communicated to various stakeholders, including impacted local
communities and the State of New Jersey.