* 1313209
* The Status, Role, and Needs of Engineering Technology Education in the United States
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Greg Pearson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2017
* USD 464,234.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Academy of Engineering undertakes a
consensus study of the status, role, and needs of engineering technology
education in the United States. The three goals of the study include an analysis
of (1) the 'production' and employment of engineering technicians; (2) employer
perceptions regarding engineering technicians that includes the knowledge and
skills technicians bring to the workplace; and (3) a description of engineering
technology education programs with respect to curriculum, faculty development,
partnerships with engineering programs and industry, and outreach to K-12
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a consensus study, the study committee,
appointed by the President of the National Academy of Engineering to assure
appropriate expertise and balance, reviews the literature and existing
databases, collects some new data via surveys, and synthesizes its findings.
Their report undergoes careful peer review. The final peer reviewed report is
widely disseminated among the industrial and educational stakeholders and policy
makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings and recommendations of the study
raise awareness of engineering technology among educators, policy makers, and
funders and promote productive discussion and action among those stakeholders on
the steps needed to more effectively and strategically support the education and
hiring of individuals with engineering technology skills.