* 1313597
* RAPID: Socio-Technical Restoration of Hurricane Isaac Power Outages
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Scott Miles, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 31,737.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) project focuses on the Louisiana
power outages caused by Hurricane Isaac on August 29, 2012. The hurricane
resulted in loss of power to some customers in at least 24 parishes. For New
Orleans, the size of the power outage caused by the hurricane is second only to
Hurricane Katrina. The power outage and restoration process led to broad, vocal
criticism of the two major private power companies serving Louisiana from the
public and government officials. The goal of this project is to understand how
power restoration speed, power utility actions, and other factors influence the
real and perceived impacts to customers, as well as reactions of the public and
government officials. In other words, are public and government criticisms of
power restoration speed rooted in measurable impacts to customers with
increasing outage times? As part of this project, the power outage patterns and
the social, economic, and ecological impacts related to them will be identified
and documented. Reactions to the power restoration activities and performance
from a sampling of customers, emergency managers, and government officials will
be documented. Restoration decisions of the two major power companies, as well
as the context that might have influenced these decisions will be characterized.
Detailed data will be collected from area business with respect to power outage
characteristics, impacts, and reactions from the businesses. Project data will
be analyzed to explore whether outage time results in a quantifiable difference
in business impacts, as well as whether outage patterns effected some types of
customers more so than others. Data collection for this project will be done
through document compilation, field interviews, direct observation, and phone
surveys. The expectation is that findings will show public and political calls
for faster or improved restoration is not based on measurable impacts of
increasing outage time, but for other reasons that are specific to different
type of customers and government functions.

This research will contribute to reducing power outage impacts to businesses,
households, and government services. The results of the project will also help
to set reasonable, objective guidelines and criteria for restoration performance
of power companies. Utility providers and emergency management agencies will
benefit from this research through eventual improvement to power restoration
practices with respect to both technical performance and public or government
relations. Alternatively, consumer strategies can be developed based on results
of this work to avoid negative impacts from outages. This work will establish a
basis for other researchers to investigate the merits of new tools, policies,
and practices for improving community recovery from disasters with widespread
power outages.