* 1313755
* CNH:   Managing Impacts of Global Transport of Atmosphere-Surface Exchangeable Pollutants in the Context of Global Change
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Judith Perlinger, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,502,550.00

Toxic pollutants that pass readily in both directions between the atmosphere and
environmental surfaces exhibit three characteristic tendencies when they are
emitted to the environment: resistance to rapid degradation, accumulation in
organic-rich surface reservoirs, and semivolatility causing re-emission to the
atmosphere. These pollutants, termed "Atmosphere-Surface Exchangeable
Pollutants" or ASEPs, are emitted to the environment through human activities,
are transported and "processed" in the environment, and are then deposited where
they may harm humans and wildlife, often in locations distant from their
original use or release. Incomplete understanding of the dynamic behavior of
these pollutants in the environment has resulted in efforts to regulate them
that do not fully protect human and ecosystem health from risks. The human
system, including sociopolitical activities, cultural perspectives, and
socioeconomic activity resulting in emission of the pollutants into the
environment and other environmental stressors, the biogeochemical cycling of the
pollutants in the global environment, and the impairment of ecosystem services
that result from this cycling comprise the coupled human-natural system of
study. The objective of this study is to probe the complex dynamics and
feedbacks within the system and to identify critical social adaptations and
governance advancements required to address the challenges to sustainability
posed by these chemicals. Because emissions of these pollutants occur throughout
the world and they tend to move northward in cycles of re-volatilization and
deposition, resource managers face a particularly difficult challenge in
addressing concerns related to this form of contamination. To identify ways in
which the regulation of these chemicals can be improved, simulate their global
transport will be simulated under differing future climate and land cover/land
use scenarios to estimate amounts sequestered in and re-emitted from ecosystems.
The project team will quantify the economic costs in the United States caused by
exposure to these chemicals and analyze efforts to adaptively manage these
chemicals at scales ranging from local to global. The Laurentian Great Lakes
will provide the geographical focus for nested analysis of social adaption and
governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on pollutants
that travel long distances in the atmosphere and cause harm to humans and
ecosystems far from the locations where they were emitted. The characteristics
of atmosphere足 surface exchangeable pollutants lead to a separation in space and
time between use and harmful impacts. These pollutants are released into the
environment through human activities that yield economic benefits, but the
economic costs of damage to human health and environmental impacts are often
borne by other segments of society. Because the chemicals cross political
boundaries, efforts to address any concerns are complex. The project team will
examine details of the environmental cycling of these pollutants (how, where and
when they cycle between the air and the Earth surface) that currently impede our
ability to model their global transport and fate, and thus inform policy
decision-making. They will also assess the economic damages caused in the United
States by these pollutants. By studying the coupled human足 natural system
involving these chemicals, this project will improve our understanding of
sustainable means of production, use and governance of a class of pollutants.
Public outreach and distributed K足 college education activities, and partnering
between researchers, educators, stakeholders, and decision足 makers, will promote
incorporation of research results into learning, education, and governance. This
project brings together a diverse group of natural and social scientists from
four academic institutions to study the problem of these pollutants in a more
holistic fashion than has ever been attempted to date, and may serve as a model
for studying other classes of substances in the future.