* 1313522
* RAPID: Developing sensitive tests for detecting water chemistry changes associated with shale bed methane production in the Appalachian Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Donald Siegel, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 95,574.00

Hydraulic fracturing of shale gas deposits has a potentially large impact on
water supplies. In contrast to the current shale gas boom in Pennsylvania, New
York State has been under a hydrofracking moratorium. This creates an
opportunity to complete a large-scale, unbiased assessment of water chemistry
pre-hydraulic fracturing, to facilitate detection of water chemistry changes
following hydraulic fracturing. This project will develop a shale chemistry
signature fingerprint based on a combination of halogen concentrations (Br, I,
and Cl), isotopic ratios (129I/I, 87Sr/86Sr), and fluorescence of organic
matter. The project will contribute to a scientifically-defendable protocol,
applicable throughout the Marcellus play, whereby potential contamination from
hydrofracking can be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop geochemical fingerprinting tools to unambiguously identify changes
in chemistry of surface water and groundwater due to activities related to
energy production via hydraulic fracturing. These new geochemical fingerprinting
tools will contribute to science-based decision making about the sources of
contamination in regions where hydraulic fracturing is occurring and will lay
the framework for developing best practices for evaluating evolving water
quality in shale gas basins. The project will characterize geochemical
parameters for present-day surface and shallow ground waters and establish a
regional, pre-production baseline against which to compare future surface and
shallow ground waters following the onset of hydraulic fracturing in New York
State. This study will utilize; 1) unbiased sampling, 2) novel and unambiguous
geochemical fingerprinting, and 3) rapid dissemination of results through a
public database and web interface. All participating landowners will receive
results of all water quality testing for their well water. The project will
develop an open-access, detailed, geospatially-referenced database of surface
and groundwater chemistry. The database will be made publically-available online
and will have a web-GIS interface, such that it is navigable by a non-technical
audience.