* 1313934
* SEES Fellows: Impacts of Land Use Patterns and Public Transit Availability on the Economic and Environmental Sustainability of Electric Vehicles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Elizabeth Traut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/29/2016
* USD 289,463.00

In this Award from the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows Program) Dr. Elizabeth Traut from Carnegie-Mellon
University will investigate the impacts of land use patterns and public transit
availability on the adoption, use and economic/environmental sustainability of
plug-in and hybrid electric vehicles (xEVs). This award has support from: the
Directorate for Engineering, the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences and the Office of Integrative and International
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will investigate what
scenarios of electric vehicles (xEVs) and charging infrastructure are most
environmentally and economically sustainable in various regions, under both
current and future electric grid mixes. Some of the factors that will be
considered include: vehicle design (especially all-electric range), adoption
(cost factors, subsidies), driving patterns (distance between charges, city vs.
highway driving), charging&lt;br/&gt;opportunities (when, where, and how long
vehicles are parked), and charging infrastructure, which are in turn affected by
regional factors such as land use patterns and public transit availability. The
research will compare scenarios developed for Chicago and Glasgow, Scotland. The
aim of studies like that proposed in this work is to develop science- and
engineering-based frameworks to guide policy decisions for regional systems of
xEVs and charging infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Traut will be
working with collaborators Prof. Chris Hendrickson of the Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering at Carnegie-Mellon University as well as Prof.
Piyushimita Thakuriah, Halcrow Chair of Transport at the University of
Glasgow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Science,
Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program,
with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that
lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the
necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this
project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves
in an independent research career related to sustainability.