* 1313897
* WSC-Category 2: Extreme events impacts on water quality in the Great Lakes: Prediction and management of nutrient loading in a changing climate
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Anna Michalak, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2016
* USD 4,377,250.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Proposal # 1039043&lt;br/&gt;WSC CATEGORY 2: EXTREME EVENTS
IMPACTS ON WATER QUALITY IN THE GREAT LAKES: PREDICTION AND MANAGEMENT OF
NUTRIENT LOADING IN A CHANGING CLIMATE &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Great Lakes
(GL) are a vital freshwater resource with chronic water quality problems.
Climate-change-induced extreme events are expected to affect the region's
ecosystems and ecosystem services, with impacts on social and economic well-
being. Despite mounting evidence of the severity of these issues, knowledge is
limited and fragmented about how the climate, ecological, and social systems
interact as coupled systems. The re-eutrophication of Lake Erie illustrates the
complex interactions among natural and human systems, and points to the
challenge of managing this resource effectively and adaptively. In the GL
region, agricultural production and land use change are major drivers of water
quality, and extreme weather events can influence the choice of agricultural
practices. For example, larger storm events can increase use of tile drains or
prolonged drought can increase adoption of irrigation. Land use practices also
interact with extreme weather events to impact water quality. For example,
increasing intensity of spring storms and their timing relative to fertilizer
application has been hypothesized to change the ratio of dissolved reactive
phosphorus to total phosphorus in runoff, impacting Lake Erie phytoplankton
communities. Through these and similar feedbacks, climate-change-induced extreme
events may cause as yet unpredicted impacts to the GL ecological and socio-
economic systems. These changes, in turn, might feedback on the region's
climate, driving further system changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This proposal asks: "What are the possible effects of climate-changed-
induced extreme events on water quality and ecology in the Great Lakes system,
and what management strategies will be effective in addressing these changes?"
The complex, co-evolving human and natural systems in the GL region create the
need for a paradigm shift in the study of water quality. Accordingly, they will
address this question, with a focus on the climate-sensitive western basin of
Lake Erie, through the lens of Sustainability Science, which provides a
framework in which each sub-system can autonomously change through time while
interacting with other sub-systems. In applying this framework, they will
develop models, analysis, data, and information to better understand
interactions among the physical, biological, social, and economic systems, and
to explore and inform potential governance system responses to these changes.
They will create new knowledge both within the individual components (physical
climate, eco-hydrological, socio-economic) and through synthesis of these
components. The physical climate component will investigate extreme-event
precipitation formation and the role of land-use/lake/atmosphere feedbacks
through a combination of climate and event-based simulations. The social and
economic components will study the implications of climate-change-induced
adaptations in human migration and agricultural production for spatial land use
patterns and land markets. The eco-hydrological component will move beyond the
traditional notion that freshwater eutrophication is driven by total phosphorus
loads, and explore how the climate / extreme-event / land-use interactions
enhance delivery of more biologically active phosphorus forms. To further
understand GL water quality issues, the relative effects of phosphorus loading
versus invasive species in the re-eutrophication will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;The
governance component will innovate by gauging how integrated knowledge may
change decision-makers' perceptions of available institutions and tools, and
what they might need to design new ones. The components will inform one another
through model-based interactions, and the outcomes of the modeling activities
will be used to further understand opportunities and constraints in governance
systems. By using the paradigm of sustainability science to propose a framework
for the integrated study of water systems, the framework, methods, and many
results will be transferable to other problem settings and
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Their results will advance the
scientific understanding of coupled human-climate-water quality systems, and
inform and influence decision-making in the Great Lakes region. They will
promote training, teaching, and learning by integrating research into K-12
education through the Investigate the State (ITS) and Michigan Sea Grant (MSG)
programs, and will broaden participation of underrepresented minorities through
inquiry-based study at the Ypsilanti New Tech High School. Broad dissemination
will also occur through publication of research results, and through creation of
educational and professional development resources via the ITS and MSG programs.
The eco-hydrological and socio-economic components will build on existing
networks, and closely involve watershed councils and government agencies. They
will train five graduate students and two postdoctoral scholars, with specific
attention to mentoring postdoctoral scholars and training graduate students in
an integrated interdisciplinary context.