* 1313839
* RAPID: Reconnaissance Survey of Activity Concentrations Following  the 11 March 2011 Japan Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Costas Synolakis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2014
* USD 16,340.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) award is for the collection of
ephemeral data from the March 11, 2011 Japanese earthquake and tsunami. Data
will be collected from locations in Japan and the US Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands. The PI and colleagues had visited the area following
the 11 March 2011 Tohoku tsunami and recorded runup and tsunami currents. They
also took soil and water samples for determination of concentrations of
radioactive isotopes of Iodine and Cesium. A few of these samples suggested
concentrations one order of magnitude higher than reported by others. In this
project, additional data on tsunami runup will be obtained from Saipan, Tinian
and Rota. Eyewitnesses to the tsunami will be contacted for additional
information. Topsoil samples will be also obtained from the same sites
previously sampled in Japan to validate the original
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data collected on tsunami runup will help to
complete existing databases on runup measurements from the Tohoku tsunami. These
data can be used to validate tsunami inundation maps produced by NOAA for the
Northern Mariana Islands. The data on concentrations of radioactive Cesium will
help determine the magnitude and areal dispersion of radioactive elements
released from the damaged nuclear power plants in Japan.