* 1313585
* Building Network Enabled International Science and Engineering Collaborations in the Lower Mekong Region
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Peter Arzberger, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2015
* USD 94,432.00

Indiana University, the PRAGMA project, the Network Startup Research Center
(NSRC) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR)) will organize a
science and cyberinfrastructure workshop to be held in Vietnam in late 2013,
involving countries of the Lower Mekong region (LMR), including Cambodia, Laos,
Thailand, Vietnam and Myanmar. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on
three areas: 1) forming and enhancing science and education collaborations among
US scientists and scientists of the countries of the LMR; 2) developing human
capacity to operate and maintain cyberinfrastructure in support of science and
engineering collaborations; 3) policy and regulatory best practices in
cyberinfrastructure development and science collaboration. In countries where
Research and Education Networks (RENs) are just emerging, developing a
knowledgeable community of network operators, users and policy makers is a
necessary step in supporting and fostering collaborations between researchers
and educators within the region, with the US and globally. The intellectual
merit of the workshop is the bringing together of these three groups: network
operators and managers of RENs at the campus and national levels; researchers
from institutions within the region and from the US who collaborate in three
main areas of science and engineering: disaster management, climate change and
forestry; and policy-makers and leaders from government and academia involved in
supporting the development of cyberinfrastructure and collaborative science in
their countries and in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
workshop will benefit science and engineering in areas of national and regional
importance in the Lower Mekong countries, and where US science and engineering
collaborations will be enhanced. The US Department of State is engaged in the
multinational Lower Mekong Initiative (LMI), designed to enhance collaboration
in the region on critical issues of education, health, environment and
infrastructure. Funds from the Department of State will support participation by
scientists from within the region, which will broaden the impact of the
workshop. The NSF funds will support travel for US scientists and graduate
students working with collaborators in the countries of the LMR and/or
collaborating with counterparts in the region, including those from across many
NSF divisions. One of the workshop?s broader impacts will include increasing
participation by researchers from countries of the LMR in international science
and engineering projects. The training provided to both network operators and
researchers using cyberinfrastructure tools will be done in a sustainable,
train-the-trainer method to encourage ongoing learning.