* 1313824
* CNH-Ex: Quantifying Linkages Among Land-Use Policies, Agricultural Intensification, Habitat Fragmentation, and Social-Ecological Resilience in a Tropical Biological Corridor
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Lisette Waits, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2017
* USD 248,733.00

This project is about understanding the interactions between land-use policies,
agricultural rural development and land use change in tropical landscapes, and
how these changes affect the resilience of and relationships between human
populations and the natural ecosystems present in these landscapes. Millions of
hectares of tropical forests have been converted to agriculture leaving behind
patches of remnant natural forest embedded in an agricultural matrix.
Historically, this agricultural matrix was dominated by subsistence crops and
pasture, but in some areas this land is rapidly being replaced with intensive
plantation agriculture for soybean, banana, and pineapple production. In
contrast with more traditional land uses, these crops require higher inputs of
labor, money, agrochemicals, and infrastructure. The impacts of this new land
conversion trend are not well understood, but preliminary studies suggest that
intensive plantation agriculture may drive dramatic demographic and economic
changes in local communities and have profound effects on ecological systems.
Ultimately, these impacts will change the ability of these human and ecological
communities to maintain resilience to future change. Thus, a better
understanding is needed of the relationships among land-use policies, ecosystem
structure and function, and the decisions and actions of local communities and
land managers that ultimately determine where and how fast intensive plantation
agriculture will spread. This project will evaluate these relationships in the
model system of the San Juan-La Selva Biological Corridor in Costa Rica.
Specifically, this research will address a variety of research questions, such
as: What national policies led to the establishment and spread of intensive non-
traditional plantation crops? For three focal regions, what is the status of the
social and ecological indicators of resilience? How will current and alternative
policy scenarios affect future land use patterns, and how will these affect
ecological resilience? How does future scenario modeling of projected land use
changes influence the perceptions of community members and land managers about
their future social and ecological resilience? This effort incorporates
stakeholder input at every step of the research; implements two new ecological
approaches, functional traits analysis and landscape genetics; and explicitly
measures both social and ecological resilience in the same system and at
multiple spatial and temporal scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this
research will advance understanding of how human communities and ecosystems
respond to agricultural intensification, and will therefore help scientists and
managers better understand how to manage for resilience in the face of global
change. At the local scale, findings will be shared through stakeholder
workshops with community leaders and regional land managers; these workshops
will provide participants with information to make informed land use decisions,
and develop community capacity to adapt to change. At the global scale, findings
from this research will be disseminated through presentations at the
participating universities, at professional conferences, and through publication
of peer-reviewed papers in scientific journals. In addition, this project will
contribute to the interdisciplinary research training of multiple undergraduates
and five Ph.D. students, all from under-represented groups. This project is
supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH)
Program.