* 1313878
* I-Corps:  Path Towards Commercialization of High-Power Tunable Mid- to far-IR Lasers using Novel Two-Color VECSEL
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Mahmoud Fallahi, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This project plans to develop a new class of high-power, compact, widely-tunable
mid- to far-IR laser source. The team's approach is based on an intracavity
collinear difference frequency generation (DFG) design in a two-chip vertical
external-cavity surface-emitting laser (VECSEL). Access to the VECSELs' high-Q
intracavity circulating power at two different wavelengths with orthogonal
polarization will provide efficient type-II DFG. The success of this work can
have a significant impact on the development of compact, high-power mid-IR and
far-IR sources and will cover various disciplines in optical science. By
expanding on the basic VECSEL design, the proposed laser has great potential to
efficiently generate any desired wavelength in the 3-300 micron range. This is
important since in the next few years new military, medical, and sensing
applications are expected to greatly expand the market potential for long
wavelength laser sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed mid-IR source has
the potential to impact various fields of science and engineering, as well as in
generate new products benefiting the ecosystem. By expanding on the basic VECSEL
design, the proposed laser has great potential to efficiently generate any
desired wavelength in the 3-300 micron range. The discoveries made within the
scope of this program could have a transformative impact on a wide range of
applications. Applications in biomedical, atmospheric monitoring, chemical
sensing, and national defense could all benefit from advancements in mid- to
far-IR lasers sources. In fact, in addition to the application-rich mid-IR, the
proposed concept can be extended to the untapped spectral regions in the far-IR
providing even more opportunities in the near future. collected in non-model
species. This new approach opens the door for highly efficient surveys of
genetic variation across diverse species. The innovation developed in this
proposal has the potential to advance biodiversity research by releasing two
major bottlenecks: limited availability of genetic markers in non-model systems
and low sample throughput. Anchored enrichment may also open the door for a new
high-throughput mining approach to pharmaceutical discovery and increased
efficiency of insecticides for agriculture applications.