* 1313659
* NSF CNH-Ex: Pastoralism in Transition: Linking Localized Interactions and System Behavior to Evaluate Social-Ecological Vulnerability
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Laura German, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2017
* USD 249,525.00

This CNH project is about livelihood transitions that poor rural communities in
developing countries are making in order to cope with deteriorating
environmental conditions, shifting social trends, and broader changes in
governance. While the transformation of livelihood activities has the potential
to improve human well-being, food security, and ecological sustainability, it
can also have the opposite effect and increase the vulnerability of the human
population and the ecosystems that support them. In the drylands of Africa,
about 100 million pastoralists rely heavily or solely on livestock production
for their subsistence. Modernization has brought drastic political and social
changes, as well as unprecedented population growth, land degradation and more
frequent droughts that decimate herds. Today, many pastoralists are adopting
crop agriculture alongside their struggling livestock-based livelihood system as
an avenue for much-needed diversification. Such a transformation entails
profound changes in the ecological functioning of landscapes, the level of risk
exposure faced by households and whole communities, and the authorities and
rules governing land use and land rights. Given the complexity and novelty of
these changes, assessing the conditions under which social and ecological
vulnerability is likely to be alleviated or exacerbated is a profound challenge,
but is urgently needed as traditional subsistence-level societies worldwide face
similarly uncertain futures. This research will assess how the transition to
agro-pastoralism in two Maasai communities in Kenya is affecting three
components of social-ecological vulnerability: the ecosystem's sensitivity to
drought and shifting grazing pressure; the degree of risk exposure that
households take on as they make the transition; and the coping capacity afforded
by the suite of new rules and practices adopted by the communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach adopted in this research is based on advances
in complex systems theory, which can be applied to ecosystems, human
interactions, and governance systems alike. This approach is also highly
advantageous because it enables the use of information about easily-measured,
small-scale interactions to understand and predict broader trends such as
tipping points and thresholds, which emerge at the level of the whole social-
ecological system. By developing theoretically grounded methods to evaluate
multiple dimensions of vulnerability, this research will build transformative
links between theory and real-world empirical assessments. It will directly
enhance the ability of scientists to understand and solve other complex
sustainability problems emerging around the world. Through ongoing participation
and dialogue, research procedures and findings will be shared with local
community members as tools for empowerment and sustainability planning.
Cooperative ties with key colleagues in regional academic, development, and
conservation communities will ensure that the research tools developed will
enhance the approaches and impact of other sustainability initiatives and
research programs. The project's mentored PhD student and postdoc will gain a
unique learning experience of the value of science-society collaborations for
high-impact research outcomes. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of
Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.