* 1313272
* Analysis of Nonlinear Stochastic Partial Differential Equations with Applications in Turbulence Theory and Climate Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Nathan Glatt-Holtz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2017
* USD 121,170.00

A fundamental challenge faced in fluid dynamics is that the basic governing
equations do not account for persistent, randomly driven fluctuations that arise
due to uncertainties in modeling from empirical, numerical and physical sources.
In view of the wide progress made in computation and given the ubiquity of
probabilistic methods in applications there is a clear need to better understand
the numerical and analytical underpinnings of stochastic partial differential
equations (SPDEs) in general and in relation to the basic equations of fluid
dynamics. This project seeks to further the development of numerical and
analytical tools for SPDEs with a view towards novel applications in climate and
weather modeling and for the study of turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
will focus in particular on three emerging areas of nonlinear SPDEs. Firstly we
will address the theory of invariant measures and statistically steady states.
In particular we will develop tools to study inviscid limits in the class of
invariant measures for the Navier-Stokes equations and for related models
arising in geophysical and turbulence applications. We will also identify and
characterize noise regimes leading to ergodic and mixing properties for some
previously unaddressed classes of nonlinear SPDEs. A second portion of the
project will develop parameter estimation and inverse modeling techniques for
noisy nonlinear PDEs. The third portion of the project is devoted to the
numerical analysis of nonlinear SPDEs and to developing related analytical tools
needed for this purpose.