* 1313120
* RUI: Detecting Gravitational Waves with Pulsars: Mitigating the ISM Delay
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Dan Stinebring, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 173,172.00

Pulsar timing can be used to explore many aspects of gravitation and stellar
physics. In particular, pulsars can be used to search for gravitational waves -
ripples in space-time caused by the acceleration of large masses such as black
holes - by monitoring the arrival time of the pulses. This long-term,
collaborative effort is one of the great quests of modern physics and
astrophysics. The technique employed is sensitive to gravitational waves with
light-year wavelengths produced, for example, by orbiting supermassive black
holes at the cores of merging galaxies. This wavelength regime cannot be probed
by other techniques, for example those being explored by LIGO and the proposed
LISA mission. Multi-path propagation through the inhomogeneous interstellar gas
- and subsequent interference effects - causes the radio signal to vary in
strength or scintillate. Scintillation effects hamper high precision timing of
pulsars by introducing random noise into the timing signal. The required timing
precision is extraordinary: about 100 ns maintained for
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his Oberlin College undergraduate
students are developing a technique that allows time delays smaller than a
microsecond to be estimated from the time-variable spectrum of the pulsar.
Although there is much development work needed on this technique, initial
results are promising and underscore the importance of understanding and
correcting for this delay. The proposed research will develop this technique in
detail using high-sensitivity observations from the Arecibo radio telescope and
other large telescopes such as the NRAO/Green Bank Telescope and the LEAP
(virtual array) telescope being organized in Europe. The main goal is to focus
on this important source of timing noise and develop a practical technique for
correcting for it in the timing signal of relatively weak millisecond
pulsars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will benefit the scientific
community by improving our ability to detect gravitational waves with an array
of millisecond pulsars. In addition, what we learn about scattering of radio
waves by the ionized gas in the Milky Way will improve our understanding of how
the Milky Way "works," for example the degree of turbulence of the interstellar
gas is how it is distributed in space. Both of these topics are of interest not
only to specialists, but to a much wider audience as well. As a professor at a
liberal arts college, the PI shares the excitement of this work with his
research students and with the wide range of students he teaches. His teaching
of Introductory Astronomy to about 100 undergraduates a year, for example,
benefits directly from his involvement in scientific research. This research
program will involve undergraduate students in the excitement of exploring a new
phenomenon and piecing together parts of a bigger puzzle. By working closely
with the PI and his collaborators, the students will gain a broad range of
technical skills as well as further develop their ability to independently
explore problems. Using state-of-the-art electronics and computers at the
largest radio telescopes in the world, the students will gain confidence in
their ability to tackle large and complex problems. Opportunities to collaborate
with scientists in the U.S. and abroad and to report their work at conferences
and in publications will enhance students' research experience and prepare them
for graduate training or other roles in the technical workforce.