* 1313962
* SEES Fellows: Engineering a carrying capacity framework for sustainable management of natural resources
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Carrie Byron, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2017
* USD 417,785.00

In this Award from the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows Program) Dr. Carrie Byron from the University of New
England will engineer new tools for sustainable management of resources and will
examine synergies between coupled human-natural systems using a carrying
capacity approach. This award is supported by the Directorate for Geosciences
and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will (1) investigate the ways
in which ecological- and social-carrying capacities can be quantified ; (2)
investigate the feedbacks between ecological and economic systems; (3) study the
mechanisms regulating ecological- and social-carrying capacity; and (4) explore
if a carrying capacity concept can be used to promote sustainable management of
natural resources in coastal ecosystems. Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island and
Cobscook Bay, Maine will be used as sites in the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
aim of studies like that proposed in this work is to develop better methods for
the management of natural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Byron will be
working with collaborators Prof. James Sulikowski of the Marine Science Center
at the University of New England and Dr. Di Jin at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Instittuion; as well as Prof. Tracey Dalton in the Department of Marine Affairs,
at the University of Rhode Island and Prof. Gayle Zydlewski in the School of
Marine Sciences at the University of Maine. Dr. Byron will work with research
students with her University collaborators and will disseminate the results of
her work through scientific and public outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.