* 1313091
* RUI: The Hydrodynamics and Observational Signatures of Binary Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Lombardi, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 231,312.00

A large variety of interesting astrophysical objects and systems are thought to
pass through a contact or semidetached binary stage. The ultimate outcomes of
such evolution include exotica such as binary neutron stars, planetary nebulae
with double degenerate cores, ultracompact X-ray binaries, and blue stragglers.
In a contact binary system, the two components orbit within a larger common
envelope and maintain physical contact, while in a semidetached binary, one star
gradually accretes mass from a companion overflowing its Roche lobe. In either
case, one or both binary components can expand on a stellar evolution timescale,
often causing the binary to become unstable and merge. If the binary components
have degenerate cores, the cores can separately survive the merger to form
systems with binary compact objects. Regardless of the parent stars, the merger
of a binary can result in so-called mergebursts, characterized by a sudden and
drastic observed increase in luminosity and by ejecta streaming away from the
merger product. Making use of a smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) code,
Starsmasher, we will perform a parameter sweep covering such scenarios, varying
both the evolutionary state of the parent stars and the mass ratio. We will
determine the conditions under which a binary merges, and we will study
carefully the dynamics and observable characteristics of the merger and merger
product, including its light curve, continuum spectrum, and outflow velocity.
Our results will complement binary stellar evolution and population synthesis
calculations, they will assist in the interpretation of observations, and they
will help explain the formation channels of numerous exotic objects, including
specific examples such as V1309 Sco.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
represents an opportunity to foster a connection between researchers at
Allegheny College and RIT. The proposed project will provide a valuable research
focus for undergraduates at Allegheny. Undergraduates, often grappling with
career plans, certainly will benefit from early exposure to intercollegiate
collaboration and from building a solid foundation in computational methods, an
area with broad applications. Based on his experience with Allegheny College
students and their career trajectories, the PI expects that this project will
equip them well for success in graduate school and in technically oriented
careers. In addition, through the PI's teaching and outreach efforts, the
project proposed here has the potential to reach a wide range of people and
raise the scientific literacy of both local and national audiences.