* 1313821
* Does in utero exposure to domoic acid cause temporal lobe epilepsy?
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Paul Buckmaster, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,186,570.00

Algae of the Pseudo-nitzschia genus are found in marine environments worldwide.
Harmful blooms of Pseudo-nitzschia produce domoic acid that contaminates marine
food webs and affects many species. People are at risk of domoic acid toxicosis
and consequences can be severe, including amnesia and seizures. In adult animals
domoic acid exposure can cause status epilepticus, excitotoxic neuron loss,
aberrant synaptic reorganization, and temporal lobe epilepsy. In utero exposure
to domoic acid in rodents causes long-term behavioral impairments, epileptiform
EEG activity, and reduced seizure threshold. Morphological abnormalities also
occur, especially in the hippocampus, but changes are milder than those caused
by domoic acid exposure in adults. Evidence from California sea lions (Zalophus
californianus) suggests natural exposure to domoic acid in utero might cause
later development of temporal lobe epilepsy. These findings have raised growing
concern that human embryos might be at risk when pregnant women consume seafood
containing domoic acid at levels below current regulatory limits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at Stanford University
will conduct experiments to test the hypothesis that in utero exposure to domoic
acid causes temporal lobe epilepsy, albeit a milder form than that caused by
adult exposure. There are two overall objectives: (1) to determine whether in
utero exposure to domoic acid causes temporal lobe epilepsy in mice and to
compare the neuropathology to that of mice exposed as adults; and (2) to test
the hypothesis in California sea lions by evaluating brain tissue from animals
euthanized because of domoic acid toxicosis with a poor prognosis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address growing concerns that human
embryos might be at risk when pregnant women consume seafood containing domoic
acid at levels below current regulatory limits. Results will determine whether
or not in utero exposure to domoic acid causes epilepsy in mice and perhaps in
sea lions. If results of the proposed proof-of-concept experiments support the
hypothesis that in utero exposure to domoic acid causes temporal lobe epilepsy,
they will provide rationale for investing in further studies to more directly
evaluate risks to humans. Furthermore, if in utero exposure to domoic acid
causes epilepsy in mice and sea lions, results generated will reveal the pattern
and extent of associated brain damage, which might help identify underlying
epileptogenic circuit anomalies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Trainees
will participate in the proposed project. They include a graduate student and
veterinary students that come to Stanford University for the summer to gain
research experience through an NIH-funded training grant (T35 OD010989). They
will learn about epilepsy, environmental exposure to toxins, comparative
neuroanatomy, and EEG recording .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JOINT FUNDING BY NSF AND
NIEHS: The original proposal on which this project is based (R01 ES021960-01)
was submitted to the National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences
(NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding Opportunity Announcement RFA-ES-11-013 ,
"Oceans, Great Lakes and Human Health (R01)", an opportunity jointly sponsored
by NSF. This project is cooperatively funded through separate awards from NSF
and NIEHS.