* 1313775
* CNH: Climate Effects on Tea Quality and Socioeconomic Responses
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Albert Robbat Jr., Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 08/31/2019
* USD 931,000.00

This project focuses on why and how tea quality is vulnerable to changing
climate conditions and how changes in quality may affect farming communities and
land-use strategies. Tea production and consumption systems are used as a case
study to explore complex interactions among human and natural systems. This
interdisciplinary research project will examine how links among tea
agroecosystems, markets, and farmers are impacted by increased climate
variability and the resulting socioecological feedbacks. The investigators will
ground their research in socioecological and chemical ecology theory. They will
employ a range of research methods, including field sampling in tea-producing
areas of China; controlled greenhouse experiments; biochemical and sensory
analyses of tea samples; consumer surveys of purchasing decisions and price
modeling; farmer surveys of ecological knowledge, management, social networks,
and livelihoods; and multivariate modeling of climate and management
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new information and
insights regarding climate effects on crop quality and to facilitate societal
actions towards sustainability of agro-ecosystems and farmer livelihoods. The
project will enhance theoretical understandings regarding human-environment
relationships and shed new light on the dynamics of climate change,
agroecosystems, markets, and agricultural practices. Project findings will
assist in the development of evidence-based management plans and policy
suggestions for land-use organizations in tea producing areas. Although this
project focuses on tea production and related environmental conditions in China,
it will yield insights that have value in exploring the complex relationships
between quality-related market-driven forces and changing natural conditions for
a broad range of environmentally sensitive resource-related activities across
the globe. Examples of other economic activities for which real and perceived
changes in product quality associated with even-minor changes in environmental
conditions may have profound impacts include wine production in the U.S. and
elsewhere, cherry production in Washington state and Michigan, and skiing
conditions in the Rockies and New England. This project is supported by the NSF
Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.