* 1313788
* CNH-RCN: Tropical Reforestation Network: Building a Socioecological Understanding of Tropical Reforestation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Thomas Rudel, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 439,988.00

Sustainable use of tropical forests depends upon the ability of forests to
regrow after clearing. This project -- Tropical Reforestation Research
Coordination Network -- will address major gaps in our understanding of the
social and ecological drivers of reforestation, and the consequences of
alternative methods of reforestation for reforestation or for commercial
forestry. Interdisciplinary teams will be formed at an initial workshop to focus
on four thematic areas: 1) social and ecological causes of forest changes in the
tropics; 2) recovery of ecosystems in disturbed tropical forest landscapes; 3)
interactions between climate variability and reforestation; and 4) socioeconomic
and ecological costs and benefits of reforestation. Teams will review previously
published, scholarly research; plan new research proposals to address knowledge
gaps; produce policy briefs for governmental and non-governmental agencies and
organizations; and produce teaching modules for university students and
reforestation professionals. A third workshop featuring early career scientists
will focus on the social and ecological challenges of managing regenerating
forests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help guide efforts to actively
restore forests on degraded and unproductive lands. Partnerships with the Union
of Concerned Scientists, the Network of Conservation Educators and
Practitioners, and the Environmental Leadership and Training Initiative will
allow participants to transmit their findings to policy makers, students,
foresters, and the general public via webinars, policy briefs, field training,
and on-line courses. The network's activities will promote international
collaboration and provide training for graduate students through a distributed
graduate student seminar on the social and ecological impacts of climate
variability on tropical reforestation.