* 1313093
* Collaborative Research:  Multiscale Modeling of Oyster Reef Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Jian Shen, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 128,672.00

Native oyster species were historically dominant ecosystem engineers that
provided critical ecosystem services such as biofiltration and economic value
through fisheries. Their populations were decimated over the last century
through overfishing and habitat degradation, often to less than 1% of historical
abundance. Extensive efforts are underway worldwide to restore populations of
native oyster species, including in the Chesapeake Bay, but these have largely
been ineffectual, partly due to the lack of understanding of oyster-reef-
sediment dynamics in complex nonlinear systems. A realistic mathematical model
that can account for the dynamics at various spatial scales will enable us to
study the underlying processes of these systems. With an understanding of
nonlinear dynamics, such as multiple stable states due to feedbacks between
oysters and the physical environment, and the effects of different spatial
scales on population viability, effective restoration strategies can be devised.
In this project, oyster-reef-sediment dynamics will be modeled at three scales:
local, whole reef, and metapopulation. Local models will address reef geometry
and how it affects feedback interactions. At the reef scale, a reaction-
diffusion-advection model for oysters and sediment will be used to explain the
spatial pattern of the reef and determine optimal reef geometries for
restoration. Metapopulation models, including ones with connectivity between
reefs based on realistic hydrodynamic modeling under various dynamic conditions,
will be used to locate potential restoration sites and to estimate the risk of
extinction due to environmental perturbations. This project will lead to
advances in several branches of mathematics, including spatiotemporal pattern
formation, metapopulation model analysis and simulation, and stochastic coupled
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results of the project will guide ongoing eastern
oyster restoration efforts by federal, state and nonprofit agencies in the
Chesapeake Bay and other locations along the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico coasts,
as well as for other native oyster species globally. In doing so, the project
will contribute significantly to achievement of Executive Order 13508, signed in
2009, which has the goal of restoring oyster populations in 20 tributaries of
Chesapeake Bay by 2025. The project is complementary to and will be integrated
with an active field research program to parameterize the models and ultimately
inform the relevant agencies on optimal restoration strategies. The project will
also lead to training of undergraduate and graduate students in mathematical
biology. This type of training is timely due to the scarcity of scientists
capable of modeling in marine conservation biology and fisheries stock
assessment.