* 1313762
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Susan Vanek: The Cost of Independence: National Identity and Economic Autonomy in Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Thomas Wilson, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2016
* USD 20,815.00

This project examines Greenland's independence movement through its nation-
building efforts, particularly its Branding Greenland initiative, a process that
strives to reconfigure an ethnic identity into a national identity. The
Greenlandic Nation is a new phenomenon in world affairs as it is composed and
led by an indigenous Inuit population, poised to become the first independent
Inuit nation-state. As such it is one of the few contemporary examples of
nation-building in the Arctic. This transition is reconfiguring the face of
governance in the region, with Greenland?s role in its own governance increasing
as Denmark's wanes. Nation-branding in Greenland draws attention to the
increasing role of culture and identity as tools for economic development and
political recognition by indigenous and minority groups. Building on and
contributing to scholarship on indigenous movements in both the Northern and
Southern Hemispheres, the proposed project explores the transition from a
primarily ethnic, Inuit identity to a national identity and the contention
between various understandings of Greenland as a place and Greenlanders as a
people embedded in this process. It examines how culture and identity have been
configured and reconfigured through policy with the goal of attaining political
and economic autonomy, and how they have increasingly been objectified and
essentialized as tools for development by various interests in politics,
business, and NGOs. This project also contributes to a more situated
understanding of government and governance, moving it from a straight-forward
top-down process focused solely on political actors to one characterized by
multiple and intersecting social, cultural, political and economic interests and
contested meanings. This project employs the notion of "bordering" to examine
contemporary nation-building as an internally and externally focused process,
highlighting the changing role of the nation-state in an increasingly global
Arctic, facing climate change accompanied by growing international attention and
increasing resource development.