* 1313815
* CNH:   Coupled Climate, Cultivation, and Culture in the Great Plains: Understanding Water Supply and Water Quality in a Fragile Landscape
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Marcellus Caldas, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,450,000.00

Freshwater is central to agriculture, industry, residential development and
other aspects of the US economy, provides essential ecosystem goods and services
for society, and maintains the health of the biota that inhabit aquatic
ecosystems. Existing freshwater resources are being challenged by increasingly
unsustainable land use and water use practices. The distribution, abundance and
quality of freshwater supplies will undoubtedly also be affected by projected
climate change and variability. Unless landscapes are managed proactively in the
future, sustaining even the present level of ecosystem goods and services that
aquatic systems provide will be impossible. Among the most pressing
environmental challenges related to freshwater are how to formulate and
implement sustainable, science-based, strategies to adapt to climate variation,
land use change, and other consequences of human development. To address this
challenge, we will develop an integrative mechanistic model accounting
explicitly for human-landscape interactions. Our coupled human-landscape model
incorporates linkages and feedbacks among atmospheric, terrestrial, aquatic, and
social processes to predict the potential impact of climate variability, climate
change, land use, and human activity on water resources at decadal to centennial
scales in the Central Great Plains region of North America. This part of the
United States has longstanding water quality and quantity concerns resulting
from extreme climate variability, intensive water uses and land uses.
Furthermore, the regional socio-economic system is challenged by dramatic
population shifts, concentration of land tenure, dependency on highly variable
and limited water supplies, economic uncertainty, and strong cultural resistance
to top-down government regulation. Both human and natural systems in this area
depend on adequate freshwater for survival, but are fragile, quickly and
dramatically affected by climate fluctuations, and potentially facing disaster
given either natural or anthropogenically-driven climate scenarios. In the first
three components of the project, we develop and interactively couple mechanistic
models of the three systems controlling water supply and water quality ? the
hydrosystem, the aquatic ecosystem, and the human system. In the fourth research
component, these three system models are integrated in two ways. First, we use
an agent-based decision model to evaluate wholesystem (hydrosystem, aquatic
ecosystem, human system) response to climate variation scenarios derived from
historical climate data and downscaled climate projections. Second, we use
policy optimization modeling to identify the most effective strategies to
achieve sustainability within a culturally appropriate context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will produce benefits to society by
providing tools and frameworks that will guide policy formulation and
implementation of incentives and regulations to ensure the sustainability of
coupled hydrological, ecological, and human systems in the Central Great Plains
and beyond. Our research has the potential to transform the science supporting
water sustainability efforts on several fronts. Specifically, our research will:
(a) improve our ability to translate climate model outputs into more
understandable and relevant weather-scale events ; (b) produce a better
understanding of how and why landowners make water-use decisions; (c) develop a
spatially-explicit, landscape-scale synthesis of existing ecological data to
understand how climate changes and watershed alterations impact riverscape-scale
biodiversity, (d) facilitate understanding of how climate change will act in
conjunction with and exacerbate a range of other stressors to impact the
functions of wetlands, and (e) produce a usable policy optimization model to
help governments move towards societally acceptable and achievable water
sustainability. These advances will directly contribute to the sustainability of
economically important agricultural systems, biologically significant
ecosystems, urban population clusters, and clean water supplies.