* 1313810
* Collaborative Research: Biological Shape Spaces, Transforming Shape into Knowledge
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Cindy Grimm, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 135,850.00

Collaborative Research: Biological Shape Spaces, Transforming Shape into
Knowledge

This project will develop a framework to represent, analyze and interpret shapes
extracted from images, supporting a wide range of biological investigations. The
primary objectives are: (1) to develop a mathematical framework and
computational tools for the quantification and analysis of shapes; (2) to
integrate these computational models with machine learning and statistical
inference methods to enable new discoveries, transforming imaging data into
biological knowledge; (3) to deliver novel quantitative methodologies for shape
analysis that start from a biological premise, rather than a purely geometric
one. The aim is thus not only to quantitatively describe shape, but to develop
methods for linking morphological variation to its underlying biological causes.
To ensure that the project focuses on methods that are most promising to biology
with significant breadth of application, model and tool development will be
guided and supported by a set of diverse case studies, ranging from the sub-
cellular to organismal scales.

Shape represents a complex and rich source of biological information that is
fundamentally linked to underlying mechanisms and function. However, shape is
still often examined on a qualitative basis in many disciplines in biology, an
approach that is time consuming and prone to human subjectivity. While ad hoc
quantitative methods do exist, they are often inaccessible to non-experts and do
not easily generalize to a wide variety of problems. The inability of biologists
to systematically link shape to genetics, development, environment, function and
evolution often precludes advances in biological research spanning diverse
spatial and temporal scales, from the movement of molecules within a cell to
adaptive changes in organismal morphology. The primary goal of this project is
to develop a new suite of widely applicable quantitative methods and tools into
the study of biological shape to address the significant need for consistent and
repeatable analysis of shape data.