* 1313268
* Accessing Atmospheric Properties of Terrestrial Exoplanets: Ground-Based Observations of Rayleigh Scattering and Extended Atmospheres
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Seth Redfield, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2019
* USD 507,239.00

This project will develop new techniques for observing atmospheres of extrasolar
planets with at the terrestrial planet boundary, the so-called Super-Earths
(mass less than 10 Earth masses). The investigators will also observe exoplanets
with much higher masses, including those which are near enough to the host star
that much of their atmospheres is escaping. They will conduct broadband (low
spectral resolution) observations of Rayleigh scattering using multi-object or
integral-field instruments, and high-spectral resolution transmission
spectroscopy of H-alpha lines in exoplanet targets. They will use various
optical and infrared observatories, such as the Keck, WIYN and Hobby-Eberly
Telescope (HET).

Rayleigh scattering is the dominant atmospheric signature of terrestrial planets
in the optical, and is considered critical to evaluating infrared observations.
The measurements of the emission from two hydrogen lines would provide
fundamental physical and morphological measurements that would help explain the
mass loss characteristics of some exoplanets. Broader impacts include a public
outreach program at McDonald Observatory, and annual teacher professional
development workshops in Texas, which incorporate the research and conform to
National Science Education Standards. Undergraduate and graduate students and a
postdoctoral scholar will also receive research training on this project.