* 1313647
* Collaborative Research:  Forum for Arctic Modeling and Observational Synthesis (FAMOS)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Steele, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 264,333.00

The overall goal of FAMOS is a better understanding of the arctic climate system
(with a focus on the marine environment) through the use of improving numerical
models and observational tactics and strategies. The FAMOS project is focused on
enhancing collaboration and coordination among arctic marine modelers,
theoreticians, and observationalists. International teams of such scientists are
represented at all levels of project activities starting from generating
hypotheses, to planning, and to finalizing analyses. This work will be managed
via teleconferences, virtual workshops, newsletters, and annual workshops with
1-2 day schools for young and developing arctic researchers. FAMOS will support
synthesis across the suite of arctic models and observations by (i) Holding
scientific workshops and schools for new investigators including virtual
teleconferences; (ii) Creating teams of modelers, theoreticians, and
observationalists to work on topical issues of arctic sea ice and oceanic
dynamics and thermodynamics; (iii) Conducting collaboration with other similar
projects focused on other aspects of arctic/global climate (atmospheric,
terrestrial, cryospheric); (iv) Disseminating findings to broader communities
and involve the larger community in discussions, coordinated modeling and
observational field experiments; (v) Training a new generation of ocean and sea-
ice observationalists and modelers.

Intellectual Merit: Although the future focus of FAMOS projects will depend to a
large degree on the interests of its participants, the vision is that there will
be three broad areas of interest. The first area includes the use of
observations for model forcing (including initial and boundary conditions) and
validation. The second area is improvement of model numerics and
parameterization of different processes (e.g. mixing, advection, eddy-driven
processes) and implementation of new methods/algorithms/physics. The third area
of model improvement will be the inclusion of processes important for the Arctic
(e.g. fresh water dynamics, slope/basin exchange, wave-ice interaction, and CO2
air-sea flux, ecosystem changes). These research themes specifically address the
the major program question ?What do changes in the arctic system imply for the
future?? and to understand the behavior of the arctic system? past, present, and
future.

Broader Impacts: FAMOS is an important and unique component of present-day
arctic studies because it will help improve our understanding of oceanic and
sea-ice processes. From this view point, the most significant FAMOS
contributions will be: development of a regional and improvement of global
climate models; identification of model errors and causes of these errors and
model discrepancies, recommendations for improvements of existing regional
coupled ice-ocean models and GCMs by implementing new physics and
parameterizations for arctic processes. The coordinated community approach to
the investigation of Arctic Ocean variability is the only way to assess the
degree of uncertainty in results and conclusions made by different modelers,
scientific groups, or institutions. One of the highest impacts of the FAMOS
activity is educational (including the FAMOS school) because it promotes the
growth of young scientists participating in the project, provides guidelines for
critical analysis of the existing models, and fruitful improvements and
developments of the arctic models by a new generation of arctic modelers.