* 1313456
* The compositions of outer Solar System icy surfaces from ultra-low resolution spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* David Trilling, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2019
* USD 85,257.00

The long-standing question of how our Solar System reached its current
configuration can be addressed by a range of theoretical models, each of which
makes predictions about the origins of the small bodies of the outer Solar
System. The compositions of those small bodies, which are indicators of their
origins, are usually studied using either broadband photometry, which has low
diagnostic power, or spectroscopy, which is highly diagnostic but expensive. The
Principal Investigator (PI) and his team will use a novel technique of ultra-low
resolution spectroscopy to measure the icy surface compositions of outer Solar
System objects. In this technique the ultra-low resolution spectra are heavily
binned into custom "pseudo-filters," allowing for rapid diagnostic measurements.
The team will conduct a large-scale survey, using telescopes in Hawaii, Chile,
and South Africa, to determine the surface compositions of some 250 outer Solar
System bodies-- the largest such survey to date. The results will place strong
constraints on the evolution of the outer Solar System and the dynamical flow of
material within and from the Kuiper Belt. Broader impacts include the
commissioning of new observing modes on several telescopes; visits by the PI to
schools in South Africa during his sabbatical in Year 2 of the project; and
efforts to establish cross-cultural connections between South African schools
and US counterparts in Arizona.