* 1313422
* Open Exploration of the Time Domain with the Catalina Real-Time Transient Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Stanislav Djorgovski, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2014
* USD 233,954.00

Exploration of the time domain - discovery and studies of objects and phenomena
changing on time scales ranging from seconds to years - is now one of the most
vibrant and rapidly developing fields of astronomy, touching on a broad and
diverse spectrum of research areas, from the Solar system and discoveries of
exoplanets to the distant quasars, and from stellar astrophysics to cosmology
and extreme relativistic astrophysics. Time domain information is essential for
understanding of some of the most interesting phenomena we observe; for example,
we could not learn anything from a single picture of a Supernova, or a single
snapshot of a gamma-ray burst; variability of stars aids to our understanding of
their structure and evolution; motions of stars tell us about the structure of
our Galaxy. We now study the universe and its major constituents as a dynamical,
and always changing system. This change was enabled by the progress in
information technology. For many years now, large digital sky surveys have been
the main sources of data in astronomy. While they can be seen as panoramic
cosmic photography, we are now moving into a panoramic cosmic cinematography,
with a corresponding increase in information volumes and quality: digital
synoptic sky surveys which cover the sky many times, detecting objects and
phenomena which change or move. This trend will culminate in the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope (LSST) years from now, but we are already exploring the science
and technology of time-domain astronomy with precursor surveys. They already
have a significant potential for discovery, and will help us sharpen our
questions and strategies for the larger surveys in the future.&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a continuation and substantial expansion of the Catalina Real-Time
Transient Survey (CRTS), an ongoing, productive synoptic sky survey that is
producing a steady stream of astronomical transient events, and making them
immediately available to the entire community; it is the only current sky survey
that does so. It utilizes a data stream obtained in a search for near-Earth and
planetary hazard asteroids, funded by NASA, and it leverages considerable
existing investments in software and data services. We have established an
extensive web of collaborations for the follow-up observations and data
analysis. These substantial external resources come at no cost to the NSF, and
provide for much greater scientific returns on investment than what could be
done with a fully funded, new survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
scientific goal of CRTS is a systematic exploration of the faint, variable sky.
CRTS has so far discovered ~6,500 distinct transient events, and &gt; 13 million
variable sources, including a wide variety of variable stars, active galactic
nuclei, various cosmic explosions, stellar flares, etc. For at least 2 years in
a row, CRTS has published more Supernovae (SNe) than any other survey, including
the most luminous SNe ever seen, long-predicted SNe from AGN accretion disks,
hundreds of dwarf novae and other interesting cataclysmic variables, planets
around white dwarfs, new counterparts of x-ray sources, new tidal streams in the
Galactic halo, etc. In addition to a plenty of known types of objects and
phenomena, there is a real possibility of a discovery of previously unknown
kinds. This project will continue these studies, and start a number of new ones,
that touch on a variety of open astronomical challenges. The unique open data
policy of CRTS enables the entire astronomical community to partake in these
discoveries. All transient events are published electronically in real time, and
all data (images, catalogs, etc.) are also made publicly available; they will
enable a broad range of archival science. CRTS may be a showcase for the data
sharing and re-use, that must become a standard practice in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will aid the entire astronomical
community in making new discoveries and developing new scientific strategies. It
is an example of a new generation of scientific experiments involving real-time
mining of massive data streams, and dynamical follow-up strategies. We train
undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs, the future science and
technology leaders, and develop a broad variety of educational and public
outreach materials, both for the new science and computation.