* 1313229
* Cluster and Group Environments of Radio Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Elizabeth Blanton, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 491,673.00

Distant clusters of galaxies are important probes of cosmology and are key
players in unraveling the mysteries behind galaxy formation and evolution and
the development of large scale structure in the Universe. Any clusters that are
confirmed at very great distances add significantly to the few that are known.
This project employs a unique method for identifying new, distant clusters of
galaxies, and this sample of distant galaxy clusters will help in determining
the epoch of galaxy formation, in studying the galaxy populations of clusters
over time, and in constraining cosmological models including dark energy.

Clusters usually contain bright elliptical galaxies near their centers, and
these galaxies host supermassive black holes in their cores. Accreting
supermassive black holes produce jets and lobes detected in the radio, and these
jets and lobes become distorted as they interact with the surrounding
intracluster medium (ICM). These distortions sometimes result in the lobes being
bent in the same direction, resulting in a wide-angle tail (WAT) morphology.
Significant groundwork has been laid in studying the cluster environments of
WATs at low-to-moderate redshifts. In addition, a large sample of 653 WATs with
cluster environments too faint (and therefore distant) to be studied with the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey has been assembled. All of these objects are being
observed in the infrared with Spitzer. Based on cluster association rates at
lower redshift z, this project's sample is expected to reveal approximately 400
new clusters at z > 0.7. Follow-up deep optical imaging is the next step in the
survey and will be achieved using the 4.3-meter Discovery Channel Telescope
(DCT). By the nature of their selection, all the clusters will contain radio-
loud active galaxies, allowing the study of active-galactic nucleus (AGN)
feedback at high redshift. Poor, low-mass clusters at high redshifts are
particularly important for studying AGN feedback and for constraining models of
the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich power spectrum. High-redshift, low-mass clusters are also
the most difficult ones to find using other cluster survey techniques, making
this survey particularly useful because it will locate distant clusters with a
wide range of masses.

Research results of this project will be included in undergraduate classes.
Students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels will be involved with all
aspects of the project. The Principal Investigator (PI) will mentor
undergraduate and graduate students, who will accompany the PI on observing
trips to the telescope. The PI will engage the community through public
elementary school visits and collaboration on science museum exhibits. Students
and the PI will participate with public outreach efforts with the Discovery
Channel, including films and online science reporting.