* 1313518
* Linking land subsidence to deep arsenic release in the Mekong Delta aquifer system
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Scott Fendorf, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 256,403.00

An estimated 100 million people living in floodplains in Asia are exposed to
arsenic in groundwater that is derived from Himalayan sediments. Arsenic is a
toxin linked to cancer and a variety of other serious ailments through direct
ingestion of contaminated groundwater. Growing exploitation of these
contaminated aquifers increases the number of people facing these health risks,
and exposes still greater populations to the hazard of consuming agricultural
products irrigated with arsenic-contaminated groundwater. Despite widespread
awareness of the arsenic hazard, understanding of the relationship between
groundwater exploitation and arsenic contamination remains limited, particularly
in deep aquifers, which are increasingly providing a larger portion of total
pumped groundwater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, we focus on the Mekong
Delta, where we have obtained a comprehensive, unique, unanalyzed dataset
consisting of &gt;42,000 dissolved arsenic measurements from southern Vietnam
showing widespread contamination (&gt;1000 sq km) in deep aquifers (&gt;200m)
that are used extensively for water supply. One hypothesis is that deep pumping
has induced shallow dissolved arsenic or arsenic-mobilizing solutes to move
deeper. However, preliminary analysis does not support this mechanism in the
Mekong Delta given the observed widespread deep arsenic contamination in the
presence of thick clay deposits that serve as relative vertical flow barriers.
We hypothesize a previously unrecognized deep arsenic source mechanism in which
water containing arsenic is expelled from storage in clays that compact when
overlying and underlying deep aquifers are exploited. This work combines spatial
statistical modeling of groundwater arsenic observations, 3D aquifer flow and
compaction simulation, and remote measurement of land subsidence using satellite
radar imagery (InSAR). Our goal is to explore the notion that deep groundwater
arsenic may be due to the release of pore-waters containing arsenic trapped in
clay beds deposited millions of years ago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
has important implications to science and society. First, our formerly
unrecognized contamination mechanism may be fundamental to understanding arsenic
occurrence in aquifer systems and the associated health risks of deep
groundwater exploitation. Our investigation will have implications for water
resources development and human health in the arsenic-affected basins of
Southeast Asia where some regions of planned deep aquifer exploitation may
unknowingly expose people to deep-source arsenic. This work has consequences for
analogous arsenic-affected aquifer systems in sedimentary basins around the
world containing interbedded compressible clays that may harbor arsenic and
other contaminants. Second, in terms of methods, the link between subsidence and
arsenic release has significant potential as a reconnaissance tool, particularly
in underdeveloped regions where the impacts of excessive pumping on land
subsidence have not been recognized. The use of satellite radar to detect land
deformation can serve as a means to identify areas where clay compaction and
consequent arsenic release may be occurring.