* 1313620
* 2013 International Workshop on Clinical Brain-Neural Machine Interface Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jose Contreras-Vidal, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2013
* USD 18,152.00

Breakthroughs in the decoding of brain activity using microelectrode arrays in
non-human primates and humans, and noninvasive electroencephalography in humans,
now enable relatively accurate predictions of upper and lower limb movements. As
a consequence, peripheral nervous system interfaces are now being developed to
reliably control prosthetic limbs. However, translational efforts to bring these
technologies to end-users are confronted with important regulatory, scientific,
engineering, clinical, ethical, and financial challenges that stakeholders need
to better understand. This is partial support for an International Workshop on
Clinical Brain Neural-Machine Interface Systems (BMI, for short) intended to
identify and discuss current challenges and potential solutions leading to the
development and deployment of interface systems based on neural activity in
clinical/home applications. The meeting will be organized by the University of
Houston and held at The Methodist Hospital Research Institute (TMHRI) in the
Texas Medical Center (Houston), on February 24-27, 2013. The workshop will bring
together expert speakers (at both junior and senior levels) and discussants
representing the forefront of BMI research, rehabilitation clinicians,
neurologists, neurosurgeons, engineers, computer scientists, neuroscientists,
program managers at federal agencies, representatives of the industrial sector,
end-users and other stakeholders for discussions and interaction in an academic
setting with the goal of developing a strategic plan ("roadmap") to bring BMI
systems out of the lab and into the clinic/home. Topics to be explored will
include: what are the clinical needs and application "pulls" that require BMIs
(the "market"); what is the best approach for uncovering basic mechanisms and
validating BMI systems technology; what are the scientific, engineering and
regulatory challenges that affect clinical use of BMIs, and potential solutions;
what are the needs of patients who could benefit from this co-robot technology;
how to address potential ethical concerns regarding the use of BMI systems to
enhance the body/brain; and how to train the next generation of students in
neural and rehabilitation engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A
"roadmap" summarizing the findings of the workshop will be submitted for peer-
review to Frontiers in Neuroprosthetics, a first-tier electronic open access
journal devoted to BMI systems. To this end, faculty and graduate students from
selected university science writing programs will be invited to blog and write
summaries of the group interactions and final group briefings during the
workshop; these summaries, edited by the discussants, will serve as drafts of
the consensus attained by the participants (minority opinions will also be
included). This roadmap will serve as a guide to program managers at federal
agencies to develop funding opportunities and support mechanisms to enhance and
accelerate the deployment of clinical BMI systems. The workshop organizers will
actively recruit participants from under-represented groups, including women and
minorities, and across institutions, to ensure that their voice is heard.