* 1313713
* Inquiry Primed: An Intervention to Mitigate the Effects of Stereotype Threat in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Samantha Daley, CAST, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 449,968.00

Inquiry Primed: An Intervention to Mitigate the Effects of Stereotype Threat is
an Exploratory Project in the Teacher Strand of DRK-12 that investigates
stereotype threat at the classroom level and in the context of inquiry-based
instruction, in order to develop strategies and a related professional
development course, using the principles of Universal Design for Learning, to
help teachers learn how to mitigate stereotype threat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes three major activities: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) An
experimental study testing the hypothesis that the influences of stereotype
threat on individual students affects instructional processes for the class as a
whole: Research participants include three teachers from 3 different school
districts in Massachusetts, each with four 8th grade science classes, for a
total sample of 12 science classes and approximately 300 students. The two
treatment conditions (stereotype threat induced vs. not induced) are applied
blindly to three classroom groups over a series of six lessons. The project uses
existing surveys for gathering data, including "Communicative Interactions",
RTOP subscales, subscales of the Constructivist Learning Environment Survey
(CLES), and a brief student questionnaire measuring domain salience (e.g., self
ranking of degree of participation in class). The analysis is conducted using
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression, with predictions of classroom
instructional processes based on treatment condition, percentage of students in
stereotyped group, and domain salience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Collaboration
with teachers as co-researchers to translate research findings into classroom
practices and a prototype online professional development course: Three middle
school teachers who participated in Study 1 serve as co-researchers, using the
Universal Design for Learning model. The product is a prototype, online
professional development modules that include self-paced presentations, small
group facilitated discussions, asynchronous discussions, and live webcasts with
experts, all focused on how teachers can implement strategies to mitigate
stereotype threat in their practice. The design elements will be assessed in
terms of clarity, accessibility, use, value, and
promise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Pilot testing of three professional development
modules: The professional development component (via communities of practice)
supports classroom teachers as they incorporate these strategies into their
daily activities. The three teachers involved in the original study and design
of modules participate in a six-week pilot study of the online professional
development course, anticipated to consist of three modules, with teachers
participating 3-4 hours per week. The course is evaluated through observations
of professional development interactions (synchronous and asynchronous),
interviews, implementation strategies, Moodle Electronic Usage Logs, online
discussions, and a questionnaire. Descriptive statistics and regression analysis
are used to seek predictors of use and contributions by teacher
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes
critical knowledge about stereotype threat, a construct shown to contribute to
disparities in achievement in STEM education. The outcomes of the project will
include research findings that are to be submitted to science education research
journals for publication; a prototype, online teacher professional development
course on mitigating stereotype threat in STEM education classrooms; and
dissemination of the course to teachers who are part of the CAST and Minority
Student Achievement Networks.