* 1313537
* I-Corps:  MOFTech: Commercialization of Metal-Organic Frameworks
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Krista Walton, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) have gained growing popularity in nanomaterials
science due to their enormous potential applications in gas treatment, gas
storage, catalysis, drug delivery and host-guest chemistry. With a market for
porous materials valued at $3 billion annually, a wide range of industries and
government agencies have need of new materials that will provide radical
advancements for applications ranging from air purification to greenhouse gas
capture. However, private or government sectors have minimal access to these new
materials. The project team seeks to provide customized MOF materials with our
novel scale-up process to fill this serious market gap. Based on the results of
prior research, the team has developed technologies to produce MOF materials in
kilogram quantities.

Currently, MOFs exist largely at the academic lab scale, where the typical MOF
synthesis results in yields on the order of 10-100 mg of material. Radical
advances in porous materials capabilities are required to solve critical
problems in air purification, carbon dioxide capture, natural gas upgrading,
etc. MOFs have been shown to provide broad spectrum success in these sectors at
the lab scale. 100 grams of one the particular materials developed by the
project team possess a surface area that is roughly equivalent to the area of 26
American football fields. For true larger-scale applicability, easy access to
quantities of at least two orders of magnitude greater, i.e., 10-100 kg, is
required. Due to the broad applicability of these materials, there is a realized
need for the development of our technology. This proposed project has the
potential to fill critical gaps that currently prevent real-world application of
MOFs, including customization of materials for the customer's applications and
availability of a portfolio of MOFs for customer testing at scale.