* 1313799
* CNH-Ex: Balancing Water Needs and Water Uses for Humans and Nature
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ana Barros, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2017
* USD 249,700.00

Mountain basins and the headwaters of river basins along the foothills of major
mountain ranges are undergoing rapid environmental change due to urban
development, land acquisition by private and public investors, population
increases, and climate change. Besides increased water supply demand, other
impacts of anthropogenic land-use change are the shrinking of groundwater
recharge areas, removal of vegetation, and the alteration of links between the
landscape and the natural drainage system. The challenge is to develop
sustainable and reliable water allocation policies that best support a well-
functioning landscape while meeting the basic water demands of natural and human
systems and the associated infrastructure. This project will factor the
opportunity costs of environmental constraints and the economic value of
conservation strategies into hydro-economic assessments of water allocation
policy at the basin level. To accomplish this goal, an eco-hydrological model
with coupled surface-groundwater and vegetation dynamics will be integrated with
a water allocation model and operated within a probabilistic hydro-economic
framework to support decision-making. The model will be used to investigate
water system sensitivity to: a) land-use modification and land-conversion in
rapidly urbanizing landscapes; b) eco-hydrological sustainability defined in
terms of hydrological and ecological flows; and c) net present value for
baseline conditions (current climate, status-quo policy) and for alternative
future adaptation pathways under possible climate change scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An innovative framework that brings together scientific
and socio-economic principles to evaluate quantitatively and systematically
urbanization impacts and adaptation strategies toward improving water resiliency
of coupled human-natural systems will be developed. The modeling framework will
be tested and evaluated for the French Broad River in the Southern Appalachians,
one of the fastest growing rural regions in the nation. The project will be
conducted in close collaboration with the Land-of-Sky Regional Council, the lead
local government planning agency in western North Carolina. The research
addresses national climate adaptation priorities to enable resilient
communities, and is readily transferable to regions elsewhere undergoing large
environmental change.