* 1313727
* CNH: The Emergence of Coupled Natural and Human Landscapes in the Western Mediterranean
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Arjun Heimsath, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,300,000.00

The Mediterranean region has one of the longest histories of intensive human use
of any part of the world. In some areas, this has led to severe environmental
degradation; in other areas, productive landscapes of farms, pastures, towns,
and natural areas have been maintained for thousands of years. This project will
collect archeological data on ancient human land use, vegetation, and land form
at four Neolithic sites in Spain and Italy. These data will guide the
development of models of social and natural processes that will attempt to
predict the long-term outcomes of alternative patterns of land use. The
predictions will be checked against new knowledge of what has actually happened
over centuries of use. Based on these checks, the models will be refined to
simulate the feedbacks through which human decisions are affected by land cover
and terrain, vegetation is affected by land use and landscape change, and the
land surface and soils are affected by land cover and
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By increasing our ability to learn from the past, this
project will help the U.S. plan for more sustainable agriculture and development
of towns and cities. To help disseminate results, the modeling software created
will be available on line. The extensive educational component of the project
comprises extensive training of undergraduate and graduate students including
members of groups under-represented in science, a summer program to train K-12
teachers to use models of landscape change, and the incorporation of findings
into courses at four universities.