* 1313544
* Materials World Network, SusChEM:  Hybrid Sol-Gel Route to Chromate-free Anticorrosive Coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Lisa Klein, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 604,971.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Surface treatments with Cr(VI) are a common
industrial practice for passivating metals. However, Cr(VI) is a known
carcinogen. Replacement of Cr (VI)-containing coatings with new chromate-free
anticorrosive coatings is a public health priority. This research investigates
the formation of doped and undoped hybrid organic-inorganic glasses, which are
obtained by consolidating "melting gels". Melting gels are hydrophobic,
nonporous and gas impermeable with low sealing temperatures (between 135 and 200
degrees centigrade), and they can be applied directly onto metals and other
substrates. The research focuses on the structural and chemical aspects of
melting gels that limit gas permeability and impart protection to metal
surfaces. One substrate of interest is magnesium, because of its low density,
high strength, good thermal and electrical conductivity, and low elastic
modulus, making magnesium alloys with improved corrosion protection particularly
interesting in auto, aerospace and biomedical applications. With support from
the Division of Materials Research, this Materials World Network, Sustainable
Chemistry, Engineering project is built on a strong collaboration between the
PIs Andrei Jitianu (Lehman College City University of New York) and Lisa Klein
(Rutgers University) from US and Mario Aparicio (Instituto de Cerámica y Vidrio,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC)) from Spain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Traditional anti-
corrosion coatings for metals contain Cr(IV), a toxic material known to cause
cancer. In an effort to replace this harmful material with a safer alternative,
the project will prepare and study a use class of hybrid organic-inorganic
"melting gels" that contain corrosion inhibitors. Melting gels are non-porous
barriers obtained by a simple process that requires low temperature processing.
They prevent environmental degradation of metals through their adherence to
metals and their ability to hinder the transport of gases and water vapor
through the coatings. Our Materials World Network consists of 3 partners, the
Chemistry Department at Lehman College, the Materials Science &amp; Engineering
Department at Rutgers University, and the Institute for Ceramics and Glass
(CSIC) in Madrid, Spain. By combining the expertise of three laboratories with
experience in sol-gel processing and electrochemical testing, the team will
complete a comprehensive study on the mechanisms for forming corrosion
protection coatings for magnesium alloys and steels, which are used commonly for
aerospace, automotive, and biocompatible medical implant applications. Through
this research program, greater understanding and practical know-how in the use
of melting gels for anticorrosive and hermetic barrier applications will be
shared. At the same time, this program will educate students in relevant topics
of chemistry, materials science and corrosion through an international
multidisciplinary approach. Exchanges of scientists and students are planned to
make a more comprehensive study of anticorrosive coatings. Opportunities for
students from underrepresented groups will be included by the participation of
Lehman College-CUNY, a federally recognized Hispanic minority serving
institution.