* 1313312
* Multiscale Modeling of Division of Labor in Social Insects
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Fewell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 289,980.00

Social insects, including ants and termites, as well as many bees and wasps, are
among the most diverse and ecologically significant organisms on earth. These
species live in complex societies whose governance comes not from a central
authority but from the interactions of their individuals with each other and
with the environment. From this decentralized system, there emerge consistent
patterns of task allocation, division of labor, and resource exploitation. The
multiscale study of the emergence of these patterns presents both challenges and
opportunities for research and education. The goal of this interdisciplinary
research is to develop a general integrated multi-scale dynamical network
modeling framework of division of labor in social insects. Rigorous mathematics
will be integrated with extensive field and laboratory data to study the complex
adaptive system of social insect societies. The research team is exploring: 1.
How the underlying topology of the interaction network of a colony evolves and
adapts at different scales of the organization; 2. How to characterize the
crucial feedback mechanisms linking both structure and dynamics of the division
of labor in a dynamical environment and 3. How the decentralized social insect
system based on many independent and simple individual interactions leads to
highly complex dynamics with great network properties such as scalability,
robustness/flexibility and simplicity. The investigators use nonlinear
differential equations, spatial stochastic processes and kinetic equations to
model at the colony level, the individual level, multilevel and at a spatial and
task continuum level, respectively. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project
lives at the intersection of social science, life sciences and applied
mathematics. This modeling framework of social insects provides not only a
powerful system for examining how network dynamics contribute to the evolution
of complex biological systems but also a great opportunity to explore how
behavior evolves within complex systems in general. The methods developed may
apply in many domains outside of biology, including network routing,
optimization theory and robotics. A template integrating interdisciplinary
learning for social sciences students, life sciences students and applied
mathematics students will be developed through shared research projects at the
undergraduate and/or graduate level.