* 1313674
* RAPID: Commuter Adaptation to Transportation Disruption in Hurricane Sandy's Aftermath
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2013
* Pamela Murray-Tuite, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2013
* USD 44,870.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) will collect important, perishable
data on transport-related stress and commuter adaptation to transportation
disruptions and temporary policy and service changes related to Hurricane Sandy
in the New York Metropolitan area. A team will collect changing transportation
modes, departure times, and other travel-related choices and stress levels
through a survey. The data allow testing of hypotheses such as (1) delays
experienced with limited transit availability and crowding change the timing of
work trips; (2) previous personal vehicle commuters are more likely to carpool
under greater carpooling (HOV3+) restrictions than to take transit; (3)
commuters that are women, older, and lower income report more transport-related
stress than others; (4) higher stress levels result from longer commute lengths
and more days of disruption; and (5) the timespan of commuting disruption is
higher for lower income, less educated, and non-white populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study's data and models will enhance understanding of
commuter adaptability to events that disrupt the transportation system,
temporary transportation policies, and fuel shortages. Its outcomes will guide
future, comprehensive transportation resiliency studies by allowing demand
predictions. Without appropriate demand models, resilience studies rely on
judgment-based demand estimates, which can lead to misestimation of connectivity
and capacity needs. Acting according to underestimates can cause traveler
frustration, delays, and lost productivity in an already stressful time, while
overestimates can lead to excessive expenditures. Most transportation disruption
analyses focus exclusively on road networks, rather than transit and multi-modal
systems. Thus, transit dependent cities have few tested practices with which to
inform mitigation and recovery plans. This study addresses this gap and
identifies policies for future events and other locations. Furthermore, stress
constitutes a typically unmeasured cost of disruption, and its study can improve
understanding of how transportation disruptions influence cognitive processes
and adaptation, suggesting both public and private interventions to improve
public health.