* 1313863
* RAPID: Aerial Imaging and Ground-based Surveys for Post-Disaster Assessment of Areas Affected by Hurricane Sandy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2014
* Antonios Kontsos, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) will collect perishable damage data
to electrical power system caused by Hurricane Sandy that made landfall on
October 29, 2012. It was a very large storm (almost 800 miles in diameter
according to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) that affected
large areas of coastlines of New York and New Jersey. The storm was judged to be
Category 1 based on its wind speed. However, the hurricane affected millions of
people living along the east coast of the United States and was responsible for
7.5 million power-outages. Even after two weeks since the landfall of the
hurricane, thousands of people were still without power. The research will
document damage to power line system and trees that affected electrical power.
The investigation will use a combination of close-range airborne and terrestrial
techniques to perform rapid condition assessment of critical civil
infrastructure of electrical power and identify factors that caused power
failures.

The novelty of this research resides in: 1) the investigation with high-quality
aerial images captured from manned/unmanned systems, and 2) the development of
novel methods for the analysis of both aerial and ground-based data. The
research will provide understanding of the causes of power failure and can
provide direction to research in mitigation of infrastructure failures in
natural hazards. It is envisioned that the research effort will significantly
advance scientific and engineering knowledge in the area of post disaster rapid
assessment of electric power lines, and will further enhance ability to
mitigate, react and intervene in major natural disasters targeting critical
infrastructure.