* 1313889
* EAGER: Stability and Fluidity in Children's Learning of Physics Concepts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Heidi Kloos, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 138,292.00

The long-term goal of the current project is to understand the dynamic process
that allows young children to learn about the world. It is well established that
children formulate ideas about how features relate to one anther, for example
how the heaviness of an object affects its buoyancy. This ability of the mind--
to form beliefs--is highly beneficial for multiple cognitive activities,
including perception, problem solving, and reasoning. However, the process that
underlies the development of beliefs is not well understood, a gap that becomes
most apparent when an educator tries to replace a child's mistaken belief:
corrective feedback does not always lead to conceptual change. In order to
understand the underlying process that gives rise to a child's belief and its
change, it is first necessary to quantify belief stability. The current project
seeks to establish such a quantifying measure, referred to as ascendency, using
ideas from thermodynamics that have been applied successfully to understanding
eco-systems. To test the validity of this measure for a cognitive system,
preschoolers participate in a learning experiment about sinking objects. Two
different learning contexts are contrasted. In one of them, children are likely
to merely make guesses from one trial to the next. And in the other learning
context, children are likely to form mistaken beliefs at first (e.g., that heavy
stuff sinks fastest) and then change such mistaken belief as a result of
feedback. This experimental context makes it possible to find transition points
of belief stability, transition points that can be tested against changes in the
measure of ascendency.

Research in cognitive development and education has long established the
struggle children face when they are required to change a mistaken belief, for
example a belief about a physical phenomenon. This resistance to conceptual
change is often surprising, especially given that children sometimes
spontaneously change a belief, even without any intervention at all. Quantifying
the stability of a belief would make it possible to better understand such
conflicting results. More importantly, it would make it possible to better time
efforts to change a mistaken belief. Thus, developing a measure of belief
stability could prove transformative to science education, making it possible to
test the circumstances in which a child is most likely to engage in conceptual
change. While only a first step towards understanding the nature of children's
beliefs, the results of this project are likely to set the stage for a
systematic understanding of the context in which children best learn about the
world.