* 1313946
* RAPID: Collection of Perishable Data on Households Affected by Hurricane Sandy to Better Understand Variables Affecting Collective Post Disaster Housing Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Zhen Cong, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 05/31/2015
* USD 44,185.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) will collect data regarding
households affected by hurricane Sandy, the second costliest hurricane in the
history of the US with an estimated loss of $60 billion and 113 fatalities. The
data collection and analysis will be performed in Staten Island, NY and Atlantic
City, NJ as both cover a wide range of demographic and socioeconomic attributes
such as age, race and income and were severely impacted by hurricane Sandy. The
data to be collected will include households' internal variables such as age,
gender, race, disabilities, job status, income, education, insurance coverage,
social networks and psychological wellbeing as well as external variables
including temporary housing provided, grants and loans received, insurance
reimbursements promised and received, restoration of critical infrastructure,
and reconstruction of the neighbors. Households' recovery decisions:
reconstruct, wait, or relocate are based on a confluence of aforementioned
internal and external variables among which some tend to vary greatly with time
and as such would be either difficult to collect at the later date or almost
impossible as households relocate. Building damage data can also be lost in the
next few weeks, if not days, as cleanup and recovery activities start and
accelerate. In addition, the psychological state of individuals and their
expectation for the future are extremely perishable. Therefore this research is
aimed at capturing the confluence of all perishable data on households' recovery
decision and investigating how these recovery decisions will eventually affect
the recovery of the whole community. The data collection will combine face-to-
face and phone interviews to collect the initial recovery decision of the
households. The collected dataset will be linked with geo-tagged videos of the
affected residences to reflect households' imposed damage costs. Additionally a
follow-up phone survey will be employed approximately 6 months after, to compare
the initial and final recovery decisions of the
households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent disasters including Hurricane Sandy,
Hurricane Katrina, and Joplin Tornado coupled with many others, revealed huge
challenges faced by affected communities to promptly restore infrastructures,
residential properties and commercial activities during the recovery process.
Anticipated increase in future extreme events coupled with growing population in
disaster-prone regions has created an urgent need for deep understanding of the
process of post-disaster recovery and more effective strategies to enhance it.
While there are many studies conducted to identify design deficiencies or to
examine aggregated effects of certain measures and policies, very few, if any,
have focused on modeling how households make recovery decisions following a
disaster, and how these decisions collectively contribute to the community-wide
recovery. As household recovery is the key to community recovery, it is crucial
to bridge this knowledge gap through understanding the effect of different
households' variables on their final housing recovery decisions. The broader
impacts of this research would be twofold. Firstly, it will provide a
comprehensive database of households and their associated variables which can be
utilized by researches to study the different aspect of recovery dynamics and
secondly it can be used as a decision-making tool by authorities to enhance the
overall community recovery by prioritizing and optimizing their investments in
the affected areas.