* 1313820
* CNH-Ex: Coupling Burning Practices, Vegetation Cover Change, and Fire Regimes to Determine Fire-Emission Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Paul Laris, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 248,794.00

This project focuses on improving estimates of emissions from the most
frequently and widely burned areas on Earth, the savanna in Africa. Savanna
fires emit large quantities of greenhouse gases and aerosol particles. While it
is increasing recognized that these fires play an important role in the global
carbon cycle, there are few accurate estimates of their emissions and none from
West Africa which is that continent's most active fire region. This
interdisciplinary research project will develop a model of emission dynamics to
determine how emissions change over time by linking changes in the fire regimes
to changes in land-use and land-cover patterns. Available estimates of emissions
from savannas contain high levels of uncertainty, because they have been based
on very broad generalizations of complex landscapes. To improve emissions
estimates, the investigators will use a new approach to develop a model based on
the actual burning practices of people who set fires. Building on an existing
database, they will develop a system to classify savanna vegetation types as
defined by fire users and link this classification scheme to fire maps derived
from satellite imagery. These data will be combined with field-based
measurements of emissions of key greenhouse gases including carbon dioxide,
carbon monoxide, and methane. These data will be analyzed and combined with data
on changes in land use and cover to develop a model of how emissions change over
time. The results of these analyses will produce one of the first accurate
estimates of emissions from the heavily burned West African savanna, which will
be used to quantify the sources of error in existing emissions estimates.

This project will provide a new model of emissions built on the practices of
African fire users as well as one of the first models of fire regime dynamics
based on land-use and land-cover changes in Africa. Project results will be used
to predict changes in fire emissions from the African continent, with the new
models producing results that will provide valuable and accurate data for those
attempting to improve global models of emissions from fire. The project will
yield much-needed local-scale information regarding fire regimes by disclosing
those areas associated with high uncertainties in the global-scale models of
emissions and by suggesting ways to improve them. The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change requires that emissions estimates include an assessment of
uncertainties. This project will provide such an estimate. The project will
strengthen research capacities by facilitating graduate research. It will
facilitate collaborative relationships between U.S. and African researchers. The
investigators will help conduct "fire seminars" to disseminate results in the
study region with the goal of improving local and regional fire management
efforts that are currently hampered by a lack of data. The seminars will provide
a forum to explore more effective ways of disseminating scientific information
to local residents in regions far beyond the study area. This project is
supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH)
Program.