* 1314910
* Collaborative Research:   Is the Isabella anomaly a fossil slab or the foundered lithospheric root of the Sierra Nevada batholith?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Robert Clayton, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 136,500.00

A detailed seismic investigation of lithospheric structure will test two
hypotheses for the tectonic origin of the Isabella high seismic velocity anomaly
in the upper mantle of California's southern Great Valley. Both hypotheses are
viable based on existing seismic imaging that uses data from stations spaced
about 70 km apart, but they have dramatically different implications for the
processes that accompany subduction termination and the evolution of continental
arc lithosphere. One hypothesis attributes the Isabella Anomaly to the sinking
mafic root of the southern Sierra Nevada batholith. The other attributes the
Isabella Anomaly to a fossil slab that is a continuation of the Monterey
microplate coherently translating beneath the Great Valley because it is
mechanically coupled to the Pacific plate. Importantly, the latter hypothesis
places the fossil slab beneath the along-strike extent of the section of the San
Andreas fault that dominantly deforms by aseismic creep and hosts deep crustal
tectonic tremor, which might be caused by fluids from the slab. Passive source
seismic imaging using a dense broadband array with ~7 km station spacing
extending from the coast to the Sierra Nevada foothills will robustly test the
two hypotheses with detailed mapping of lithospheric interfaces and
identification of whether or not they are continuous across a plate bounding
fault with &gt;300 km of cumulative right lateral displacement. Scattered wave
migration and tomographic imaging methods will be used in concert to constrain
lithospheric structure beneath the dense array. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
seismic study will advance understanding of the structural legacy and mechanics
of subduction termination, post-subduction evolution of the Sierra Nevada arc
lithosphere, and present day basal boundary conditions on the creeping section
of the San Andreas fault. A clear opportunity for scientific advance is
identified not only by the potential implications for fundamental tectonic
processes, but also by the existence of two well-defined hypotheses for
lithospheric-scale structure that can be robustly tested with modern passive
source seismic imaging methods. Additional impacts of the project include aiding
in the development of a new geophysics group at the University of New Mexico
(UNM) by supporting a beginning-career PI, a graduate student, and an
undergraduate researcher. Expansion of geophysics research and teaching at the
state of New Mexico?s largest institution has outstanding potential to attract
under-represented minorities to opportunities in the geosciences. A graduate
student and undergraduate researcher will be supported at Caltech. The project
will develop a new collaboration between UNM and Caltech.