* 1314117
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost, Low Weight, and Low Profile Microinverter for Photovoltaic Solar
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Mehrdad Nikoonahad, PARTOE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 148,971.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project is concerned with
photovoltaic (PV) solar technology. Microinverters are presently sold as
separate boxes that are bolted either onto the racking or the panel frame and
still require DC cables, connectors and the junction box. Partoe?s Tiger 1
microinverter is a low cost, low weight, low profile, microinverter for direct
integration onto the panel?s backsheet, thereby eliminating DC cables,
connectors and the junction box and enabling a significantly simpler
installation/commissioning of PV systems at lower cost. Tiger 1 deploys a
proprietary thermal management technology to keep any heat generated by the
electronics away from the backsheet, as any excess heat (over ambient) reaching
the solar cells results in a reduction in PV efficiency. The Company has
validated its product concept with a number of customers both within the US and
in Asia. Hardware prototypes are completed. Objectives of this research include:
Complete algorithm/software development and characterize the current pushed to
the utility grid, thermal characterization of the panel backsheet, under
different microinverter operating conditions, and optimization of Partoe?s mesh-
network-radio-based reporting/diagnostic software. If successful, the results of
the research will place the Company in a position to address certification and
preproduction issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The boarder impact/commercial
potential of this project is a reduction of the cost of solar PV electricity, at
a time when our dependence on fossil fuel has proven to be quite problematic.
Partoe is targeting an $8.5B (2014 estimate) solar inverter market. Entirely
eliminating DC cables, connectors, junction box, and enabling a solar panel that
produces AC power (PVAC) from the onset, sets our differentiation from our
competitors. Another differentiation is our mesh-network radio technology. Our
competitors use Power Line Communication (PLC) for monitoring. PLC generally
dissipates more power than a mesh-network-enabled-radio technology (100s of mW
vs. 10s of mW). Everything else being equal, this results in a higher DC/AC
conversion efficiency for Tiger 1. The long term impacts of low-cost solar
electricity not only address oil-related geopolitical issues, but also are
environmental and societal. On longer term, Tiger 1 can be interfaced with smart
meters (which are radio-enabled in the US) and send/receive instructions, for
example, for delivering reactive power to the grid for voltage regulation,
micro-grid operations, etc. Objectives of this proposal are stepping stones
toward these longer term directions for Partoe.