* 1314790
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptive analog nonlinear circuits for improving properties of electronic devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Alexei Nikitin, Avatekh Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2014
* USD 165,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims at
developing advanced analog nonlinear algorithms and circuits for mitigation of
in-band noise and interference, especially that of manmade origin, affecting
various signals of interest and limiting the performance of the affected devices
and services. Manmade noise, unintentional as well as intentional, is a
ubiquitous and rapidly growing source of interference with various electronic
devices, systems, and services, harmfully affecting their physical, commercial,
and operational properties. This noise comes from a magnitude of various sources
such as mutual interference of multiple devices combined in a system (for
example, a smartphone equipped with WiFi, Bluetooth, GPS, and many other
devices), electrical equipment and electronics in home and office, dense urban
and industrial environments, increasingly crowded wireless spectrum, and
intentional jamming. The proposed nonlinear algorithms and circuits, Adaptive
Nonlinear Differential Limiters (ANDLs), have many significant advantages over
existing filtering solutions, providing capabilities that cannot be replicated
by linear filtering devices and systems. ANDLs also enable elegant and
inexpensive real-time solutions to the manmade interference problems that may be
used in addition, or as a low-cost alternative, to the state-of-art interference
mitigation methods.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in its ability to
advance scientific and technological understanding of the problems caused by
manmade interference, as the proposed ANDL algorithms and circuits enable a
variety of simplified and inexpensive real-time solutions to these problems,
further enhancing the societal and commercial impact of the proposed technology.
ANDLs are intended to be fully compatible with existing linear devices and
systems, and to be used in addition, or as a low-cost alternative, to the state-
of-art interference mitigation methods. When incorporated into existing devices
and/or systems as integrated circuit ANDL cells, ANDLs may be widely deployed,
in a sustaining as well as disruptive manner, to meet the increasing demand for
reducing manmade noise and leading to improvements in physical, commercial, and
operational properties of those devices, and the systems and services that
incorporate and use the improved devices. This will benefit a wide range of
applications in high revenue industries such as, for example, consumer
electronics, medical, industrial, and defense electronics, and industrial,
consumer, and military communication devices and services.