* 1314365
* HCC: Large: Collaborative Research: Variations to Support Exploratory Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Gregg Rothermel, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2015
* USD 857,156.00

In any design or learning activity, exploration is a key component. Significant
research and conventional wisdom show that the best way to achieve a high-
quality design is to explore multiple variations and iteratively evaluate them.
When novices learn a new skill or system, they must explore and practice the
available options. Similarly, when experts try to understand and improve an
existing design, they must explore different approaches to modifying its
behavior. Unfortunately, exploration is risky, error-prone, and cumbersome using
today's tools. For instance, when users decide their current design is not
effective, the only mechanisms available for selectively backtracking out of
changes are linear undo and version control, which make it difficult to isolate
backtracking to specific edits, or else users must manually remove undesired
edits, which is slow and fallible. Further, today's tools do not support
comparing two variants of a design or combining elements from multiple variants.
Research is showing that these manual processes inhibit exploration, making
users and designs less effective.

To address these problems PIs from four partner institutions have come together
to undertake a research program that is both broad and deep, focusing on the
creation and management of variations during a system's implementation and
evolution. The goal is to discover new theories, algorithms, visualizations, and
tools that support variations in code. The team will evaluate all of their
approaches through lab and field studies, and they will investigate how users
can be educated in more effective ways to work with variations. Based on a
choice calculus for representing variations in software, they will develop a
theory for formally defining and reasoning about variations. They will leverage
theories of human behavior such as Minimalist Learning, Attention Investment,
and Information Foraging, to develop a theory of Variation Foraging. They will
develop an infrastructure including multiple levels of transcripts of users'
editing operations that will support a novel form of selective undo and enable
users to investigate their existing variants, return to any previous variant,
and mix and match elements from multiple variants. They will develop algorithms
to enable recording of interactions with variants so they can be explored and
reused to explore and test new variants; these recordings will be augmented with
automatically created data to help users understand behaviors they have not
explicitly explored. Using this infrastructure the PIs will invent
visualizations, search facilities, and interaction techniques that provide
effective ways for users to find, understand, explore, reuse and create
variants, and be able to ask "why" questions to understand the differences among
variations of a system. For novices, an "Idea Garden" will help them explore new
strategies for identifying which variations can help solve a problem and how to
implement them.

Broader Impacts: This research will enhance infrastructure for research and
education by producing an integrated, open source web development environment
for use by researchers and the world. The work will therefore benefit society by
empowering the tens of millions of end-user programmers to creatively build
content and applications for the web. The PIs will advance discovery while
promoting learning by integrating their research into undergraduate courses on
creativity and software engineering, and by supporting summer camps for at least
300 high school students per year. Project outcomes will be disseminated to
researchers through publications and presentations, to computing educators
through the above-mentioned camps and the National Girls Collaborative Project,
and through public deployment. The PIs expect high interest because the work
will be based on JavaScript, which is today's most popular programming language
and for which there is a high demand for better tools. The research will address
underrepresentation via its focus on investigating how to support both male and
female end-user programmers, by involving high-school members of
underrepresented groups, and by engaging many of the PIs? female students.