* 1314024
* CSR: Small: Self-sustainable Solar-powered Emergency Mesh Design
* CSE,CNS
* 08/24/2012,08/31/2014
* Nilanjan Banerjee, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 181,408.00

Natural emergency and disaster scenarios are unfortunate occurrences with far
reaching after effects. In addition to human casualties, natural calamities can
destroy the power grid, telephone networks, and mobile phone towers. The result
being, there is no alternative for disseminating critical updates such as
disease and safety alerts, locations, and directions to survivors. The above
problem is an outcome of the lack of network systems that are designed to
survive and serve after natural disasters. In order to remedy this problem, this
project is designing, implementing, and deploying a solar powered self-
sustainable emergency mesh to provide critical communication infrastructure to
survivors and rescue personnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work employs a mesh
architecture that is energy-efficient and self-sustainable. It relies on
renewable energy sources such as solar to provide near-perpetual lifetime to
mesh nodes while serving critical updates to survivors. Since renewable energy
scavenging is notoriously unpredictable, this project uses a clean-slate low
power hardware and software systems design for the nodes. Additionally, in the
event of node failures due to variability inherent in renewable energy
scavenging and extreme environmental conditions during the aftermath of a
natural calamity, the mesh automatically redistributes the data on the failed
nodes to maintain sufficient redundancy. Finally, the mesh design uses common
wireless technology such as Wi-Fi and light weight web-based services for
compatibility with off-the-shelf laptops, mobile phones, and PDAs carried by
disaster survivors. The culminating goal of this project is to save human lives.
With the mesh infrastructure in place, human casualties during post-disaster
times can be minimized. Additionally, during non-emergency scenarios, the system
can be used to disseminate \police alerts" and \disease alerts" (e.g. swine-flu)
that keep individuals well informed and cautious. In addition to a broad
societal impact, this project, through educational courses provides hands-on
experience to undergraduates and graduates in building mobile, embedded, and
geospatial systems.