* 1314945
* TWC: Medium: TCloud: A Self-Defending, Self-Evolving and Self-Accounting Trustworthy Cloud Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Eric Eide, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 999,991.00

The use of cloud computing has revolutionized the way in which cyber
infrastructure is used and managed. The on-demand access to seemingly infinite
resources provided by this paradigm has enabled technical innovation and indeed
innovative business models and practices. This rosy picture is threatened,
however, by increasing nefarious interest in cloud platforms. Specifically, the
shared tenant, shared resource nature of cloud platforms, as well as the natural
accrual of valuable information in cloud platforms, provide both the incentive
and the possible means of exploitation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these
concerns we are developing a self-defending, self-evolving, and self-accounting
trustworthy cloud platform, the TCloud. Our approach in realizing TCloud holds
to the following five tenets. First, defense-in-depth through innate
containment, separation and diversification at the architectural level. Second,
least authority by clear separation of functionality and associated privilege
within the architecture. Third, explicit orchestration of security functions
based on cloud-derived and external intelligence. Fourth, moving-target-defense
through deception and dynamic evolution of the platform. Fifth, verifiable
accountability through light weight validation and auditable monitoring, record
keeping and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach to fundamentally
refactor the cloud architecture to explicitly enable security related
functionality lays the foundation for truly trustworthy cloud computing. Given
the unrelenting push towards the use of cloud technologies our work has broad
applicability across industry, healthcare, government and academia. All software
we develop will be released to the community in open source form.