* 1314463
* Multidomain Multiscale Simulation of the Coupled Maxwell-Schroedinger Equations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Kalman Varga, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

To describe the interaction of a strong electromagnetic pulse and matter, one
has to use the microscopic Maxwell equations with atomic level charges and
currents obtained by solving the Schroedinger equation. The electron dynamics is
influenced by the electromagnetic fields and vice versa, requiring a unified
treatment of electrons and the electromagnetic fields by coupling the Maxwell
and Schroedinger equations. Solving this on the computer is an outstanding
problem because the simulation is inherently multiscale in nature, with the
spatial scale of the electromagnetic field being determined by laser wavelengths
of the order of one micron and the spatial scale of electron dynamics being set
by the atomic radius and bond length of the order of an Angstrom. The main
objective of this project is to develop a time-dependent simulation framework to
describe the electron-ion dynamics and the propagation of electromagnetic waves
in matter on equal footing using a time-dependent multidomain decomposition
method. This approach is expected to allow the study of electronic, magnetic,
optical and structural properties of materials in a unified Maxwell-quantum
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to exploring new frontiers in
simulations of time-dependent first-principles quantum mechanics to describe the
interaction of electromagnetic fields and matter, the broader impacts of this
project involve the training of a student and postdoc, who will have a unique
opportunity to learn and demonstrate creativity in performing high-profile
scientific research. This project will also involve a broad range of outreach
and educational activities that include hosting high school teachers through the
Vanderbilt Research Experiences for Teachers program, educating middle school
students through participation in the Vanderbilt Summer Academy, engaging
children in the community through nanoscience demonstrations and talks at the
Nashville Adventure Science Center.