* 1314901
* 2013 Microtechnologies in Medicine and Biology Conference, April 10-12, 2013, Marina Del Ray, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Ellis Meng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 03/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

1314901&lt;br/&gt;Meng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the international
Microtechnologies in Medicine and Biology (MMB) conference is to advance the
application of revolutionary microtechnologies to the fields of medicine and
biological sciences by fostering interdisciplinary exchanges between biologists,
medical researchers, chemists, physicists, and engineers. The seventh MMB
conference, since its founding in 2000, will be held in Marina del Rey,
California from April 10-12, 2013. MMB 2000 was the first international
conference to cover microtechnologies research at the intersection of medicine,
biology, and engineering and has since been imitated both in form and content by
other meetings. However, MMB continues to be the premier conference in the area
as measured by the success in attracting high profile speakers, facilitation of
high impact technical discussions among diverse conference participants, ability
to promote sustained interactions among the interdisciplinary community, and
training and mentoring of young investigators. The major technical themes
include microtechnology advances, biotechnology applications, tissue engineering
applications, and cell/molecular biology applications. The format includes
keynote lectures, flash poster oral presentations, poster sessions, networking
sessions, and small group discussions with keynote speakers. For this meeting,
five special research themes were selected (Personalized Medicine, Translational
Research, Neuro-engineering, Immunology, and Tissue Engineering) and will be
covered by five to seven internationally renowned keynote speakers. These
eminent senior investigators bring a comprehensive and historical view of the
field in a format that will be accessible to attendees from outside their
immediate disciplines. Funding is requested to help US based young investigators
to defray the costs of travel and registration to present their work at MMB-13.
Part of the funding will be used to encourage person-to-person interaction
between student participants and established leaders in the biomedical
engineering community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The MMB meeting
is a proven multidisciplinary forum for dissemination of the latest advances of
microtechnology in biomedical engineering at all levels of training and a
substrate for sharing of knowledge across interdisciplinary barriers. The small
conference setting promotes open discussion of new directions, ideas, and
approaches in both research and education by diverse communities that would
otherwise not interact in such a venue (mixing industry and academia as well as
engineers with scientists and clinicians). Multiple avenues for intellectual
exchange will reinforce existing contacts and facilitate new collaborations in
emerging research frontiers. It is such interactions and exchanges that will
lead to&lt;br/&gt;microtechnologies to revolutionize the fields of medicine and
biological sciences. The MMB Student Competition has proven over the years to be
an effective mechanism for identifying, recognizing, and mentoring the top-tier
talent among the pool of young investigators. Finalists will present their best
work in the setting of an international conference. They will become role models
for other young participants providing further inspiration and intellectual
stimulation. MMB will provide a channel for these young investigators to be
introduced to the leading figures in biomedical engineering. The competition is
conducted in a friendly and supportive environment that allows top-notch
students to network with fellow finalists and other students from a wide array
of bioengineering disciplines. In addition, the competition and the conference
in general play a crucial role in recognizing the talents of women, minorities,
and disabled persons in biomedical microtechnologies. Finalists will be able to
showcase their achievements following the conference in special conference
issues of leading peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The nature, types of activities, and scale of MMB'13 provide a supportive
environment and rich opportunities to promote microtechnology-focused biomedical
research and exchanges between cross-disciplinary groups in intimate settings.
The conference has an excellent track record of bringing together researchers
and educators from numerous disciplines at various stages of their careers to
promote cross-disciplinary fertilization of new ideas. Thus, the conference has
created a cohesive community of diverse young and senior investigators.
Generally, about half of the attendees are students. The conference also
attracts a number of young investigators including postdoctoral scholars and
junior faculty. Thus, the emphasis on multiple exchanges and opportunities to
interact with pioneers and leaders offer unique and invaluable training
opportunities for these constituents and in such a manner fosters the next
generation of bioengineers. Both the technical content of the conference as well
as the career development opportunities will allow MMB 2013 to achieve and
sustain the far reaching impact that this conference series has enjoyed over the
last twelve years.