* 1314331
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Colloquium at the iConference 2013
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2013
* Hamid Ekbia, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2013
* USD 25,537.00

This is funding to support travel for a diverse group of U.S. PhD students and
distinguished faculty mentors to participate in a doctoral colloquium (workshop)
on research on information science that will be co-located with the 2013
iConference to be hosted by the University of North Texas in Fort Worth on
February 11-15. The iConferences, the annual meetings of the iSchool community,
are a leading forum that brings together faculty, students, research staff, and
industry practitoners with a common interest in supporting and augmenting human
engagement with information and technology. Open to broad participation, the
iConferences have been successful in building a sense of community around the
information field, bringing together people who otherwise might rarely interact
with one another, and helping them share findings and exchange views relating to
their interdisciplinary research. More information about the iConference may be
found online at http://www.ischools.org/iConference13/participation,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2013 iConference Doctoral Colloquium, which will take
place on February 15, 2013 (the final day of the iConference), will be a
research-focused meeting of about 25 selected Ph.D. candidates studying all
aspects of information science (IS), along with approximately 10 distinguished
mentors. The primary objective of the Doctoral Colloquium is to help train the
next generation of information science researchers. To this end, it will provide
the student participants with an environment in which they can share and discuss
their goals, methods and results at an early stage of their research. By
participating in the doctoral colloquium, students will gain feedback on their
work both from the mentors and from other students, which should allow them to
enhance their research. Students will also develop a better understanding of the
different research communities engaged in the study of information science, and
learn how to position their work within the IS community. In addition, the
colloquium will provide students with opportunities to make new professional
connections beyond their own disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The iConference doctoral colloquia traditionally bring together the best of the
next generation of researchers in information science and related areas,
allowing them to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development. Participation
is encouraged from a broad range of relevant disciplines and approaches, thereby
broadening attendees' perspectives on their topics of study and promoting
advancement of the field. No more than one student will be accepted from any
given institution, and priority will be given to students who have not
previously attended an iConference Doctoral Colloquium. The organizers will
proactively work to include women and minority representation among the student
participants to the extent possible. As a consequence of these steps, the
student and faculty participants will constitute a diverse group across a
variety of dimensions, which will help broaden the students' horizons to the
future benefit of the field.