* 1314644
* SBE: Medium: Understanding and Influencing Security and Privacy Decision-making
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Tatyana Ryutov, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Heng Xu
* 02/29/2016
* USD 600,000.00

Cyber security is increasingly seen as the management of economic trade-offs:
balancing losses from actual attacks (e.g., monetary costs, psychological costs
due to loss of privacy, etc.) against the costs of threat/attack mitigation
mechanisms (e.g., monetary costs, degradation of performance and productivity,
etc.). While tackling this multi-attribute decision problem in a highly dynamic
and uncertain environment, individuals frequently diverge from rationality. To
better understand the deviation from rational behavior and to find effective
ways to remediate this (when necessary), a systematic study will be undertaken
with the results used to model the human behavior of malicious actors
(attackers), non-malicious actors - those who intend to maintain the security of
a system (defenders) and actors whose behavior/attitudes are indifferent to
system security, but do not intend to attack the system (end
users).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research methodology involves: (1) generating
representative scenarios of various attack / mitigation decision problems, (2)
conducting surveys using scenario simulations to identify the drivers of human
behavior relative to each scenario, (3) developing models of human behavior that
involve the application of various normative and descriptive models from
behavioral economics, (4) comparing the outcomes of the models, (5) conducting
controlled laboratory experiments with human subjects to reveal differences
between predicted and observed user behavior, (6) using the developed models to
help determine what measures can be employed to change human behavior, and (7)
implementing, simulating, and evaluating the developed models in a multi-agent
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three key
tasks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Explore what factors drive an adversary to
select a particular cyber-attack and what motivates the benign user to either
take or not take action. The proposed research also will examine what steps can
be taken to change human behavior - either to not attack, take certain attack
paths, or, for a benign user, take steps to avoid or mitigate an
attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Explore the potential difference between
optimal and actual security decisions, to determine when and why deviation from
the optimal decision occurs, and identify effective means to correct deviations
from rationality that impede the realization of good security
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Investigate how attackers can take advantage
of the gap between perceived and actual risk, as well as attackers? risk taking
behavior. This is critical to ensuring the development and implementation of
effective monitoring and mitigation technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will develop techniques and models delivering the foundation for future
security-focused behavioral modeling research, provide much needed empirical
data, and produce a software toolkit for developing, testing and evaluating
methods and models to study human security decision-making.