* 1314757
* CGV: Large: Collaborative Research: Coupling Simulation and Mesh Generation using Computational Topology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Joshua Levine, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Many simulation algorithms depend on an underlying spatial discretization---a
mesh that decomposes the domain into a finite set of elements that can be
analyzed by a computer. The quality of the simulation is, in part, determined by
the quality of the mesh. However, in the past, mesh generation and simulation
were done as separate processes. Better results can be achieved by tightly
integrating simulation with mesh generation and recent advices in computational
topology provide the key to doing so. Computational topology allows for the
analysis of the structure of data---in this case simulation variables. By
understanding the structure of the simulation the mesh generation algorithms can
adapt to it, providing meshes that are closely linked to the actual simulation.

Because simulation is a powerful tool for discovery throughout computational
science, this research has the potential to have broad impact across all fields
of science and enable new scientific breakthroughs that could have tremendous
societal impact. This research will also produce open-source software, short
courses, and workshops around the topic of coupling simulation and meshing. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project will lead to a rich educational and
research environment for graduate and undergraduate students. The project web
site provides access to research results, software and educational materials
(http://sealab.cs.utah.edu/SimulationMeshingTopology).