* 1314734
* Collaborative Research: High-Performance Particle Simulations from Desktops to Exaflops
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Chuang Ren, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

Modern high-performance computer architectures highlight parallelism,
heterogeneity, and re-configurability to provide both performance and power
efficiency enhancements. These degrees of complexity present new challenges to
computational physicists, who are required to remap existing software so that
simulation tools run efficiently on novel computer architectures. In particular,
plasma simulations using the particle-in-cell (PIC) method are widely used on a
variety of topics including inertial fusion energy, plasma-based acceleration,
space weather, and astrophysics. The goal of this project is to develop a set of
general skeleton codes that can be used for experimentation, education, and for
developing adaptable PIC software for next-generation many-core architectures.
The activities supported here will focus on incorporating the best software
practices into production codes for use on present and future high-performance
computers, on experimenting with novel ideas for load balancing and tradeoffs in
performance and accuracy, for analyzing and storing large data sets, and on
developing "desktop" versions of PIC codes for use by a wide audience and
broaden their impact. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
scientists with powerful simulation tools by tapping into the vast computing
power of graphic cards commonly used for video games. These tools will enable
scientists to pursue research in plasma physics, to build compact particle
accelerators, to understand cosmic rays, and to make fusion a practical clean
energy source for mankind. The tools developed here will also serve as teaching
tools for students to learn complex aspects of plasma physics. This project will
provide unique training and research opportunities for students pursuing a
career in physics and hands-on experience with state-of-the-art techniques
suitable for modern high-performance computational platforms.