* 1314955
* Taming Quantum Many-Body Systems for Quantum Information
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Akimasa Miyake, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 165,000.00

Information processing devices, like computers, have become ubiquitous and
indispensable in our modern life as an information society. A new promising
paradigm, called quantum information processing (QIP), uses microscopic quantum
states to encode information, and harnesses counterintuitive quantum effects
such as superposition and quantum correlation called entanglement to attain
drastic improvements over conventional devices. As the concepts from QIP start
to be appreciated more in quantum many-body physics, it becomes clearer that
nature handles quantum information better than we have imagined when it exhibits
various exotic macroscopic physical phenomena useful in our technology. In this
project we will study how effectively the intrinsic complexity of quantum many-
body systems can be harnessed for the advancement and scaling-up of QIP.
Strongly-correlated quantum many-body systems, like frustrated quantum magnets,
are explored as potential resources for entanglement available from large-scale
QIP. This theoretical project is expected to cross-fertilize QIP and quantum
many-body physics at their newly intersecting frontiers, and to help pave the
way to larger scale quantum simulation and quantum computation.

The research will contribute to the knowledge base of quantum information
science, and to the training of future scientists in this highly
interdisciplinary field. Students will be involved in all aspects of the
project, including education, research, and the dissemination of results. The
project broadens the current research spectrum of the NSF-funded Center for
Quantum Information and Control (CQuIC) significantly towards the interface with
quantum many-body physics. Video conferencing is used to allow participation of
CQuIC partners in the regular activities of CQuIC, including weekly group
meetings and research seminars. All students and senior personnel will actively
participate in the Southwest Quantum Information Technology (SQuInT) network,
including the annual workshop. During its 15-year history SQuInT has provided a
vibrant avenue for exchange of ideas and results in QIP, with particular
emphasis given to PhD students, postdocs, and new researchers in the field.