* 1314996
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra Low Power Electrostatic Switch Relay for Vibration Energy Harvesting
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Ji-Tzuoh Lin, Ambiharv Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2014
* USD 149,992.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop an ultra-low-power electrostatic switch relay for the purpose of
managing ultra-low-power energy harvesting. Normal power management for energy
harvesting, which involves controlling the release and storage of the collected
energy, has been accomplished with CMOS-based switches or microcontrollers.
Unfortunately, silicon based controllers consume at least a few microwatts of
energy. Thus, in a scenario in which the available power is less than that
required to run the energy-managing switch or microcontroller, no energy will be
harvested. As a solution, the proposed research will provide the development of
an electrostatic switch relay, which will utilize low actuate voltage (1.5-5V).
In Phase I, the feasibility of this switch will be proven by developing and
testing a prototype. The following technical objectives will be pursued: (1)
simulate a long-cantilever/short-gap design, (2) develop a prototype device, and
(3) test and evaluate the prototype device. The principal investigator
hypothesizes an actuation voltage less than 5V for the proposed switch, which
will prove that this solution is feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project includes enabling the recovery of
darker, more random, and extremely low disturbance energy provided by solar,
vibration, or heat sources in the environment of the device. By commercializing
this technology, a device will be offered that can harvest power that is
normally too little to be recovered, saved, and reused. A no-power switch with
low actuation voltage would be adopted as a key component in the market for
ubiquitous energy harvesting. Companies looking for a self-sustained remote
control system or for sensors to be installed in the fuselage of airplanes or in
buildings would be interested in this product. The proposed solution is better
competing devices because of the low power-managing strategy it utilizes for
ultra-low energy harvesting. Competing devices either require high voltage or
need to consume more power.