* 1314122
* I-Corps:  Short-term Wind Forecasting Engine
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Inanc Senocak, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The purpose of this project is to demonstrate a proof-of-concept for a short-
term wind forecasting engine. Installed wind power capacity across the nation
has increased dramatically over the last decade. However, utility companies,
grid operators and wind farm owners are facing major difficulties because of
intermittent winds. The variability of wind is further exacerbated for wind
farms that are located on complex terrain regions. Substantial technology gaps
exist in short-term wind power forecasting and grid integration. Current
practice relies on weather forecasting and historical wind analysis, but power
forecasting using these approaches is prone to large errors. The forecasting
engine developed by the research team is designed for fast execution on parallel
computing clusters accelerated by modern graphics processing units in a multi-
scale fashion, where micro-scale computations will be concurrently driven by
meso-scale weather prediction models. The numerical methods and the turbulence
model adopted inside the forecasting engine offer great flexibility for complex
terrain and enable significantly improved predictions at the turbine hub height.

The availability of an accurate wind forecasting engine for utility companies,
grid operators and wind farm owners has a broad impact on the efficient
production and the economics of energy. A reliable wind forecasting engine will
help increase the amount of wind power in the overall energy portfolio. Accurate
forecasting is also expected to help lower the grid integration cost of wind
energy and make this form of renewable energy competitive in a deregulated
electricity market that is expected to be driven by smart-grid technologies. A
forecasting engine has the potential to enhance the reliability of the
electricity grid, because the grid is vulnerable to overload when winds suddenly
ramp up without any advance information on the wind. In addition to forecasting
power from existing wind farms, the proposed technology can be used to increase
existing transmission line capacity and optimize wind farm layouts for maximum
power generation.