* 1314984
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptive Mobile Learning for STEM Education Using Massive Open Online Courses
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Nishikant Sonwalkar, EDWISETECH INC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 153,500.00

The innovation will introduce game-changing brain-based adaptive mobile learning
technology to science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) education. The
proprietary technology provides multiple learning pathways as well as cognitive
behavior analytics to help learners reach maximum learning outcomes. The new
technology utilizes a powerful Markovian statistical inference engine to
stimulate, create and strengthen neural pathways to enhance the acquisition,
retention, recall and application of knowledge. It is unique in integrating four
dimensional aspects of learning -- multimedia, learning pedagogy, interactivity
and social interaction, and addresses five learning strategies -- apprentice
incidental, inductive, deductive and discovery. The platform collects click-
stream data, allowing continuous learner assessment and dynamic re-rendering of
content for real-time remediation. The data also provide the means for ongoing
learner analytics for continuous course improvement. Learners participating in
early trials of the adaptive learning technology achieved a high degree of
competency and course completion. The project?s investigative focus will be on
teaching undergraduate physics at a public university. The scalability of
courses delivered via this technology and the potential to offer Massive Open
Online Courses, combined with the application of knowledge gained from learner
analytics, could revolutionize STEM education and greatly increase the flow of
students in the STEM career pipeline.

The broader/commercial impact of science, technology, engineering and technology
(STEM) education delivered via adaptive mobile learning technology is tied to
its ability to increase the number of STEM professionals. This will be promoted
by increasing both the number of students taking STEM courses and the percentage
of students successfully completing them. The innovative adaptive mobile
learning technology is (1) flexible for adaptation to any curricula and for any
student population, including remedial or advanced placement; (2) scalable,
whether for one classroom or a Massive Open Online Course offered to tens of
thousands of students; (3) portable, in that courses can be accessed anywhere,
anytime, including by smart phone or tablet, with minimal technology
requirements; (4) affordable, because post-secondary and secondary institutions
can offer cloud-based courses without an investment in technology and technical
support; and, above all, (5) effective, providing each student a personalized
learning environment, an effective learning trajectory, and real-time
remediation until competency is achieved. The project's Phase I focus is
introductory physics. Additional STEM offerings will be developed and deployed
as the project progresses, with near-term potential to develop 20 pre-college
STEM Massive Open Online Courses reaching one million students a year.