* 1314423
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel and cost effective mechanical ventilator for pandemic preparedness and underserved communities
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Matthew Callaghan, OneBreath, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will support
development and testing of a novel cost-effective mechanical ventilator. The
H1N1 pandemic ignited concern in the healthcare community over the state of
preparedness of our nation?s healthcare system in the event of a critical care
emergency. If a 1918-like flu pandemic were to occur today, tens of millions of
people could die from respiratory distress. Unfortunately, the United States
does not have enough ventilators to support patients with respiratory distress.
When considered on a global scale, the disparity in critical care and emergency
resources between wealthy and impoverished nations is alarming. The goal of this
proposal is to progress from a high-level prototype to pre-production status.
Iterative performance testing and redesign will be followed by human factors
validation and interface design with simulated use modeling. Completion of Phase
I will place the company in a position to begin verification testing and
validation of mechanical components and software in Phase II. The next step is
regulatory approval following a 510k pathway and sales expected to begin within
2 years of the Phase I start date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to conquer one of the most
difficult problems in critical care: delivering high precision, high reliability
and low cost in a mechanical ventilator. If a flu pandemic were to occur today,
millions of people could die from respiratory distress. Unfortunately, the
United States does not have enough ventilators to support patients with
respiratory distress in even a mild pandemic. Respiratory illness is a leading
cause of hospitalization and death in emerging nations. Each year thousands of
patients die in rural community hospitals because of lack of access to
mechanical ventilation. Despite improvements in infrastructure and economies,
ventilators remain out of reach for many hospitals. At present, the mechanical
ventilation market is more than $2 billion globally and growing at 7%.
Commercialization of this novel ventilator design would provide a viable option
for stockpiling ventilators in the event of a mass casualty event and hospitals
in emerging markets will finally be able to afford high performance ventilation
for their intesive care units.