* 1314735
* Collaborative Research: Worm Algorithm and Diagrammatic Monte Carlo in Atomic and Condensed Matter Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Nikolay Prokofiev, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2017
* USD 870,000.00

This project focuses on strongly correlated phases of cold-atomic systems in
optical lattices where collective behavior is governed by laws of quantum
mechanics. The prototypical strongly correlated fermionic systems -- the Hubbard
model and resonant fermions in the regime of BCS-BEC crossover -- are central in
the fields of the cold atom research and condensed matter. Understanding quantum
plasticity and super transport in solid 4He remains one of big challenges in
modern low-temperature physics. There is urgent need for universal unbiased
first-principles methods for strongly correlated fermionic systems across all
fields of physics, quantum chemistry, and materials science. Ab initio and model
simulations provide crucial information about quantitative and qualitative
properties of these systems, test analytical predictions and help establish the
proper theoretical framework, lay the ground for the unambiguous analysis of
experimental data and further development of measuring techniques. In
particular, this project aims to (i) develop generic diagrammatic Monte Carlo
(DiagMC) tools for continuous-space and lattice fermionic/fermionized systems:
resonant fermions, Hubbard model, and frustrated spin systems, (ii) understand
quantum plasticity and supertransport in solid helium-4, (iii) perform Worm
Algorithm (WA) studies of quantum-critical phenomena and novel phases of ultra-
cold atoms: deconfined criticality, universal critical dynamics, phases of
multi-bound complexes of polar molecules.

An unbiased theoretical description of collective quantum phenomena is of vital
interdisciplinary importance for a number of applied and fundamental areas, such
as quantum computing and high-energy physics. High-end computing methods and
techniques often find applications outside the physics community. Simulations of
complex models with multiple constraints, randomness, and a variable number of
continuous parameters are typical in polymer science, neural networks, computer
science, behavioral, social and economics studies. The algorithms developed in
the project provide an example of how some of the difficulties may be
circumvented. An integral part of the project is the training of graduate
students and post-doctoral associate in advanced numeric techniques, quantum
statistics, topical problems of atomic and solid state physics, network
administration, and parallel supercomputing.