* 1314631
* SBE TTP: Medium: Securing Cyber Space: Understanding the Cyber Attackers and Attacks via Social Media Analytics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ronald Breiger, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,301,944.00

As society becomes more dependent on cyber infrastructure, the security of
networks and information technologies has become a growing concern. Individuals,
businesses, and governmental organizations are now common victims of cyber-
attacks that seek to steal private data, gain remote control over remote
systems, and cause harm to networks and systems through other malicious means.
Additionally, critical infrastructures such as smart power grids and
communication networks are facing an increasing number of cyber-based threats.
As a result, many researchers and security practitioners have begun to
investigate cyber attacker communities in order to learn more about cyber
attacker behaviors, emerging threats, and the cybercriminal supply chain.
Unfortunately, there is a lack of established science for cyber security
research. The lack of literature is problematic for researchers wanting to learn
more so that they may contribute to and advance the current state of cyber
security research. For example, many cyber attacker communities take careful
measures to hide themselves by employing anti-crawling measures. This would be a
challenge for many researchers and security practitioners. Furthermore, some may
find cyber attacker community discussion difficult to interpret due to cyber
attacker jargon, advanced security concepts, or foreign contents belonging to
cyber attacker groups spanning across different countries or
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For these reasons, research studying hacker
communities is greatly needed, as well as research that advances others?
capacity to understand and investigate contents from such communities.
Specifically, the development of automated tools and analyses increases the
potential for more cyber security research. Web mining and machine learning
technologies can be used in tandem with social science methodologies to help
answer many questions related to hacker behaviors and culture, illegal markets
and covert networks, cybercriminal supply chain, malware analysis, emerging
security threats, and other matters. There are many opportunities for extending
current cyber security research by combining hacker community data with social
science methodologies, computational techniques, and security analysis.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this research, important questions about hacker
behaviors, markets, community structure, community contents, artifacts, and
cultural differences are explored. Automated techniques to collect and analyze
data from forums, Internet Relay Chat, and honeypots will be developed. The
development of such tools will help further proactive approaches for preventing
cyber-based threats, rather than taking the traditional approach of reacting
when something "bad" happens. Better understanding of hacker communities across
multiple geopolitical regions will support a better understanding of
cybercriminal behavior, and improved and safer practices for security
researchers and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed integrated
computational framework and the resulting algorithms and software will also
allow social science researchers and security practitioners to closely examine
how cyber attacker groups form, develop, and spread their ideas; identify
important and influential cyber criminals in the online world; and develop the
means to recognize online hacker identities through their communication and
interaction styles. Knowing more about cyber criminals, hackers, and their
illegal black markets can help policy makers and security professionals make
better decisions about how to prevent or respond to attacks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work also contributes to the educational and
professional development of the student research associates who contribute to
it. They will learn sound research methods, and how to write about and present
their work for scientific and other professional audiences.