* 1314054
* SEES Fellows: A framework for sustainable irrigation practice: integrating social, hydrologic, and ecologic factors to meet the urban water challenge
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Neeta Bijoor, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2015
* USD 249,973.00

In this Award from the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows Program) Dr. Nita Bijoor from the University of Califonia
- Irvine will study the ways in which socioeconomic, biophysical, and management
factors can be used to develop an integrated Irrigation Sustainability
Framework. This award has support from: the Directorate for Engineering, the
Directorate for Geosciences and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will combine:
location-tagged water-use data obtained from seven governmental organizations in
Southern California, land use/ land cover data from the Municipal Water District
of Orange County (based upon aerial survey data), and other geological and
socioeconomic databases to quantify irrigation efficiency and develop improved
models to manage water use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of studies like that
proposed in this work is to develop better models for water use, with the aim
towards providing useful data to help policy makers make informed decisions on
sustainable ways to manage water in an arid urban
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Bijoor will be working with closely with
collaborators Prof. James S. Famiglietti, Director of the Center for
Hydrological Modeling at the University of California-Irvine, and Mr. Joseph
Berg of the Municipal Water District of Orange County. Dr. Bijoor will also work
with the Southern California Coastal Water Research Project, Orange County
Coastkeeper, and the Valley Crest Design Group.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.