* 1314632
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Know Thy Enemy: Data Mining Meets Networks for Understanding Web-Based Malware Dissemination
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Christos Faloutsos, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 333,333.00

How does web-based malware spread? We use the term web-based malware to describe
malware that is distributed through websites, and malicious posts in social
networks. We are in an arms race against web-based malware distributors; and as
in any war, knowledge is power. The more we know about them, the better we can
defend ourselves. Our goal is to understand the dissemination of web-based
malware by creating "MalScope", a suite of methods and tools that uses cutting-
edge approaches to build spatiotemporal models, generators and sampling
techniques for malware dissemination. From a scientific point of view, this
project brings together two disciplines: Data Mining and Network Security. The
outcome is a suite of novel, sophisticated, and scalable techniques and models
that will enhance our understanding of malware dissemination at a large scale.
We use two types of web-based malware dissemination data: (1) user machines
accessing dangerous sites and downloading web-based malware; and (2) Facebook
users being exposed to malicious posts. We already have and will continue to
obtain more data from our industry partners (e.g. Symantec's WINE project),
open-access projects, or collect on our own (e.g
MyPageKeeper).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of our work is that it
will enable the development of security solutions for end-users and industry. A
15-minute network outage costs a 200-employee company about $40K, while identity
theft costs about $1,500 per person on average. By knowing the enemy better,
security researchers and industry can more effectively stop the interconnected
manifestations of Internet threats: identity theft, the creation of botnets, and
DoS attacks. The PIs have a track record of technology transfer, with
collaborators at industrial labs (Yahoo, MSR, Symantec, AT&amp;T, IBM), national
labs (LLNL, Sandia), open-source software (``Pegasus''), and spin-off startups
(StopTheHacker). Educational impacts include developing a new course, providing
publicly available educational material, and open-source software.