* 1314649
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Wave and Surge Structural Damage to Shorefront Residential Properties from Hurricane Sandy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2013
* Ning Lin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 14,994.00

This Collaborative Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) project will collect
perishable damage data caused by Hurricane Sandy that made landfall on October
29, 2012. It was a very large storm (almost 800 miles in diameter according to
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) that affected large areas of
coastlines of New York (Long Island and New York Metropolitan area) and New
Jersey. The storm was judged to be Category 1 based on its wind speed. However,
because of its size and coinciding with high lunar tide, it generated high storm
surge. The coastline regions received serious damage by the flood due to surge
and impact forces of waves. Residential structures along the coastlines
sustained severe damage and destruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project will collect field data of damaged residential buildings
focusing on the New Jersey coastal area. Two major goals for collection of data
are: (1) to collect perishable data on residential building damage levels,
failure modes, and building characteristics (elevation, specific
connections/members failed, age); and (2) to find damage gradients, and to
identify and quantify their causes. Small teams will evaluate and record data
for every residence in the selected region. Data taken will include location,
elevations, house type and size, approximate age, large scale storm
erosion/accretion, local scale foundation scour, approximate waterlines, visible
damage from wind/waves, damage levels, damage/failure modes, specific connection
and member failures, and environmental exposure (sheltered behind
buildings/dunes, open to sea). Numerous GPS-tagged pictures will be taken of
each house from multiple angles. With 3-4 teams of 2 people each, 400-600 houses
will be surveyed for the database. These damage data will be used in future
research in developing storm surge resistant residential structures.