* 1314416
* Using Math Pathways &amp; Pitfalls to Promote Algebra Readiness
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Jodi Davenport, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,999,288.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Using Math Pathways &amp; Pitfalls to Promote Algebra
Readiness is a 4-year Full Research and Development project that creates a set
of materials for middle grades students and teacher professional development
that would support the learning of early algebra. Building on their prior work
with an elementary version, the efficacy study focuses on the implementation of
the principals underlying the materials, fidelity of use of the materials, and
impact on students' learning.&lt;br/&gt;The project's goals are to: 1) develop
an MPP book and companion materials dedicated to algebra readiness content and
skills, 2) investigate how MPP transforms pedagogical practices to improve
students' algebra readiness and metacognitive skills, and 3) validate MPP's
effectiveness for improving students' algebra readiness with a large-scale
randomized controlled trial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iterative design and
efficacy studies produce research-based materials to increase student learning
of core concepts in algebra readiness. Though the focus of the project is
algebra readiness, the study also examines the validity of the pedagogical
approach of MPP. The MPP lesson structures are designed to help students
confront common misconceptions, dubbed "pitfalls," through sense-making, class
discussions, and the use of multiple visual representations. If the pedagogical
approach of MPP proves to be successful, the lesson structures can be presented
as an effective framework for instruction that extends to other content areas in
mathematics and other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a
critical need in education, and the potential impact is large. Math achievement
in the U.S. is not keeping pace with international performance. The current
project focuses on algebra readiness skills, an area that is critical for future
success in mathematics. Algebra often serves as a gatekeeper to more advanced
mathematics, and performance in algebra has been linked to success in college
and long-term earnings potential. Longitudinal studies indicate that students
taking rigorous high school mathematics courses are twice as likely to graduate
from college as those who do not. Thus, adequately preparing students for
algebra can dramatically affect educational outcomes for students. The current
project broadens the participation of underrepresented groups of students in
math and later science classes that require strong math skills. The intervention
builds on materials and pedagogical techniques that have demonstrated positive
outcomes for diverse students. The targeted districts have large samples of
English language learners and students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM so that we may evaluate the impact of the intervention
on these populations. At the end of the project, the publication quality
materials will be readily available to teachers and districts through our
website www.wested.org/mpp.