* 1314480
* Structure and function of ABC transporters to understand persistence of global marine pollutants
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Geoffrey Chang, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,832,563.00

Marine pollution is of concern for human health through our exposure to
contaminated food from the sea. What remains poorly understood is why some
chemicals are persistent, accumulating in marine organisms and then in humans,
while others are not. Multidrug resistance (MDR) transporters, belonging to the
ATP Binding Cassette (ABC) family, are major biological determinants of
intracellular chemical accumulation. While ABC transporters have been implicated
as determinants of pollutant persistence, and used as tools for predicting
availability and efficacy of drugs, they have yet to be systematically applied
to understanding why certain pollutants accumulate.

In this project, a research team at the Scripps Institute of Oceanography will
work to develop a structural and functional understanding of multidrug (MDR) ATP
Binding Cassette (ABC) transporters and their interaction with global marine
pollutants. They will clone, express and purify MDR ABC transporters from sea
urchins and other aquatic organisms, and determine their molecular structures.
They will also test, in vitro, whether global, persistent pollutants are
substrates, inhibitors or not bound (i.e. not recognized) by the transporters.
They will extend findings from the in vitro assays to the cellular and
organismal level using pollutant accumulation, cytotoxicity and fluorescence
competition assays with recombinant marine proteins and morpholino antisense
oligonucleotide-mediated loss of function assays in sea urchins, a tractable
marine model system. In vitro and in vivo results from marine transporters will
be assessed in parallel assays with mammalian (mouse and human) transporters to
determine which interaction patterns are conserved, potentially leading to
transfer of pollutants from marine organisms to man. The team already has in-
hand preliminary data that indicate striking functional conservation of the
major subfamily types of xenobiotic eliminating transporters in sea urchins and
man.

Broader Impacts: Given the potential risk to human health from marine pollution,
there is a need to refine our ability to predict accumulation and develop new
tools to enable design of safer chemicals. This project is expected to make
significant advances toward that goal. The research team will include several
postdoctoral researchers and graduate students.

JOINT FUNDING BY NSF AND NIEHS: The original proposal on which this project is
based (R01 ES021985-01) was submitted to the National Institutes of
Environmental Health Sciences (NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding Opportunity
Announcement RFA-ES-11-013 , "Oceans, Great Lakes and Human Health (R01)", an
opportunity jointly sponsored by NSF. This project is cooperatively funded
through separate awards from NSF and NIEHS.