* 1314749
* Collaborative Research: The generation of a biodiversity hotspot: paleobiogeography of the Caribbean inferred from multiple arachnid lineages with differing dispersal abilities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Ingi Agnarsson, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 01/31/2017
* USD 543,632.00

The Caribbean region is a well-known hotspot of biological diversity, yet the
detailed processes that generated this rich species diversity on the islands are
complex and poorly understood. This project unites a team of international
experts to test hypotheses about how the age and dispersal ability of various
species, and the geological history of islands, interplay to generate
biodiversity hotspots. The research will also test the importance of islands as
sources of continental colonization, and the role of dispersal versus geological
land-bridges in island colonization. This will be accomplished by surveying 15
diverse arachnid lineages and their fossil relatives, and by using phylogenetic
approaches to analyze patterns of evolutionary relationships, ages of
divergence, and patterns of community composition across islands.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A mega-transect across one of the world's most biologically rich
archipelagos will transform knowledge of the history of the Caribbean. Many new
scientists will be trained -- the project will recruit and train young diversity
specialists at multiple institutions, with the central focus at the minority-
serving University of Puerto Rico. These biologists will be trained in the
importance of educating the public about biodiversity. The work will generate
rich resources for further biodiversity research by making species data,
phylogenies, range maps, specimen photographs, databases, and DNA sample data
publicly available through the internet and museum depositories.