* 1314205
* Towards Spin-based Quantum Computing in the Solid State: Tomography of a Spin Node
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Carlos Meriles, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 381,150.00

Harnessing the quantum behavior of nanoscopic physical systems is at the center
of a broad cross-disciplinary effort driven by the promise of various
applications for information processing and secure communication. The prospect
of performance gains and increased complexity is driving interest in new devices
for existing or new functions (particularly, quantum information processing
(QIP) protocols) as well as new paradigms for system architectures beyond
present technology. Implementations based on solid-state "spin complexes" formed
by individual paramagnetic dopants and neighboring nuclear and electronic spins
are of particular importance because spin-based quantum technology is well
positioned to overcome the obstacles to scaling. Assembling atomically identical
spin clusters, however, is unlikely in the near term future, making new
protocols necessary to precisely determine the spatial structure of an
individual node and selectively address single spins within the complex. In line
with these ideas, this grant articulates state-of-the-art nanoscale technology
and novel spin manipulation schemes to resolve the network of relative couplings
of nuclear spins in the vicinity of the so-called NV center in diamond, arguably
one of the most promising platforms for future spintronic and QIP devices.
Underlying our effort is the notion of circuits configured to exploit the atomic
scale differences between logic units so as to process quantum information in
optimal ways. Capitalizing on multi-dimensional spectroscopy and high-resolution
imaging schemes, it will be possible to expose the structure and connectivity
within the nuclear spin network of a given node in ways resembling the solving
of a complex molecular structure. Such information will be crucial to
identifying and exploiting long-lived nuclear memories, or to implementing
quantum correction protocols without resorting to additional, ad-hoc coupling
interfaces.

Besides the technological and scientific advantages, our work is expected to
have a broad educational outcome because it will offer students a unique inter-
disciplinary scientific training and the ability to interact with a network of
collaborating labs. These partnerships not only will provide a broad
dissemination platform but also will allow the PI to advance ongoing outreach
programs designed to provide meaningful research experiences to underprivileged
students through summer activities. These plans gain special meaning at City
College, a minority serving institution with a uniquely diverse population of
inner-city students. Capitalizing on the various recruitment channels at hand,
the teaching, mentoring and career counseling components of this project will
truly broaden participation, while encouraging groups underrepresented in the
sciences to pursue scientific careers both in academia and in industry.