* 1314003
* SEES Fellows: Development of a Novel Algal Harvesting and Dewatering Method for the Economically Feasible Production of Biofuels from Microalgae Growing on Industrial Emissions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Stewart, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2017
* USD 495,721.00

In this Award from the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows Program) Dr. Jennifer Stewart from the University of
Delaware will study the impact of changes in the environment upon the risks for
emerging infectious diseases, in particular zoonotic and vector-borne diseases.
This award has support from: the Directorate for Biological Sciences, the
Directorate for Engineering, and the Office of the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Stewart will
study the biological mechanisms that drive the nitric-oxide (NO) induced
flocculation of the photosynthetic algae Heterosigma akashiwo and she will work
with students at Delaware Technical and Community College to develop a pilot-
scale algal harvesting and dewatering system for production of biomass for
production of photosynthetic fuels. Dr. Stewart will study the cellular
processes and products important to downstream biofuel production will be
examined using a multidisciplinary "whole cell" approach that incorporates
physiological, biochemical, and molecular analyses. This approach will include a
comparative transcriptome analysis to identify genes and gene pathways involved
in flocculation, and define the optimal conditions for flocculation and
harvesting of high quality biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of studies like
this is to develop alternative (renewable) sources of high quality liquid fuels
that can be easily incorporated into existing infrastructure. Algal biofuels
show some promise, but production of algal biofuels are not yet economically
viable on a commercial scale. The flocculation and dewatering methods that Dr.
Stewart is studying could help to reduce the price of separation and removal of
water in the processing of algal biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Stewart will
be working with collaborators Kathryn Coyne of the University of Delaware and
Doug Hicks, Department of Chemical Engineering Technology at Delaware Technical
and Community College. Dr. Stewart will also be building an exhibit to include
in "Coast Day," a public outreach event at the University of
Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Science,
Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program,
with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that
lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the
necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this
project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves
in an independent research career related to sustainability.