* 1314925
* TWC SBE TTP:   Medium: Bringing Anthropology into Cybersecurity
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Wesch, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 715,845.00

This research applies anthropological methods to study cybersecurity analysts
working in Security Operation Centers (SOC). These analysts process large
amounts of data while handling cyber threats. The job requires intelligence and
high levels of skills but has many mundane/repetitive aspects. Adequate tool
support is largely lacking and many of the skills and procedures involved are
uncodified and undocumented resulting in a large body of "tacit knowledge." This
project places researchers trained in both cybersecurity and anthropology into
SOCs, working side by side with the analysts. This "participant observation"
approach provides a means to access the tacit knowledge of the analysts and to
convert it into more explicit knowledge, leading to the development of
algorithms that can help automate the tasks. The ethnographic fieldwork also
provides an opportunity to observe real security operation centers' work
processes and identify factors that influence the effectiveness and efficiency
with which cybersecurity incidents are handled. This helps to explain why some
cybersecurity problems are hard to address in practice, what roles humans and
organizational structures play, and where procedures might be inefficient or
completely fail for non-technical reasons. The research is carried out through a
collaborative effort involving researchers from Kansas State University and two
companies. Results from the research will create practical tools that leverage
tacit knowledge in security analytics and automate tasks such as incident
response and forensic analysis. Research findings also inform the training of
cybersecurity professionals by making explicit the tacit knowledge of effective
security analytics acquired during participant observation.