* 1314663
* Dynamic Redistribution of Fluids in Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Laura Pyrak-Nolte, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 06/30/2018
* USD 359,000.00

Most subsurface activities perturb the natural state of fluids in soil and rock
because fluids are often injected, withdrawn or transported through the
subsurface. All of these techniques induce changes in the local pressure field
that initially perturb a multiphase system into a nonequilibrium condition that,
over time, relaxes to steady-state or quasi-static distributions. The relaxation
depends on pore-scale processes such as dynamic contact angles, air-water
interface geometry, temporal changes in wettability, and local heterogeneities
in the porous media. This research focuses on an experimental investigation of
the dynamic redistribution of fluids in porous media by connecting internal
microscopic perturbations to external macroscopic behavior. The study will
assess the contributions of wettability, pore topology and films to the
redistribution of immiscible fluids in a porous medium in the transition from
dynamic to steadystate/quasi-static conditions. A combination of experimental
techniques will be used that include the fabrication of transparent micro-models
with built-in electro-kinetic actuators tomanipulate fluids at the pore scale
internal to the pore network; the fabrication of 3D transparent micro-models
using a new grain deposition method; and the measurement of 2D &amp; 3D fluid
distributions using fluorescent imaging and laser confocal microscopy to
determine the role of absorbed films, corner fluids and pinned films on static
and dynamic relations as a function of dimensionality. Analysis of experimental
datasets will determine which competing theories for static and dynamic
constitutive relationships are supported by experimental evidence, and whether
current theories are sufficient to describe multiphase fluid
relaxation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the scaling of pore connectivity
and the hydraulic properties of porous networks is of particular relevance today
because of the intense activity in shale-gas which depends on networks of
fractures to produce the gas, and because of attempts to sequester carbon
dioxide in the subsurface. In addition, contaminant remediation efforts,
chemical mixing, and biological tissue growth on synthetic porous media all
depend on the complex interplay of geometry with the dynamics of fluids. This
research will provide critical testing of theoretical methods used to predict
flow and distributions of multiple fluids in porous media, and will enable
scientists and&lt;br/&gt;engineers to connect interfacial areas, disconnected
fluid phases and film geometry to macroscopic hydraulic properties.