* 1314857
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: DIORE: Digital Insertion and Observation Resistant Execution
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Samrat Bhattacharjee, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 815,499.00

Cloud computing allows users to delegate data and computation to cloud
providers, at the cost of giving up physical control of their computing
infrastructure. An attacker with physical access to the computing platform can
perform various physical attacks, referred to as digital insertion and
observation attacks, which include probing memory buses, tampering with memory,
and cold-boot style attacks. While memory encryption can prevent direct leakage
of data under digital observation, memory access patterns to even encrypted data
may leak sensitive information. This work will allow organizations to securely
outsource their computing infrastructure to an untrusted cloud provider, while
preserving a similar level of security as if hosting the infrastructure in
house&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop DIORE (Digital Insertion
and Observation Resistant Execution) which is a combined hardware software
platform immune to digital insertion and observation attacks. DIORE provides
memory-trace oblivious execution, relying on efficient hardware implementations
of Oblivious RAM, and novel compiler techniques for partitioning programs such
that Oblivious RAM accesses are minimized. This ensures that an adversary with
access to a program execution's memory trace learns nothing about the code or
data other than what is revealed intentionally. DIORE opens up possibilities for
new cloud applications involving sensitive information such as genomic, medical,
or financial data -- domains that are considered too privacy sensitive for
today's cloud.