* 1314778
* HCC: Large: Social-Computational Support of Civic Engagement in Public Policymaking
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Gilly Leshed, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,279,876.00

The overarching goals of this work are to understand and to provide socio-
computational support for improving the entire cycle of technology-enabled civic
engagement: (1) recruitment of people with a stake in the issues; (2)
deliberative discussion in which they learn about the policy issues, engage with
each other, voice questions and recount experiences; and (3) consensus building
in which participants move toward collaborative content-creation, summarization
of the knowledge that has emerged in discussion and the development of agreement
around key points. In practice, efforts to use social media for citizen policy
consultations often fell far short of their knowledge-generating and democracy-
reinforcing goals. There thus is a crucial need to discover how to design civic
engagement spaces that leverage the potential of social media, so that they
support not simply more participation but rather better participation that will
benefit both the policymakers seeking input and the citizens who participate in
the discussion.

To achieve this goal, the project integrates computer science research on
natural language learning for social-computational systems, human-computer
interaction research on online communities, social media design, and social
science research on motivation and individual and group deliberative processes.
The research will advance behavioral science understanding of the relationship
between individual characteristics and successful e-deliberation; the
communicative processes that characterize successful e-deliberation; and the
group processes and moderator behaviors that promote a shift from open
discussion to consensus building. It will advance the state-of-the-art in
natural language processing by developing joint human-computer text analysis
techniques to (1) promote on-line civic engagement in policy discussions and (2)
facilitate deliberative moderation in this collaborative online setting. It will
add to human-computer interaction by advancing recommender systems, online
communities, and social media research to support mentoring activities and
engagement with alternate points of view. Finally, it will extend scientific
understanding of how to motivate and support broader, better citizen
participation in public policymaking.

The work will have at least five broader impacts: (1) increase understanding of,
and infrastructure for, e-participation in policy-making, and provide annotated
datasets of civic deliberations for use by other researchers; (2) enhance
education through graduate and undergraduate mentoring and development of a new
interdisciplinary course on Online Civic Engagement; (3) promote STEM education
diversity with programs for middle and high school girls; (4) provide community
and government outreach activities; (5) benefit society by improved civic
engagement in policymaking in general.