* 1314422
* Parameter-Independent Reduced Models for Flow and Transport in Groundwater Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* William W-G. Yeh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 256,606.00

The overriding objective of this proposal is to develop parameter-independent
reduced models for flow and transport equations in groundwater modeling. The
reduced model is valid for the entire parameter space in the original full-scale
model and is three orders of magnitude smaller than the full-scale model. The
proposed methodology combines the data-driven and model-driven methods in that
it makes use of input/output data relationships as well as incorporates the
physics of the model. Model reduction is based on the Galerkin projection of the
high-dimensional model equations onto a subspace, approximated by a small number
of optimally chosen basis functions (principal components). Algorithms will be
developed to optimize the snapshot selection in the parameter space and time for
the construction of the parameter-independent principal components. The reduced
model captures the dominating characteristics of the original full-scale model
and outputs within a desired degree of accuracy. Additionally, procedures will
be developed whereby the reduced model is utilized for optimal experimental
design for parameter estimation, Monte Carlo simulation, Bayesian inversion,
data assimilation, and groundwater management. Numerical experiments and real
case studies will be conducted to show how the proposed parameter-independent
reduced models can be used to drastically reduce the computational requirements
associated with large-scale groundwater flow and transport models, while
satisfying the specified level of error tolerance for meeting the stipulated
goal.

Groundwater models are used as decision-making tools for the planning and
management of water resources systems. In many instances, the groundwater model
has to be run a large number of times. A typical model uncertainty analysis
requires tens of thousands of model runs to evaluate the uncertainty of the
model outputs given the statistical characteristics of the model inputs. It
would not be feasible or practical to use a computationally demanding and
expensive full-scale model to perform such tasks. The project will develop new
algorithms for constructing robust reduced models for groundwater flow and
contaminant transport. The new algorithms can be used to perform various
critically important hydrological analyses as the reduced models run 1,000
faster than the original full-scale model. The proposed model reduction
methodology will be validated and applied to a selected groundwater basin in
Southern California. Note that almost 40% of water supply in Southern California
is from groundwater pumping. Arrangements have been made with the United States
Geological Survey (USGS) office in San Diego for collaborative research
participation in order to maximize the immediate applicability of the developed
methodology for conjunctive planning of surface water and groundwater in
Southern California. However, the proposed methodology is very general and can
be applied to other groundwater basins in the country.