* 1314674
* TTP: Medium: Crowd Sourcing Annotations
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* David Cok, GRAMMATECH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 978,190.00

Both sound software verification techniques and heuristic software flaw-finding
tools benefit from the presence of software annotations that describe the
behavior of software components. Function summaries (in the form of logical
annotations) allow modular checking of software and more precise reasoning.
However, such annotations are difficult to write and not commonly produced by
software developers, despite their benefits to static analysis.

The Crowdsourcing Annotations project will address this deficiency by
encouraging software-community-based crowd-sourced generation of annotations.
This effort will be supported by tools that generate, use, and translate the
annotations; the results of annotation efforts will be shared through openly
available repositories. We will also use pilot projects to demonstrate and
encourage the use of annotations and static analysis. The project will leverage
and interact with the Software Assurance Marketplace (SWAMP) project's
collection of static analysis tools and example software. Some of the technical
challenges are developing uniform styles and languages for annotations, reliably
validating crowd-sourced submissions, merging annotations and the corresponding
source code, version control, and integration with typical software development
environments. The social challenges are also important: designing and
implementing a crowd-sourcing infrastructure in a way that enhances and
motivates community and individual technical and social benefits.