* 1314969
* Complexity of Simulating Quantum Adiabatic Optimization by  Quantum Monte Carlo Methods
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Willem van Dam, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

The project "Complexity of Simulating Quantum Adiabatic Optimization by Quantum
Monte Carlo Methods" investigates the computational power and weaknesses of a
widely used method for simulating quantum physics. The Quantum Monte Carlo
method is a commonly used algorithm for analyzing and simulating large, coherent
quantum systems. Although it is known that this method can not efficiently
simulate all quantum mechanical systems, it is also known to provide reliable
answers for a large subclass of such systems. The project focuses on the
specific question whether or not a quantum computer running the Quantum
Adiabatic Optimization algorithm is efficiently simulatable by the Quantum Monte
Carlo method. 

The theory of quantum computation looks at the question which problems can be
solved efficiently on a quantum computer that do not have an efficient solution
using classical computation. An important case of this theory concerns Quantum
Adiabatic Optimization, which is a general purpose quantum algorithm that
attempts to find the optimal value in an exponentially large landscape of
function values. Despite more than 12 years of study, it is still not known to
which extend this quantum heuristic performs better than classical heuristics.
On the one hand, it is possible that a classical algorithm that uses the Quantum
Monte Carlo method will be able to efficiently simulate quantum adiabatic
optimization, which would prove a strong limitation on the 'quantum benefit' of
the quantum adiabatic approach to solving optimization problems. On the other
hand, it is also possible that one can prove that the Quantum Monte Carlo method
does not succeed in efficiently mimicking the quantum adiabatic algorithm, thus
providing strong evidence that quantum adiabatic optimization does indeed have
computational powers that go beyond classical computation. This project aims to
determine which one of these two possibilities is the case. Research in quantum
computation is high interdisciplinary with impacts in a number of areas of
physics and computer science. In addition, this project will support the
education and training of a graduate student in this cross-disciplinary
research.