* 1314938
* CONFERENCE:   Rustbelt RNA Meeting 2013 to be held on October 18-19, 2013 at the Marriott Hotel in Downtown Cleveland, OH
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Jane Jackman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2014
* USD 16,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The Rustbelt RNA Meeting (RRM) is an annual meeting that
gathers scientific researchers from the Midwestern United States to present and
discuss new developments in RNA-related research with a particular focus on
providing unique opportunities that advance the professional development of
early-stage trainees. The 2013 RRM will be held in Cleveland, OH at the Marriott
Hotel Downtown on Oct 18-19; this venue has been chosen based on its excellent
meeting facilities and accessible location to researchers from the Midwest,
including Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, Pennsylvania, Kentucky, New York, and
surrounding areas. The annual RRM meeting provides an outstanding forum for
communication of new developments in RNA-related research. Research presented at
the RRM typically covers a broad spectrum of topics that reflects the highly
interdisciplinary nature of the RNA field. In recent years, emerging
technologies have facilitated the acquisition of large-scale RNA sequence data,
enabling identification and assessment of entire transcriptomes while revealing
previously unknown classes of RNAs. Moreover, advances in cell imaging,
biophysical and computational tools allow researchers to address new questions
about functions and mechanisms associated with biological RNAs. The 2013 meeting
program will feature a full schedule of poster and oral presentations by
predominantly student and post-doctoral trainees, and a keynote lecture by Nobel
laureate Dr. Tom Cech (University of Colorado Boulder).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The RRM provides unique opportunities for
career development of undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral trainees. One
important charge of the RRM is to feature oral and poster presentations by
students and junior researchers; indeed, trainees are allocated &gt;90% of the
oral presentations, and a lengthy and historically well-attended poster session
highlights the research of remaining trainees who cannot be assigned a platform
presentation. Importantly, in the process of determining winners of several
presentation awards, all trainee presentations are judged by faculty volunteers
for both scientific merit and presentation effectiveness, thus ensuring that
valuable feedback is provided to each participant. To promote broad and
inclusive attendance, the 2013 RRM will introduce two Travel Scholarship Awards
for URM trainee registrants selected based on outstanding scientific merit. The
RRM serves to expose trainees (often for the first time) to a meeting atmosphere
that resembles that of a large national meeting in terms of the quality and
quantity of research presented, but with the benefit of a more intimate and
personalized experience that not only provides the opportunity to advance their
scientific knowledge, but also promotes interaction, collegiality, and the
development of new collaborations.