* 1314642
* WHCOHH: Harmful algal bloom dynamics and epigenetic mechanism of toxin action
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2013,02/29/2020
* Mark Hahn, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/29/2020
* USD 4,321,138.00

This award will provide NSF support for the establishment of the Woods Hole
Center for Oceans and Human Health (WHCOHH) at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, with a strong and integrated set of research projects that will
employ novel remote sampling technologies to achieve new insights into the
population dynamics of known and emerging HAB threats, and to address critical
mechanisms of toxin action, linking developmental exposures to adult
consequences. The studies are expected to lead to substantive improvements in
our ability to predict harmful algal bloom events, and the effects of toxins.
The ultimate mission of the Center is to improve the public health through
enhanced understanding of how oceanic and environmental processes affect the
production, distribution and persistence of toxin-producing organisms, and the
risks from exposure to their potent neurotoxins. The Center will act as a focal
point for research on issues at the intersection of oceanographic, biological
and environmental health sciences in Woods Hole. The Center will comprise three
integrated and interdependent Research Projects and an Administrative Core.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Factors affecting the distribution, survival,
proliferation and toxicity of HAB species still are poorly known, despite their
enormous consequences for human health. Moreover, it is becoming clear that
multiple HAB species can co-occur, raising issues of combined exposures
compounding the threats to human health. The Center research team will focus on
two key species, Alexandrium fundyense, which produces saxitoxins responsible
for paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), and Pseudo-nitzschia spp., which
produce domoic acid that is responsible for the amnesic shellfish poisoning
(ASP) syndrome. Studies on the mechanisms of toxin action will be accompanied by
and compared with those of important anthropogenic toxicants common in the
marine environment. Thus, this Center will establish a newly cohesive approach
to address and advance the understanding of how coastal ecology and physical
processes may influence human health risks from harmful algae.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Center staff will engage local and state
Departments of Public Health in discussions regarding the Center?s activities.
Additionally, they will engage the Cape Cod Health Care system, and will seek to
provide lectures to local physician groups regarding not only the findings, but
also the overall science, including the sources of chemicals (toxins and
toxicants) and the molecular toxicology that will be part of the Center's
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs and trainees will disseminate results via
standard peer-reviewed publications and presentations at national and
international scientific meetings. Center research will involve the training of
several undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows in research methods and
approaches, and we will provide career development of new faculty. To assist
student and other?s oral presentations and maximize effective communication with
the scientific community, the Center will offer presentation training as part of
the normal course of activities, as part the Administration Core activities.
Communication with the public will include such things as contribution of
articles related to Center projects to the WHOI magazine Oceanus, which
publishes articles directed at lay audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JOINT
FUNDING BY NSF AND NIEHS: The original proposal on which this project is based
(P01 ES021923-01) was submitted to the National Institutes of Environmental
Health Sciences (NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding Opportunity Announcement RFA-
ES-11-012 , "Centers for Oceans Human Health (P01)", an opportunity jointly
sponsored by NSF. This project is cooperatively funded through separate awards
from NSF and NIEHS.