* 1314295
* PIF: Beyond Adiabatic State Preparation with Ultracold Trapped Ion Quantum Simulators
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* James Freericks, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 175,000.00

In the early 1980's, Richard Feynman proposed a new way to perform computation
that directly involves quantum mechanical effects and differs from conventional
digital computers that are classical in nature (having one of two states in each
bit). Recently, experimental groups have started to realize these Feynman ideas
with trapped ion quantum simulators. These devices mimic the quantum behavior of
particles by simulating them in a controlled quantum-mechanical arena. The work
in this grant focuses on determining how to carry out the next generation of
these experiments. They are controlled by shining lasers onto the ions that are
in the trap which apply forces onto the ions that depend on the quantum state
the ion is in. These forces induce vibrations into the collection of ions, and
these vibrations can be detrimental to the functioning of the simulator. This
work will determine the effects of these vibrations on the computation and will
develop methods to both understand and to control those effects. Work will be
carried out in close collaboration with two experimental groups who are building
these simulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One graduate student will be trained
during the period of this grant. The training will help develop the
technologically savvy workforce. In addition, a number of classroom visits to
local schools in the Arlington, VA school district will be undertaken and
presentations will be made that cover different phenomena in quantum mechanics
(magnetism for elementary school and the two-slit experiment for middle school).
The research work will focus on new paradigms for analog quantum simulation
which, if successful, could have an impact on developments of novel computing
technologies in the future.