* 1314615
* SBIR Phase I:  Continuous non-invasive glucose monitor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Paul Melman, Newton Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,754.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
a new non-invasive glucose sensor for diabetes patients. Similar in approach to
pulse oximetry, the sensor measures the intensity of light scattered by
epidermis at two wavelengths to provide a sensitive and specific reading of the
patient?s blood glucose concentration. This approach will enable the
construction of a continuous glucose monitor with wearable form factors (small
size, low weight) and low cost. This device will greatly improve the ability of
diabetes patients to control their glucose level and eventually support an
automated closed-loop insulin delivery system (artificial
pancreas).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is improvement in the health of millions of diabetes patients and
reducing the large and growing cost of treating the disease. This will be
achieved by eliminating the discomfort of repeated blood tests and providing
more frequent glucose readings. Diabetes is a chronic disease with no cure. It
is a leading cause of heart disease, stroke, kidney malfunction, amputations and
blindness in the adult population. According to the American Diabetes
Association, the direct cost of treating diabetes and its complications is ~10%
of the entire cost of the US healthcare system.