* 1314957
* NEESR-CR: NEESsoft-Seismic Risk Reduction for Soft-Story, Wood frame Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2012,09/30/2014
* Mikhail Gershfeld, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2014
* USD 842,580.00

This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation, "George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Research
(NEESR)," competition and includes the Colorado State University (lead
institution) with Clemson University, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Western
Michigan University, California Polytechnic Institute-Pomona, and the University
at Buffalo, State University of New York (SUNY). This award will utilize the
NEES facilities at the University at Buffalo, SUNY, and University of
California, San Diego (UCSD). As early as 1970, the structural engineering and
building safety community recognized that a large number of two-, three- and
even some four-story wood frame buildings designed with the first floor used
either for parking or commercial space were built with readily identifiable
structural system deficiencies, referred to as a "soft story." Thus, many older
multi-story, wood frame buildings (built prior to 1970s) are susceptible to
collapse at the first story during earthquakes. The majority of these older
multi-story, wood frame buildings have large openings and few partition walls at
the ground level. This open space condition results in the earthquake resistance
of the first story being significantly lower than the upper stories. These
buildings, known as soft-story buildings, are prone to collapse during major
earthquake events. The result of the soft-story response, as was observed after
the 1989 Loma Prieta, CA and, particularly, the 1994 Northridge, CA earthquakes,
is the destruction of property and in some cases loss of life. Most cities and
counties recognize this as a disaster preparedness problem and have been
actively developing various ordinances and mitigation plans to address this
threat. Some of the most visible efforts are taking place in San Francisco, Los
Angeles, San Jose, and other major metropolitan high earthquake hazard areas. In
2008, the San Francisco Department of Building Inspection and the Applied
Technology Council (ATC) initiated the Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety
(CAPSS) project with the main goal of identifying possible action plans for
reducing earthquake risks in existing buildings. According to the CAPSS study,
43 to 80 percent of the multi-story, wood frame buildings will be deemed unsafe
after a magnitude 7.2 earthquake and a quarter of these buildings would be
expected to collapse. However, the mechanism that induces collapse of such
buildings is not well understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
NEESsoft project will (1) enable seismic retrofit of soft-story, wood frame
buildings based on performance, (2) experimentally validate recently proposed
concepts in for retrofit of soft-story, wood frame buildings, and (3) provide a
fundamental understanding of the way wood frame buildings collapse through a
systematic experimental program consisting of three major test types at two NEES
facilities. The NEESsoft project will begin with simultaneous development of a
3-D numerical collapse model while the testing program will (1) confirm the
performance of seismic protective systems for retrofit of soft-story, wood frame
buildings and (2) experimentally validate a retrofit procedure developed through
the ATC 71.1 project entitled "Development of Simplified Guidance for Seismic
Rehabilitation of Soft-Story Wood-Frame Buildings." Finally, both the ATC 71.1
retrofit technique and a performance-based retrofit technique that utilizes
seismic protection devices will be tested at full-scale in a series of shake
table tests at the NEES outdoor shake table facility at UCSD. In the final test,
the retrofit will be removed and the building will be allowed to collapse in a
controlled manner to provide one of the first collapse data sets for wood frame
buildings, thus providing critical information for understanding this complex
problem. The intellectual merit of the NEESsoft project is that it will (1)
improve the fundamental understanding of collapse mechanisms in wood frame
buildings, (2) improve seismic numerical modeling including collapse modeling of
wood frame buildings, (3) provide a performance-based approach and guidelines
for retrofit of soft-story, wood frame buildings using seismic protection
devices, and (4) enable a more accurate calculation of the margin against
collapse for design code development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
innovation proposed within NEESsoft for engineering education is to integrate
the seismic portion of the virtual learning environment being developed within
the Wood Education Institute (WEI) into the NEEShub virtual environment under
development by NEEScomm, who heads NEES Operations at Purdue University. This
will provide educational broader impact by changing the way seismic wood
education is delivered and learned. The societal broader impact lies in the
experimental validation, and likely enhancement, of the ATC 71.1 retrofit
procedures for soft-story, wood frame buildings by providing performance-based
retrofit options for these types of buildings to better protect the occupants
and mitigate losses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this project will be
archived and made available to the public through the NEES data repository. This
award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).