* 1314226
* RAPID: Identifying Social Network and Mobile Technology Use and Its Correlation with Individual Evacuation Behavior in Hurricane Sandy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Justin Yates, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2014
* USD 32,539.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) project seeks to understand the roles
of social networking and mobile technology in decision-making regarding whether,
when, and how to evacuate during large-scale evacuation events. Previous
hurricane evacuation behavior studies have identified perceived safety, delivery
of an evacuation notification and perceived storm severity as consistently
impacting an individual's evacuation choice. Less clear is the impact that
friends and family, prior hurricane experience and internet access have on
evacuation choice. A post-event survey, following the Tailored Design Method by
Dillman, will be conducted. The data collected through this research will
provide valuable information on the roles of social networks and mobile
technology usage on individual evacuation behavior and decision-making. The
survey will be distributed to a random sample of Monmouth County, New Jersey
residents, who were subject to a mandatory evacuation order during Hurricane
Sandy (28 - 30 Oct, 2012) and will consist of four sections collecting
information on (a) how members of the household use different mobile
technologies, (b) individual household members' usage of social media programs
during Hurricane Sandy (c) how the head of household communicated with other
household members and their social circle during Sandy, and (d) whether and when
the household evacuated. It is expected to show that individuals are
consistently and increasingly relying on mobile technology and social media
during the evacuation planning process. It is anticipated that
family/friend/peer communication will show increased frequency in the number of
contacts and in the passage of information obtained through the Internet, that
local news will retain its priority over national news sources, that the
perception of "timely, personal and credible" evacuation information is
changing, and that information gathered through social media and mobile networks
will be ultimately more influential in the evacuation decision-making process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be beneficial for society as its findings
will provide knowledge on the impact that mobile technology and social networks
have on evacuation decision-making. Our study findings will not only provide
evidence showing how important social media and mobile technology have become in
the context of evacuation decision-making, but will also illustrate how
information gathered through social media informs evacuation decision-making and
behavior. This knowledge is very pertinent in a time when social media and
mobile technology are increasingly defining the way people seek timely and
reliable information. Evacuation-related organizations can use the survey
findings to (1) learn more about how people make evacuation decisions and (2)
design mechanisms that will feed/inform social media and mobile technology to
provide more efficient tools that can save the lives of many during extreme
events.