* 1314547
* SHF: AF: Large: Collaborative Research: Parallelism without Concurrency
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Charles Leiserson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

The widespread deployment of parallel machines --- from multicores to
supercomputers --- has made it critical to develop simple approaches to
programming them. Significant progress has been made in simplifying parallel
programming by developing programming models to support parallelism without
concurrency, that is, without the nondeterminacies in the logic of programs
caused by the relative and nondeterministic timing of communicating processes.
Yet most parallel programs in practice are concurrent, and hence,
nondeterministic, leading to code that can only be programmed and understood by
experts. This research project aims to understand how parallel computers can be
made easier to use by the vast majority of programmers by developing software
technology that enables deterministic parallel
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a holistic view of the problem
from the key perspectives of programming linguistics, software systems,
algorithmic analysis, and absolute performance. It acknowledges the reality that
parallel programming cannot be fully deterministic at every level of
abstraction. It is pursuing three key strategies for dealing with concurrency:
encapsulating concurrency so that it is hidden by layered abstractions at
appropriate abstraction levels, avoiding concurrency by restructuring programs
to employ deterministic approaches, and managing concurrency when it is
impractical to either encapsulate or avoid concurrency completely. Among the
specific techniques being studied are commutative building blocks, deterministic
nonassociative reducers, deterministic pipelined parallelism, deterministic
interfaces, and generalized race detection for detecting invariant races. The
project is developing open-source libraries, tools, and runtime extensions
integrated into a multicore-software platform, as well as a problem-based
benchmark suite to compare approaches.