* 1314897
* SBIR Phase I:  Tracking Algorithms for Uncovering Complex Dynamic Interactions in Live Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Christopher Calderon, Numerica Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,952.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop algorithms and prototype software to track and quantify forces
experienced by single-biomolecules in living cells. The approach is built on
recent advances in time series analysis to: (1) fit 2-D/3-D stochastic
differential equations that accurately characterize the underlying particle
kinetics (methods for checking models against experimental data will be
provided); and, (2) form reliable tracks from crowded and noisy image sequences
containing many molecules by extending state-of-the-art algorithms from target
tracking applications. Such analysis tools do not exist in current single
particle tracking software. The tools will be utilized to extract new kinetic
information on protein motion in the primary cilium of mouse cells due to the
system's relevance in biophysics, cell signaling, and cancer research. The
algorithms and software will provide more accurate estimates of kinetic
parameters with the unique addition of goodness-of-fit hypothesis testing
metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be the development of new software tools capable of producing
powerful insights into cellular and synthetic biological systems by enabling the
extraction of novel information characterizing bimolecular motion in live cells.
Such insights will positively influence numerous research areas ranging from
enhanced drug delivery to improved yields in synthetic biology applications. The
commercial software will enable researchers with various backgrounds to: (1)
produce reliable tracks from large image sequences (with metrics describing the
quality of the candidate tracks); (2) extract the underlying kinetic
information; and, (3) test the assumptions behind standard biophysical models.
The algorithms and software developed by this effort will serve as the basis for
a unique commercial product offering that will meet unmet demand in the
biological imaging market.