* 1314560
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: HIMALAYAS: Hierarchical Machine Learning Stack for Fine-Grained Analysis of Malware Domain Groups
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Arindam Banerjee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 252,545.00

The domain name system (DNS) protocol plays a significant role in operation of
the Internet by enabling the bi-directional association of domain names with IP
addresses. It is also increasingly abused by malware, particularly botnets, by
use of: (1) automated domain generation algorithms for rendezvous with a
command-and-control (C&amp;C) server, (2) DNS fast flux as a way to hide the
location of malicious servers, and (3) DNS as a carrier channel for C&amp;C
communications.&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the development of a scalable,
hierarchical machine-learning stack, called HIMALAYAS, which specializes in
algorithms for automatically mining DNS data for malware activity. In
particular, we are interested in isolating both ordered and unordered sets of
malware domain groups whose access patterns are temporally and logically
correlated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HIMALAYAS performs a task of increasing
complexity at each level ? starting from scalable clustering and feature
selection at lower levels, to more advanced malware domain subsequence
identification algorithms at higher levels. It has multiple benefits, including
speed, accuracy, interpretability, and ability to use domain knowledge, which
makes it very well suited for malware analysis and related tasks. The analysis
by HIMALAYAS should accelerate the identification and takedown of malware
domains on the Internet and improve services such as Google SafeSearch.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The machine-learning stack developed as part of the
HIMALAYAS project has broader application to many important data mining
problems, e.g., in financial data analysis, and mining user patterns from web
access logs. The project provides opportunities for students to participate in
the development and transition of the technology.