* 1314620
* TWC SBE: Medium: Collaborative: Incentive Compatible Wireless Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Randall Berry, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 03/31/2019
* USD 399,999.00

Wireless connectivity has become the primary way most users access cyberspace.
The wide use of the internet on wireless and mobile devices is further
encouraged with new services that simultaneously engage and connect a large
number of users. As a result, the society at large is quickly getting
comfortable with the idea of conducting everyday lives on mobile devices most of
which require communicating sensitive and confidential information over the
wireless medium. Consequently, secure access to cyberspace necessitates wireless
security. Wireless, being an open medium, is more prone to malicious cyber acts
as compared to wired connectivity. On the other hand, this medium also presents
unique opportunities to provide security guarantees through the interaction of
nodes and advanced physical layer techniques. In particular, information
theoretic security emerges with design insights that provide guaranteed security
against computationally unlimited adversaries. In order to do so, information
theory assumes a network of altruistic nodes and looks for fundamental
performance limits which usually come with complex interaction and coordination
requirements. The premise of this project is that this idealistic set-up can be
successfully transformed into a practical one by amalgamating information theory
with the theory of incentives in order to provide secure wireless cyber
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research topics being addressed include
the development of: (1) mechanisms to incentivize non-altruistic cognitive nodes
to participate in information theoretic security protocols; (2) incentive
mechanisms for scenarios where all nodes have equal access to spectrum and need
confidentiality, even from each other; (3) techniques for providing security to
groups of cooperative nodes and the associated trust issues; (4) incentive
mechanisms for combating active attacks; (5) strategies for combating colluding
adversaries; and (6) mechanisms to ensure that nodes have the incentive to adopt
a given security protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this work
include: (1) providing secure access to cyberspace via the wireless medium; (2)
new design insights for practical security protocols; and (3) amalgamating
information theory and game theory via incentive mechanisms. Educational broader
impacts include: (1) dissemination of research results in the form of tutorials
and short courses; (2) enhancing graduate-student research experiences via a
three-university research exchange program; (3) incorporating the research
results into graduate and undergraduate communications courses; and (4)
recruitment of and mentorship for women in engineering and science.