* 1314040
* SEES Fellows: Developing new models to understand human vulnerability to climate-related hazards at multiple scales
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Bryan Jones, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2017
* USD 531,039.00

In this Award from the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows Program) Dr. Bryan Jones from the City University of New
York, Baruch College will investigate the multi-scale drivers of spatial
population change, developing new theories and frameworks to accurately describe
population change, and combine this with data on climate change to create
estimates of sensitivity/exposure to future climate-related hazards. This award
has support from: the Directorate for Geological Sciences and the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
studies like that proposed in this work is to develop a better knowledge base to
inform projections of the spatial distribution of population, providing
additional tools for urban planners, economists, and governments to estimate the
vulnerabilities to climate-related hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jones will
be working with collaborators Prof. Deborah Balk of the CUNY Institute for
Demographic Research and Dr. Brian O'Neill of the National Center for
Atmospheric Research. Dr. Jones will also work with Prof. Mark Montgomery of the
Department of Economics at the State University of New York, Stony
Brook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Science,
Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program,
with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that
lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the
necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this
project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves
in an independent research career related to sustainability.