* 1314699
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Separation Technology for a Game-Changing Cellulosic Sugar Biorefinery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Rodrigo Teixeira, Hyrax Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
means for isolating solutes including fermentable sugars from ionic liquids.
Ionic liquids are the only known solvent for woody biomass and have been shown
to support the breakdown of cellulose to fermentable sugars with yields
exceeding 90%. However, commercialization of an ionic liquid-based biorefinery
process has been impeded by the lack of a technology for separating fermentable
sugars from ionic liquid with high recovery of the ionic liquid. The present
project will use unique physical properties of ionic liquids and water to effect
separation of sugars from ionic liquids with less than 1% of the ionic liquid
being lost in the sugar product.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project spans several
strategically important industries including fuels, chemicals, plastics and
other materials. Most current and pending renewable routes to these industries
rely on fermentable sugars as a feedstock. However, sugars are presently only
available from corn, sugarcane and other crops that compete with our food
supply, driving up prices particularly affecting lower income societies.
Instead, the present project will develop the pathway to a cost effective
biorefinery process that produces sugars from non-food plant material.