* 1314828
* Data-Driven Multiscale Model Identification and Scaling via Random Renormalization Group Operators for Subsurface Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* John Cushman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 400,842.00

One of the major contributors to enhanced dispersion (mixing) of anthropogenic
contaminants in hydrogeological formations is multiscale heterogeneity, which in
many cases leads to anomalous dispersion (anomalous means non-Brownian, i.e.,
the process does not possess at least one of the following: stationary
increments, Gaussian increments or independent increments.) Heterogeneity may be
associated with spatial/temporal variations in hydraulic conductivity, porosity,
sorbtivity, fractures, and differential swelling to name a few contributors.
Natural and man-made (such as occurs during fracking) heterogeneity makes
accurate modeling of contaminant movement in the subsurface an extremely
challenging problem. A number of disparate models have been proposed to capture
behavior associated with hydrologic transport. These include Brownian and Levy
motion and fractional versions of these processes. Additionally, these models
have been conditioned on other random processes (subordination) and non-linear
clocks (time transformations) have been introduced. When two or more of these
models are combined (summed), multiscale heterogeneity that drives anomalous
dispersion can be accounted for. The proposed research will employ tools from
statistical physics, identify optimal models and develop user friendly software
which relies on available data for a given site. If a very rich model is used,
it can be easy to over fit data. If a less rich model is used, it may not be
fully capable of capturing the behavior under consideration. The proposed
techniques circumvent this problem by considering a cascade of models that range
from the very simple to the extremely complex and many models in between. The
codes developed to identify data with models will be released under open source
software licenses and tutorials will be written and made available to make the
use of the codes as easy as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large portion of
the world?s fresh water resources reside in the upper portion of the Earth?s
crust; approximately 30 times the volume of the world?s fresh surface water.
Most importantly, half of the U.S. population relies on ground water for
domestic use. Thus to protect this precious natural resource it is imperative
that we understand and can predict how anthropogenic contaminants spread in the
subsurface. The proposed research addresses this fundamental problem by creating
an optimal model identification scheme based on available data for natural
geologic formations and subsequently making the resulting software open source.