* 1314454
* Collaborative research:  Mechanisms of reproductive, developmental, and early life stage impacts of marine oil spills in a vertebrate sentinel model
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Fernando Galvez, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2018
* USD 358,500.00

Marine oil spills can release large volumes of persistently toxic chemicals into
the environment, and many large active oil fields are in close proximity to
high-density coastal human populations where humans can be exposed through
clean-up and remediation efforts, through contact with oiled media in popular
vacation areas, and through the food chain. Despite many large oil spills in
recent years close to populated regions, and a few studies testing for acute and
psychological impacts in humans, remarkably little is known of the medium and
long-term health impacts of oil spills on important biological processes such as
reproduction, development, growth, and performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, a research team from the University of California at Davis, the
Louisiana State University Agricultural Center, and the Louisiana State
University and A &amp; M College will explore the biological impact of the
Deepwater Horizon oil spill to study such effects. They will use the Gulf
killifish as a sentinel animal model because they offer an opportunity to
carefully link cause with effect by virtue of their relatively short life cycle,
a well-provisioned molecular and physiological toolkit, their local residence
and well-documented exposure to the event in the field, and because they are
tractable for laboratory and field studies providing an opportunity to verify
predicted effects in the real world. Fish are established models for human
health and development, and killifish are particularly appropriate for studying
consequences of the DWH oil spill specifically because they are abundant, local,
and non-migratory residents of Gulf of Mexico regions directly affected by the
spill event. The team already has evidence that killifish were exposed and
affected by the event. Now their objectives are to test for oil spill effects at
various sensitive stages of the vertebrate life cycle including effects that
span generations, to characterize the spatial and temporal extent of vertebrate
risk from the spill, and to test for the influence of individual and population
genetic variation on sensitivity to oil pollution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: There remains a clear deficiency in our understanding of health effects
from hydrocarbon exposures that emerge over the medium and long term. This
research will offer insight into risk and mechanisms of oil spill impacts in a
vertebrate model, offer biomarkers predictive or reflective of impaired
biological processes, and accelerate the discovery of genetic and physiological
risk factors. The project will support the training of PhD students and
undergraduate researchers. PhD students from both LSU and UC-Davis will
participate in EnvironMentors, a program that pairs graduate students with
students from local high schools for an academic year, during which time
participants are guided in the completion of an independent research project to
be presented as a scientific poster at a local science fair. The LSU group will
also present these posters and other summarized research results at Ocean
Commotion, a yearly event organized by the Louisiana Sea Grant College Program,
which attract thousands of local K-8 students. Given the socio-economical
landscape of Louisiana, a diverse elementary school and undergraduate student
body will be engaged by these outreach efforts. Furthermore, undergraduate
research participation of groups that are historically underrepresented in the
sciences will be supported through programs offered by the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute (LSU), the Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LSU), and
Aggie Ambassadors program (UC Davis). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JOINT FUNDING BY NSF
AND NIEHS: The original proposal on which this project is based (R01
ES021934-01) was submitted to the National Institutes of Environmental Health
Sciences (NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding Opportunity Announcement RFA-
ES-11-013 , "Oceans, Great Lakes and Human Health (R01)", an opportunity jointly
sponsored by NSF. This project is cooperatively funded through separate awards
from NSF and NIEHS.