* 1314973
* TWC: Option: Medium: Collaborative: Semantic Security Monitoring for Industrial Control Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Robin Sommer, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 699,368.00

Industrial control systems differ significantly from standard, general-purpose
computing environments, and they face quite different security challenges. With
physical "air gaps" now the exception, our critical infrastructure has become
vulnerable to a broad range of potential attackers. In this project we develop
novel network monitoring approaches that can detect sophisticated semantic
attacks: malicious actions that drive a process into an unsafe state without
however exhibiting any obvious protocol-level red flags. In one thrust, we
conduct a measurement-centric study of ICS network activity, aimed at developing
a deep understanding of operational semantics in terms of actors, workloads,
dependencies, and state changes over time. In a second thrust, we develop
domain-specific behavior models that abstract from low-level protocol activity
to their semantic meaning according to the current state of the processes under
control. Our goal is to integrate these models into operationally viable, real-
time network monitoring that reports unexpected deviations as indicators of
attacks or malfunction. A separate "Transition to Practice" phase advances our
research results into deployment-ready technology by integrating it into the
open-source Bro network monitor. Overall, our work will improve security and
safety of today's critical infrastructure by providing effective, unobtrusive
security monitoring tailored to their specific semantics. In addition, we tie a
number of educational activities to the research and involve students at all
levels.