* 1314529
* Gravitational Waves and Radiation Reaction: An International Collaboration
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Clifford Will, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 76,698.00

This award is designated as a Global Venture Fund Award and is being co-funded
by NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering. The detection of
gravitational waves, either on Earth or in space, will open a new window on the
universe, requiring extremely sophisticated techniques in experiment and
analysis, large facilities, significant manpower and extensive international
collaboration. Likely sources of these waves include binary systems of black
holes and neutron stars, and solar mass objects spiralling into supermassive
black holes. Comparison of the observed gravitational-wave signal with
theoretical predictions will enable both the estimation of key astrophysical and
cosmological parameters as well as tests of Einstein's general theory of
relativity. This project will contribute to the development of gravitational-
wave astronomy by enabling more effective collaborations between the PIs and
their students and post-docs at the University of Florida (UF) and Dr. Luc
Blanchet and his group at the Institut d'Astrophysique de Paris (IAP). The
detailed comparison between two different approaches to deriving the motion of
small compact bodies orbiting massive compact bodies will be extended to higher
orders in the relevant approximation. These comparisons will lead to a deeper
understanding of the dynamics of inspiral and merger of compact bodies.
Calculations of the motion and gravitational-wave emission of binary compact
bodies to high orders in the post-Newtonian approximation will be extended to
alternative theories of gravity. In the UF group, Will is a leading expert in
testing alternative theories and post-Newtonian theory, complementing Blanchet's
expertise. We will extend a theorem by Stephen Hawking on isolated black holes
in the Brans-Dicke alternative theory to the more complicated case of two black
holes in a circular orbit. This will take advantage of recent work by Blanchet
and Whiting in their collaboration on laws of binary black hole mechanics in
general relativity. This work will impact gravitational-wave observations, as
the equations developed in this project will be critical in the development of
data-analysis algorithms for the detectors. Education and training will be
integrated into the research program. Graduate students and post-docs will have
the opportunity to travel to the partner institution for extended periods of
intensive collaboration. The proposed research will have a broad impact upon our
understanding of the applications of General Relativity to extreme astrophysical
systems, upon science education, and upon understanding and appreciation of
science by the public.