* 1314207
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel non-textile fabric and assembly method
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Gregory O'Connor, Amalgam Industries, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
industrialize a radically new laminar material to demonstrate the value of non-
textile but flexible fabric for a variety of different commercial applications.
This new material has no fibers and requires no weaving or knitting. Instead, it
uses hard and rigid ?elements? - digitally precise shapes of polymers, ceramics
or metals - that are simultaneously formed and hinged together in a rapid
process called ?Direct Forming,? - a close relative of 3-D printing. Thus, even
though the individual elements are hard and tough, and therefore extremely
durable, the way these elements are hinged together creates flexibility that
allows the new material to conform to rounded or irregularly shaped surfaces
like leathers and textiles do. Once this research establishes the optimum hinge
configurations, the Grantee intends to be the first in the marketplace with this
technology, concentrating on the technical textiles segment for applications
where standard textiles, such as ballistic nylon, canvas, or woven fibers cannot
meet requirements. This Phase I project is to conduct the engineering and
testing of the exact hinging structures that will allow the new material to
exceed tensile and impact strength standards for specific target markets, such
as commercial seating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project includes the initially targeted $180 million annual
commercial seating textile market. Transportation, consumer products,
architecture and civil engineering uses are some of the over 400 applications in
over 16 industry sectors also identified. But even more important is the
manufacturing process referred to as ?Direct Forming.? When fully
industrialized, it will localize the production of high performance, robust
technical textiles, stemming the trend of offshoring upholstery textile
production. This will allow the U.S. to recapture the production of complete
parts now lost to overseas cut and sew operations. The direct forming process
will severely undercut the true costs of offshoring mass-produced items, and its
attendant material waste and extensive use of hydrocarbon fuel associated with
international shipping and warehousing. Direct forming will bring about a
different industrial model, ?mass customization,? that along with 3-D printing
will revolutionize the way thousands of parts and materials will be manufactured
in the very near future. Computers will form textiles and other products exactly
to manufacturer specifications in a single ?additive? process, rather than
manufacturing pieces from a larger bolt or hunk of polymer or metal in more
wasteful ?subtractive? processes.