* 1314426
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Optical Materials for Cooking Fast Foods without Fryer Oils
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Luke Ferguson, C12 Advanced Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2014
* USD 149,927.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
innovative optical materials with the potential to revolutionize fried food
production and numerous other industries. A new technology is needed to solve
health and safety risk problems that are associated with oil immersion cooking.
Oil immersion cooking results in unacceptably large increases in absorbed oil
and fat content in fried foods. The research objective is to develop an oil-less
frying technique based on spectrally selective infrared light. Conventional
infrared heating elements are poorly suited to these frying applications because
they are not spectrally selective and emit large portions of their energy at
longer wavelengths that quickly scorch and damage food products. This research
will develop a series of advanced ceramic materials, which when heated only emit
light at selective shorter infrared wavelengths that are useful in frying fast
foods. If successful, this research will result in array of materials which can
rapidly and efficiently fry foods that are tasty, without the need for oil,
while using less energy and costing less than traditional oil immersion cooking.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be in the food
industry. The commercial focus will initially be on cooking fast foods without
fryer oils. French fries, for example, can absorb 30% by weight of the cooking
oil used in deep frying. This new infrared cooking technology has the potential
to significantly reduce society?s consumption of deep fryer oils and fats which
are a major contributor to the obesity epidemic. Cooking using wavelength-
selective infrared light energy has the potential to achieve superior or
comparable taste quality without the absorbed oil. This technology will also
enhance scientific and technological understanding in the areas of food
processing, bulk drying, and sterilization. Many other important applications
exist for true wavelength selective infrared emitting materials that do not
radiate energy at wavelengths which overheat, burn, or destroy valuable food
characteristics during processing.