* 1314338
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Automated Formal Analysis of Security Protocols with Private Coin Tosses
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Rohit Chadha, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 244,810.00

Computerized systems are present in various aspects of modern society. These
systems are used to access and share confidential information. Such sharing is
achieved through cryptographic protocols which often employ randomization to
introduce unpredictability in their behavior to achieve critical security
objectives and make it difficult for the malicious adversaries to infer the
underlying execution of the participants. It is imperative to ensure that these
protocols meet their security objectives such as confidentiality, privacy, fair
exchange, anonymity and availability, as serious flaws have often been
discovered in widely used cryptographic protocols. Given the ubiquitous role
played by these security protocols and the socio-economic-political consequences
that incorrect designs of cryptographic protocols may have, reasoning about
their correctness is an important social imperative. This task is challenging
because of the presence of malicious adversaries on the Internet as well as the
subtle interaction between the concurrent nature of Internet and the various
features such as cryptography and randomization used by the protocols. Hence,
the development of automated techniques to verify their correctness is needed to
manage this complexity, and this is the focus of this project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The presence of randomization introduces subtle challenges in
verifying the correctness of security protocols. In particular, when reasoning
about adversarial behavior, one must only consider those behaviors in which the
scheduling of actions of the adversary is independent of the private random
choices of the individual participants. This project aims to develop scalable
techniques and tools that faithfully, and automatically verify randomized
cryptographic protocols by considering only attacks (by an adversary) that are
oblivious of the private data and private coin tosses of protocol participants.
There are primarily three research tasks identified in this project. First,
theoretical completeness results will be established that will reduce the
general security problem for unbounded protocol sessions, session identifiers,
and messages to the finite bounded cases. The other two tasks will be devoted to
making the finite bounded case more amenable to automation. In the second
research task, we will develop automated techniques to verify safety properties
of protocols based on new symmetry reduction techniques using SMT solvers. The
third research task will develop automated techniques for verifying
indistinguishability properties of protocols. We will investigate symmetry
reduction techniques using SMT solvers for this task as well.