* 1314350
* RAPID: Identifying and Modeling the Interdependencies of Restoration Efforts across Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Joe Chow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 01/31/2015
* USD 31,500.00

The objective of this Rapid Research Grant (RAPID) award is to investigate the
concept of restoration interdependencies amongst infrastructure systems in
responding to extreme events. A restoration interdependency is defined as the
need for an infrastructure manager to consider the restoration efforts of
another infrastructure in decision-making about his or her infrastructure's
restoration. For example, debris may need to be cleared from an area prior to
rebuilding or replacing power lines in that area. This would imply a precedence
interdependency between the debris removal and the power infrastructure: an
event needs to occur in the debris removal prior to an event (the rebuilding)
starting in the power infrastructure's restoration efforts. This research seeks
to identify, classify, and determine the frequency of restoration
interdependencies after Hurricane Sandy by (1) interviewing infrastructure
managers involved in the restoration efforts and (2) analyzing electronic media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will contribute to the
resiliency of a community by enhancing our knowledge of what an infrastructure
manager must consider in determining an infrastructure's restoration efforts.
This analysis will help infrastructure managers better understand the level of
coordination or information-sharing required across restoration efforts in order
to take into account these restoration interdependencies. It will further help
determine how restoration efforts should be planned to robustly handle
restoration interdependencies, thereby shortening the time required for the
restoration of vital services after an extreme event.