* 1314637
* TWC: Option: Medium: Measurement-Based Design and Analysis of Censorship Circumvention Schemes
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Nicholas Hopper, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,161,268.00

The Internet has become one of the most effective and common means of conveying
expression that is likely to be controversial or suppressed. This freedom of
expression is threatened by the now widespread practice of Internet censorship
by both private and state interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tor network is one
of several tools designed to allow users to safely and efficiently access
censored content through one or more relay computers. Using these relays makes
it difficult for a censor to determine what content is being accessed by whom.
Unfortunately, this also makes it hard to measure the use and performance of
these tools, leading to challenges in assessing the impact of the tools, and the
security and performance of proposed alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing protocols and software to address these challenges,
addressing three specific aims:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing and deploying
cryptographic protocols that safely and privately measure and release important
characteristics of the dynamics of the Tor network, including: number of users
over time, user uptime and downtime distributions, user churn, network load, and
exit statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Enhancing the security and performance
of Tor, using the data collected to improve evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Improving generic methods to circumvent relay blocking, including proxy
distribution schemes, protocol steganography, and decoy
routing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to result in widely-used
datasets for evaluating censorship circumvention schemes, training of
undergraduate and graduate students, and broad dissemination of free software
that promotes freedom of expression on the Internet, against regimes that
strongly oppose such expression.