* 1314259
* CAREER: Thermally Actuated Nanomechanical Resonators and Self-Sustained Oscillators
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/19/2012,02/28/2017
* Siavash Pourkamali Anaraki, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 02/28/2017
* USD 267,149.00

Objective: The objective of this project is to develop an integrated research
and educational program on high frequency thermally actuated nano-
electromechanical resonant devices and systems. This includes experimental
demonstration and characterization of VHF and UHF thermal-piezoresistive
resonators and self-sustained oscillators and developing solutions to major
technological barriers such as nanoscale batch fabrication, and temperature and
process compensation of such devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Micro/nanomechanical resonant devices hold the promise of unprecedented
opportunities in sensory and electronic frequency referencing/filtering
applications. Almost all the existing research on high frequency
electromechanical resonators has been focused on piezoelectric and electrostatic
transduction mechanisms. Thermal actuation, despite having several advantages,
has generally been considered a slow mechanism only suitable for low-frequency
applications. However, recent theoretical analysis and preliminary results have
demonstrated not only the viability, but also superiority and uniqueness of
thermal actuation for high frequency applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: At the fundamental level this effort could open-up a number of new
unexplored research avenues in nanoscience and technology. At the practical
level, the developed technologies can provide new opportunities in wireless
communications and sensory applications.&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute
to training of the next generation of M/NEMS experts by involving and educating
graduate and undergraduate researchers. Major educational activities that will
be integrated along with the research activities include graduate/undergraduate
lab module developments, K-12 outreach through nano boot-camps and teacher
workshops, and dissemination of results to the technical community and general
public. Special efforts will be undertaken to encourage participation of
students from underrepresented groups.