* 1314864
* CONFERENCE:   24th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research to be held June 25-28, 2013 at the Convention and Exhibition Centre in Sydney, Australia
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Jose Alonso, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 12/31/2014
* USD 48,860.00

Intellectual Merit: The 24th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research
(ICAR) will be held June 25-28, 2013 at the Convention and Exhibition Centre in
Sydney, Australia. The success of research on Arabidopsis thaliana has been
greatly facilitated by the openness and collegiality of the community, fostered
through multiple international forums including ICAR, which brings together
approximately 1,000 participants to exchange scientific results and report on
progress in the field. The conference will cover a broad range of important
topics including Evolution and Natural Variation; Small RNAs, RNA and
Epigenetics; Transgenerational Inheritance; Development; Hormones; Cell and
Organelle Biology; Intracellular Signaling; Cell to Cell Communication; Abiotic
Stress; Biotic Stress/Interactions; Energy Biology/Metabolism; Photosynthesis
and Water; Phenomics; Proteins and Posttranslational Regulation; Emerging
Technologies and Systems Biology; Emerging Topics and What's Hot, and
Translational Biology. There will also be a series of satellite meetings on
plant energy biology, epigenetics and high-throughput plant phenomics. The
meeting will include a special tribute in memory of Simon Chan, a highly
talented early-career U.S. scientist who tragically passed away in 2012. The
"Simon Chan Symposium" will feature presentations in the research area in which
he performed his groundbreaking studies, notably, by demonstrating the practical
feasibility in Arabidopsis of "reverse breeding", one of the most sought goals
of plant breeding.

Broader Impacts: ICARs have proven to be an extremely effective venue for
exposing young scientists to the field and for encouraging interactions between
younger and more senior researchers. In addition to platform talks the
conference will include 36 speakers chosen from submitted abstracts with an
emphasis on presentations by students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty
members at early stages of their careers. There will also be community-organized
workshops that allow additional speakers to present their research. This will
ensure presentation of the latest results and provide important career
development for young scientists. The ICARs, which provide the primary annual
opportunity for scientists in the Arabidopsis community, as well as other plant
biologists to meet and share the latest research, are a key component in the
continuing success of the worldwide Arabidopsis community. ICARs have proven to
be a highly effective venue for enhancing information exchange, creating new
networks and establishing new collaborations. The ICARs are also critical to
facilitate higher-level organization of the plant research community by
providing a venue for groups like the International Arabidopsis Informatics
Consortium, the Multinational Arabidopsis Steering Committee, and the North
American Arabidopsis Steering Committee to convene annually. These meetings
allow discussions of the current status of the international Arabidopsis
community as well as development of future plans and research directions.
Ensuring the participation of scientists from diverse backgrounds is critical to
the vitality of science in the U.S. A key goal is to increase participation
among under-represented minority scientists and early-career scientists. To this
end, participation will be supported for under-represented minority scientists
and faculty from Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Minority Serving
Institutions, and 1890 Institutions. In addition, participation of graduate
students, postdoctoral scholars, and beginning investigators will be fostered
through travel awards to attend the conference. The conference program and
abstracts will be publicly available on the conference website and archived at
the Arabidopsis database.