* 1314088
* A novel antibody based biomarker for toxicity of chronic domoic acid exposure
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2019
* David Marcinek, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2019
* USD 1,304,607.00

Accumulation of the neurotoxic amino acid domoic acid (DA), a phycotoxin
naturally produced during harmful algal blooms (HABs), in the food web poses
significant health threats to humans and wildlife and is responsible for a
neurotoxic illness known as amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP). Regular
monitoring of DA levels in edible shellfish tissues has been effective in
protecting human consumers from acute high-level DA exposure. However, there is
no protection from chronic low-level DA exposure, which may pose significant
human health risks, particularly in coastal and tribal communities that
subsistence harvest shellfish known to contain low levels of the toxin. Due to
increasing algal toxin exposure threats globally, there is a critical need for
rapid and reliable diagnostic tests for assessing chronic DA exposure in human
and wildlife populations, and for evidence that clearly establishes the
relationship between chronic DA exposure, biomarker response, and health
impacts.

In this proposal a research team led by a scientist at the University of
Washington will test the hypothesis that the presence of a DA-specific antibody
is a biomarker for chronic low-level exposure that can be linked to subclinical
health impacts in a mouse model system. Recently, this team has discovered (1) a
novel antibody based biomarker that is a specific signature for chronic low-
level DA exposure and pathology, and (2) that chronic exposure increases toxin
susceptibility in subsequent exposures in a zebrafish chronic exposure model. In
study the specific objectives are (1) to test the timing and duration of the
antibody response following chronic, low-level DA exposure in mice, (2) to
determine whether this response is indicative of subclinical neurotoxicity, and
(3) to test whether previous exposures to DA affect subsequent toxic
susceptibility. The new insight will be whether the presence of a DA-specific
antibody is a reliable indicator of previously undetectable chronic DA
exposures, and in turn an accurate predictor of significant health effects.

Broader Impacts: Chronic, low-level exposure to DA is a genuine concern for
members of coastal and tribal communities who routinely harvest and consume
shellfish. Currently, the only way to assess exposure in humans is through
shellfish consumption surveys. This study will be an important first step
towards developing a viable diagnostic test for assessing health impacts of
chronic low-level DA exposure and will be an important tool for monitoring
changes in exposure risks associated with changing ocean conditions.

JOINT FUNDING BY NSF AND NIEHS: The original proposal on which this project is
based (R01 ES021930-01) was submitted to the National Institutes of
Environmental Health Sciences (NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding Opportunity
Announcement RFA-ES-11-013 , "Oceans, Great Lakes and Human Health (R01)", an
opportunity jointly sponsored by NSF. This project is cooperatively funded
through separate awards from NSF and NIEHS.