* 1314164
* I-Corps:  AppScale -- Spurring Innovation Through Cloud Application Portability
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2013
* Chandra Krintz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This work addresses what researchers believe are the key impediments to the
adoption of cloud computing for scientific as well as commercial advance:
portability and application development support for emerging and future cloud
systems. The project plan proposes to explore the market viability of combining
an open source cloud portability platform (one that executes applications over
disparate cloud infrastructures without modification - individually or in
concert (cloud hybrids)), with plug-in features that enable new capabilities not
available today (cloud hot-swapping of applications, cloud application
debugging, disaster/outage recover, large scale data analytics over application
data, etc.). The approach enables developers to participate in cloud application
life cycle, security, fault tolerance, and cost, simply and efficiently. The
runtime support exploits how cloud systems are designed and implemented to
automate placement and scheduling, to extract high performance, and to
virtualize extant and future cloud services. Such virtualization will enable
applications to be written against a single service application programming
interface, implemented using multiple cloud fabrics, with high performance and
scalability.

If successful, this project has the potential for broad impact by facilitating
easy and effective cloud application development by a vast and diverse user
community. By employing an open source model, this offers the benefits of open
source (marketing, collaboration, visibility, self-support, customer confidence
building) and makes a software system freely available and therefore widely
accessible. This system can thus be used, investigated, and extended in
educational and low-income settings free of charge. This approach is also unique
in that the goal is to provide a universal platform that levels the playing
field across cloud vendors. Developers write programs that execute over the open
source application platform, which in turn executes on a wide variety of
proprietary public cloud systems - as well as local, private clusters. This
application thus precludes lock-in by any single cloud vendor and enables
customers to "test drive" public cloud offerings locally in a private setting
prior to paying for their use.