* 1314655
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative:  A Unified Statistics-Based Framework for Side-Channel Attack Analysis and Security Evaluation of Cryptosystems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Aidong Ding, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Fen Zhao
* 06/30/2017
* USD 538,102.00

Side-channel attack (SCA) has shown to be a serious implementation attack to
many cryptosystems. Practical countermeasures only mitigate the vulnerability to
some extent. Considerable research efforts on leakage-resilient cryptography
have so far not led to practical leakage-resilient implementations. One
hindering reason is the lack of commonly accepted and sound metrics, standards,
and evaluation procedures to measure and evaluate the vulnerability/resilience
of cryptosystems to various side-channel attacks. Accurate modeling of side
channels, however, is one of the open problems in applied crypto research. This
project aims to close the gap between SCA theories and practices by formalizing
a general framework for side-channel attack analysis and security evaluation of
cryptosystems.

The proposed framework quantifies the effect of algorithmic and implementation
characteristics on the success rate of the theoretically strongest maximum
likelihood attack, revealing system-inherent SCA-related parameters for security
improvement. The framework will extract maximum leakage from the observed
measurement data in the black-box scenario, often the realistic situation for
adversaries. State-of-the-art statistical methods are employed in the framework
to precisely analyze and evaluate the overall side-channel leakage. This
holistic framework will significantly alleviate the burden of security system
architects, software developers, and hardware designers in their quest to build
SCA security into systems they design, so as to ultimately yield provably secure
hardware.