* 1314143
* Ds Regional Mutagenesis:  A Platform for Defining Gene Function in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Thomas Brutnell, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* carlos vallejos
* 09/30/2016
* USD 979,208.00

PI: Thomas P. Brutnell (Donald Danforth Plant Science Center)

CoPI: Erik W. Vollbrecht (Iowa State University)

Key Collaborator: Jonathan P. Duvick (Iowa State University)

Maize is the most economically important food, feed and biofuel crop grown in
the US. Its predominance as a staple grain for the US and abroad is built on an
extremely broad germplasm base and upon highly successful breeding efforts.
However, as world population and energy costs increase at an alarming rate, we
are faced with the need for a second green revolution. This will include
developing second generation crops and developing new germplasm with enhanced
resistance to drought, salt tolerance and improved nitrogen use efficiency. At
the core of these efforts is a need to link genotype to phenotype. That is, how
does genotypic variation contribute to phenotypic variation? Mutational analysis
has been the cornerstone of genetics and has been an essential tool to link
genotypic variation to phenotypic variation. Thus, the goal of this project is
to develop an extremely powerful reverse genetics resource to define gene
function in maize. A sequence-indexed collection of over 1,500 Ds insertion
lines will serve as a foundation for this project. The tendency of Ds to insert
to closely linked sites will be exploited to generate loss-of-function gene
insertions, map the boundaries of genes, including promoter and enhancer
elements, and define the gene space in QTL intervals. A community-driven, tiered
"Ds knockout" service will be developed to extend the utility of Ds insertional
mutagenesis to serve scientists with varying resources. Candidate genes will be
solicited from the community with the expectation that multiple alleles of each
targeted gene will be recovered from local Ds insertions. A web-based public
interface will also be developed to provide detailed information on the Ds
insertions available in the collection as well as new tools for designing
reverse genetic screens that incorporate the insertion site preferences of Ds.

A central aim of this project is to bring the excitement of ongoing plant
science research into high school classrooms through innovative curricula. For
each of the three years of the grant, a Curriculum Development Workshop (CDW)
will be held at the Boyce Thompson Institute. The goal of the CDW is to develop
inquiry-based plant science activities for high school, community college and
small college biology courses. Teachers will receive funding for necessary lab
and teaching materials and will work with a postdoctoral associate and an
outreach coordinator to implement these modules during the academic year.
Workshops will also be held to train graduate students, postdocs and PI in the
genetic and molecular techniques required to best exploit the Ds lines developed
during this project. Data generated through this project, project updates and
links to genetic materials will be posted at
http://www.plantgdb.org/prj/AcDsTagging/ and http://www.maizegdb.org/