* 1314752
* Collaborative Research: Direct Search for Dark Matter with Underground Argon at LNGS
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2018
* Andrew Alton, Augustana University Association
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2018
* USD 76,000.00

The existence of dark matter is inferred from gravitational effects, but its
nature remains a deep mystery. One possibility, motivated by considerations in
elementary particle physics, is that dark matter consists of the hypothesized
Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs). It should be possible to detect
WIMPs directly, as the orbital motion of the WIMPs composing the dark matter
halo pervading the galaxy should result in WIMP-nucleus collisions of sufficient
energy to be observable in the laboratory. This collaboration utilizes funds to
commission and operate DarkSide-50, a WIMP search using a Liquid Argon Time
Projection Chamber (LAr-TPC) with an active mass of 50 kg. DarkSide-50 will use
argon extracted from underground sources (Underground Argon, UAr), which this
group has shown to have an Ar-39 content lower, by at least a factor of 150,
than atmospheric argon. Ar-39 is one of the main sources of background in the
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant by-product of this group's
research has been developing techniques that could find application in areas
ranging from national security to medical imaging. This arises from the
extraction of rare noble gases (Argon and Helium) from underground sources, and
possible applications include the detection of underground nuclear tests and in
Environmental Science where Argon is used as a detection media in ultra-low
level proportional counter measurements for an environmental radio tracer for
hydrologic transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid argon is an attractive medium
for WIMP detection due to its efficient conversion of energy from WIMP-induced
nuclear recoils into both ionization and scintillation. The argon scintillation
time profile ("pulse shape") depends on the type of ionizing particle, providing
particle discrimination that can be used to suppress background. Pulse shape
discrimination in argon provides one of the most powerful background rejections
among all dark matter technologies; when combined with the measurement of
ionization, the background rejection is further enhanced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will advance the development of
astroparticle physics and its scientific and educational mission by: (1)
offering a continuing excellent opportunity for the training of students, who
will contribute to the success of a cutting-edge project; (2) developing
techniques that could find application in several areas of benefit to society;
and (3) supporting a new education and outreach program, designed to succeed the
highly successful Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso-South Dakota-Princeton
summer school.