* 1314484
* CPS:Medium:Quantitative Visual Sensing of Dynamic Behaviors for Home-based Progressive Rehabilitation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/29/2012,11/30/2016
* Yun Fu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2016
* USD 1,027,398.00

The objective of this research is to develop a comprehensive theoretical and
experimental cyber-physical framework to enable intelligent human-environment
interaction capabilities by a synergistic combination of computer vision and
robotics. Specifically, the approach is applied to examine individualized remote
rehabilitation with an intelligent, articulated, and adjustable lower limb
orthotic brace to manage Knee Osteoarthritis, where a visual-sensing/dynamical-
systems perspective is adopted to: (1) track and record patient/device
interactions with internet-enabled commercial-off-the-shelf computer-vision-
devices; (2) abstract the interactions into parametric and composable low-
dimensional manifold representations; (3) link to quantitative biomechanical
assessment of the individual patients; (4) facilitate development of
individualized user models and exercise regimen; and (5) aid the progressive
parametric refinement of exercises and adjustment of bracing devices. This
research and its results will enable us to understand underlying human neuro-
musculo-skeletal and locomotion principles by merging notions of quantitative
data acquisition, and lower-order modeling coupled with individualized feedback.
Beyond efficient representation, the quantitative visual models offer the
potential to capture fundamental underlying physical, physiological, and
behavioral mechanisms grounded on biomechanical assessments, and thereby afford
insights into the generative hypotheses of human
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knee osteoarthritis is an important public health
issue, because of high costs associated with treatments. The ability to leverage
a quantitative paradigm, both in terms of diagnosis and prescription, to improve
mobility and reduce pain in patients would be a significant benefit. Moreover,
the home-based rehabilitation setting offers not only immense flexibility, but
also access to a significantly greater portion of the patient population. The
project is also integrated with extensive educational and outreach activities to
serve a variety of communities.