* 1314675
* SBIR Phase I:  Beyond the Smart Grid: Vehicle-Solar-Grid Integration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Paul Kydd, Partnerships One, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,974.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will determine
the feasibility of integrating existing grid-tied solar inverters with the
emerging fleet of electric vehicle storage batteries as a low-cost pathway to
the electric transportation energy supply of the future, and to create financial
incentives for both electric vehicle and solar energy owners. The proposed
project will demonstrate hardware and communications software to couple an
existing grid-tied solar inverter and an existing electric vehicle battery and
charger to signals from the local Independent System Operator (ISO). The
alternative proposed here, which can enable V2G operation for any vehicle
equipped with a DC charging port quickly and inexpensively, is to link the
inverter either directly to the vehicle battery or through a low-cost ($300/kW)
DC-DC converter, along with the existing vehicle charger, to perform this
service. The inverter is not currently used during the hours of darkness, and
the vehicle is available for charging at night using low-cost off-peak power.
Success with this alternative could lead quickly to a network of grid-tied
vehicles providing ancillary services during the nighttime hours and utilizing
expensive vehicle batteries and solar inverters more effectively than at
present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project results from the emergence of electric vehicles in large numbers and of
web-based communication and control technology. This presents a unique
opportunity to integrate the energy supply for personal transportation with the
electric utility system to create a distributed, remotely-dispatchable electric-
power storage capacity. This capacity can provide valuable ancillary services
for frequency regulation, synchronized (spinning) reserve and demand management
for improved grid stability and capacity utilization. Electric power storage
capacity is particularly relevant in relation to renewable power generation,
which is uncontrollable due to its dependence on the wind and the sun. At the
same time, the revenue from these services can provide an incentive to the
owners of electric vehicles by realizing the latent value of their large and
expensive electric storage batteries, and to the owners of solar energy systems.
Focusing only on frequency regulation, there is an existing nationwide market of
approximately $1.8 billion per year for services that electric vehicle batteries
can provide better than existing power plants. A technology and a business model
are needed for an aggregator to stand between the individual vehicle owners and
the ISOs who require the service. Demonstration of a novel approach to this
technology with existing vehicles at the Penn State GridSTAR facility in
Philadelphia, PA, is the objective of this Phase I project.