* 1314758
* Collaborative Research: Transmission of Quantum Information in Circuits of Superconducting Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Dmitri Averin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

Quantum computers have the potential to solve problems that are completely
impossible for classical computers, ranging from cryptography for national
defense to face recognition and drug development. Just as the transistor is the
building block of all modern digital circuits, the quantum bit (aka the qubit)
is the heart of a quantum computer. Superconducting qubits, which are
essentially artificial two-level atoms that can be designed and fabricated using
integrated circuit technology, have emerged as one of the top candidates for
realizing scalable quantum information processing. In order to perform quantum
computation successfully, quantum computing circuits must be able to transfer
quantum information rapidly among a large number of qubits with high fidelity.
However, because existing protocols for quantum information transfer (QIT) are
in general an order of magnitude slower than single qubit gates, QIT has become
the bottleneck for quantum computation. Furthermore, conventional methods of QIT
either require a large amount of on-chip real estate or have relatively low
quality factor leading to lower efficiency and fidelity. Therefore, it is
difficult to scale up qubit circuits to a practically useful size with these
protocols. The focus of this project is to demonstrate the basic elements of a
novel method of quantum information transmission in superconducting qubit
circuits. This new approach uses "dual-rail arrays of negative-inductance
Superconducting QUantum Interference Devices (nSQUIDs)" as the information
transmitting structures for significant improvement over the current state-of-
the-art QIT protocols. The negative mutual inductance between the branches of an
nSQUID assigns the two tasks of processing and transferring quantum information
to different parts of the nSQUID circuit and therefore makes it possible to
optimize parameters of each part for its particular task, so that much faster
QIT can be achieved. The success of the project will thus remove one of the most
critical roadblocks to building quantum computers. Therefore, knowledge and
insights gained from the project activities can be readily applied to other
superconducting qubit based quantum computing
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum information research has emerged as a
highly competitive cutting edge research field which is actively pursued by all
major nations around the world. It is critically important to national security
and to maintaining United States' leadership position in scientific discoveries
and technological innovations. This collaborative project between theoretical
and experimental groups in quantum circuit physics provides a good opportunity
for education and training of the graduate and undergraduate students in one of
the frontiers of scientific exploration. The project also includes significant
outreach and education activities such as improving the undergraduate and
graduate classes in Quantum Computing developed with previous NSF support at the
University of Kansas and Stony Brook University; involving undergraduates into
quantum information research at Kansas; and presenting colloquia on quantum
information at local high schools, colleges and universities.