* 1314721
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: HCPN: Hybrid Circuit/Packet Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* David Andersen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2018
* USD 599,444.00

Ever-larger data centers are powering the cloud computing revolution, but the
scale of these installations is currently limited by the ability to provide
sufficient internal network connectivity. Delivering scalable packet-switched
interconnects that can support the continually increasing data rates required
between literally hundreds of thousands of servers is an extremely challenging
problem that is only getting harder. This project leverages microsecond optical
circuit-switch technology to develop a hybrid switching paradigm that spans the
gap between traditional circuit switching and full-fledged packet switching,
achieving a level of performance and scale not previously attainable. This will
result in a hybrid switch whose optical switching capacity is orders of
magnitude larger than the electrical packet switch, yet whose performance from
an end-to-end perspective is largely indistinguishable from a giant (electrical)
packet switch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides a quantitative
baseline for hybrid network design across a wide range of present and future
technologies. The project will consist of five parts: i) traffic
characterization to identify the class of network traffic that a circuit switch
can support as well as the partitioning of the traffic between the circuit and
packet portions of the network; ii) circuit scheduling to enable the circuit
switch to rapidly multiplex a set of circuits across a large set of data center
traffic flows; iii) traffic conditioning to reduce the variability of traffic at
the end hosts, easing the demands placed on switch scheduling; iv) a prototype
hybrid network that can use an optical circuit switch that operates three orders
of magnitude faster than existing solutions; and v) a trend analysis to
understand the tradeoffs resulting from potential future technology
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work stands to dramatically improve data
center networks, significantly reducing operating costs and increasing energy
efficiency. The research material will be incorporated into courses, helping to
train the next generation of computer networking scientists and engineers. The
PIs will also continue ongoing outreach to high school students, both through
the UCSD COSMOS summer program and through talks delivered at local high
schools.