* 1314896
* CGV:  Large:  Collaborative Research: Coupling Simulation and Mesh Generation using Computational Topology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Valerio Pascucci, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,194,978.00

Many simulation algorithms depend on an underlying spatial discretization---a
mesh that decomposes the domain into a finite set of elements that can be
analyzed by a computer. The quality of the simulation is, in part, determined by
the quality of the mesh. However, in the past, mesh generation and simulation
were done as separate processes. Better results can be achieved by tightly
integrating simulation with mesh generation and recent advices in computational
topology provide the key to doing so. Computational topology allows for the
analysis of the structure of data---in this case simulation variables. By
understanding the structure of the simulation the mesh generation algorithms can
adapt to it, providing meshes that are closely linked to the actual
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because simulation is a powerful tool for
discovery throughout computational science, this research has the potential to
have broad impact across all fields of science and enable new scientific
breakthroughs that could have tremendous societal impact. This research will
also produce open-source software, short courses, and workshops around the topic
of coupling simulation and meshing. The interdisciplinary nature of this project
will lead to a rich educational and research environment for graduate and
undergraduate students. The project web site provides access to research
results, software and educational materials
(http://sealab.cs.utah.edu/SimulationMeshingTopology).