* 1314127
* Collaborative Research:   Characterizing the Roles of Atmospheric Structure and Clouds on the Radiation and Precipitation Budgets at Summit, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Ralf Bennartz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 10/31/2013
* USD 279,093.00

Funds are provided to characterize the interactions among the atmospheric state,
cloud properties, radiation, and precipitation at Summit, Greenland. The
objective is to investigate a number of important cloud-related processes, how
these interact with the Arctic climate system, and their impact on the surface
energy and mass budgets. Specific foci will include:&lt;br/&gt;1) Low-cloud
persistence mechanisms that lead to long-lived Arctic stratiform clouds, which
interact strongly with the atmospheric structure and surface energy
budget;&lt;br/&gt;2) Cloud-phase partitioning, which determines the cloud
microphysical composition and, ultimately, the effects that clouds have on
atmospheric radiation and the hydrologic cycle; and&lt;br/&gt;3) Precipitation
partitioning, in order to understand the different modes of precipitation at
Summit and how these impact the total surface accumulation.&lt;br/&gt;To address
these topics, this project will utilize detailed observations from a suite of
ground-based remote sensors deployed at Summit as part of the NSF/AON-funded
ICECAPS project in combination with data from satellite-borne active remote
sensors. High-resolution numerical modeling will also be used to investigate
many of the fine-scale cloud processes and their mesoscale influences. These
studies over the Greenland Ice Sheet will also be considered within the context
of similar measurements and model studies made at other Arctic locations in
order to understand these important processes over Summit and, in a more general
sense, across the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric water vapor, clouds,
and precipitation greatly affect the surface energy and cryospheric mass
balances in the Arctic, and are responsible for much of the variability in these
balances. It is thought that recent rapid melting of Arctic sea ice may be
driven, in part, by changes in cloud cover and radiation. Cloud-related
processes and feedbacks are known to be one of the greatest sources of
uncertainty in global climate models, and these shortcomings have been clearly
identified in model simulations over the Arctic. Thus, the results of this
project should improve our understanding of Arctic cloud processes and their
inclusion in climate models, which, in turn, will improve
predictability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; As broader impacts of this research, the
project will provide important data analysis and integration experience for four
new graduate students at the participating universities. In addition, data and
results from this study will be integrated into undergraduate coursework and
summer workshops for high school students and teachers.