* 1314673
* SBIR Phase I:  Sensor for Hazardous Static Voltage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Paul Martin, Chameleon Optics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
synthesis of electrochromic materials to fabricate a sensor for hazardous static
voltage. This device will visibly warn of the build-up of dangerous static
charge on a surface. In prior work, we have developed electrochromic materials
to produce flexible electrochromic films that change reversibly from neutral
gray to clear upon the application of a low voltage (1.5 volts). However, this
application requires electrochromic pigments with bright colors and an ion-
conductive dielectric that can tolerate a potential of up to 100 kV. In this
project, brilliant primary-color electrochromic metal ferrocyanide nano-pigments
will be synthesized, and the existing ion conductive dielectric will be
substantially reformulated to tolerate extremely high electric potentials. These
materials will be incorporated into a static charge sensor which will be useful
in a wide range of industries.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project arises from the
significant hazards associated with static electricity. The first application
for this sensor is the aircraft industry, where an uncontrolled static discharge
can result in catastrophic loss of facilities, vehicles and personnel. However,
the market opportunities for the sensor are much broader, encompassing virtually
any facility that synthesizes, manipulates, stores, or transports non-conductive
materials. Of particular note are facilities which handle flammable vapors or
dusts, such as oil refiners or grain mills. Flammable vapors account for about
70% of all explosive atmosphere detonations, with the most severe costing dozens
of lives and causing hundreds of millions of dollars in damage. Furthermore,
there are on average 12 explosions resulting annually from flammable dusts,
resulting in two fatalities and millions of dollars of damage per year. Timely
warning of dangerous static charge could help prevent these accidents. Less
dramatically but still of economic importance, this sensor would improve yield
in other industries adversely affected by static discharge, such as integrated
circuit fabricators. Based on data from the U.S. Business Census, there are
about 386,000 firms operating 538,000 establishments with a total of 13 million
employees that could benefit from the device to be developed.