* 1314291
* 2013 Summer Bioengineering Conference
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Charles Lee, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 05/31/2014
* USD 20,800.00

The goal of this award is to help increase student attendance and participation
at the 15th 2013 Summer Bioengineering Conference (SBC) sponsored by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers to be held in Sunriver, Oregon June
26-29, 2013. The primary purpose of the SBC is to promote state-of-the-art
research, collaboration, and scientific discourse in the broad field of
bioengineering with focus on biomechanical engineering, encompassing molecular
to tissue and organism-level approaches. This conference highlights students,
promotes advancement in their education and furthers their careers towards
becoming future leaders in bioengineering. The theme for this year is
Translational Research. The selections of the plenary speaker, workshops, and
highlighted sessions will serve to inform, educate and inspire attendees about
the importance of and pathways for translating their technologies.

The award will allow the conference organizers to reduce student registration
fees and provide complimentary student registration to 36 Ph.D. finalists in the
Student Paper Competition. All abstracts submitted are 2-page extended abstracts
and the Ph.D. student finalists are selected after a rigorous review process (3
reviewers per abstract). Six finalists for each technical area are selected by
the SPC committee and the students present their work in 6 parallel podium
sessions. In addition, the conference also supports an MS and BS poster
competition as part of the Student Paper Competition with the awards
presentation

All presentations are documented in the two-page extended abstract format and
compiled in a CD that is distributed to all registrants. Copyright is provided
and an ISBN number issued to allow appropriate archiving of the conference
material.