* 1314249
* Unitary Qubit Lattice Algorithms for Quantum Turbulence with Non-Abeliam Vortices
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Min Soe, Rogers State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 74,591.00

This project will pursue the development of unitary qubit lattice algorithms
(QULA) to solve problems in nonlinear physics by extending ideas used in lattice
Boltzmann and lattice gas algorithms. QULA for scalar 2D and 3D Bose-Einstein
condensates (BEC) have already provided new information on the unexpected
behavior of continuum Hamiltonians. The major thrust of this project will be to
examine energy spectral cascades in spinor-BEC quantum turbulence where the flow
involves both Abelian and non-Abelian vortices. Such spinor quantum turbulence
has yet to be simulated in any real detail, particularly in 3D, and the novel
algorithms developed here can be viewed as a mesoscopic model for nonlinear
physics. This research is also expected to have a profound impact on plasma and
space physics applications, as QULA will allow for the study of magneto-
hydrodynamics turbulence and magnetic reconnection. The QULA algorithms are
manifestly unitary and can be readily encoded onto future quantum computers.

The broad impacts of this project include the training of the workforce of the
future, with graduate and undergraduate students having the opportunity to learn
and work in an important field of scientific inquiry. Students will acquire
hands-on experience on the use of high-performance computational platforms, as
QULA scale ideally on modern supercomputers and the scaling was tested up to
several hundreds of thousands of cores.