* 1314792
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Long-term Active User Authentication Using Multi-modal Profiles
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Stephanie Schuckers, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 430,000.00

This project aims at advancing the state-of-the-art in cybersecurity by
developing efficient methods for generating novel biometric signatures and
performing active and continuous user authentication. Current authentication
procedures typically occur once at the initial log-in stage and involve user
proxies such as passwords and smart cards which suffer from several
vulnerabilities. This research addresses these limitations by developing
probabilistic, generative models to represent multimodal biometrics of every
user in the system, so that any significant deviation from the user-specific
model flags the presence of an imposter. This novel technique specifically
targets mitigation of masquerading attacks which are particularly challenging to
detect as they are mostly carried out by insiders familiar with the activity
patterns of the authorized user. The approach enables identification of
intruders before they can hijack a user session of an authorized individual who
may have momentarily stepped away from his/her console.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project also involves extensive usability tests for seamless integration of the
authentication processes in real-life computer and network systems, thus
ensuring that data about the behavior and performance of people using the
network is fed-back and incorporated into future designs of the security
protocols. The methods also readily extend to protecting both wired and wireless
networks, and mobile devices.