* 1314228
* SBIR Phase I:  Personal radiation biodosimetry using thin-film acoustic resonators
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Matthew Johnston, Bialanx, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a personal
radiation biodosimetry platform for point-of-care assessment of radiation
exposure. This utilizes a novel sensor array platform that will enable label-
free biomarker quantification in a low-cost, active disposable format. This
technology leverages the power and economies of scale of integrated circuits,
built up over the previous fifty years for high-performance computation and
imaging, for low-cost, bioelectronic applications. Thin-film bulk acoustic
resonators (FBARs) are incorporated directly with silicon integrated circuits to
form a dense biosensor array. Integration with a custom microchip enables
parallel measurement of dozens of sensors in a few square millimeters. Combined
with antibody immobilization, this enables multiplex protein assays in real time
through a simple digital interface. Phase I of this effort will demonstrate a
sensitive bioelectronic assay for the established radiation exposure marker
gamma-H2A.X to assess feasibility of the technology for biodosimetry
applications. This effort includes the development of a lysate-based gamma-H2A.X
immunosorbent assay, adaptation of this assay to the sensor platform, and
demonstration of the integrated biodosimetry device.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the disruptive
improvement of existing radiation biodosimetry solutions. Current strategies for
minimally-invasive biodosimetry rely on the establishment of centralized testing
centers with high-throughput assay processing. Samples must be collected and
transported to a testing center, with transportation networks often compromised
alongside a radiation release event. A point-of-care biodosimetry platform would
allow on-site dose quantitation for appropriate medical triage and emergency
management. This is a critical and unmet need for the preparation and response
to a nuclear release event. As a commercial product, the device would be
purchased for pre-deployment to areas at risk for nuclear release and radiation
exposure, including urban centers, nuclear reactor sites, hospitals, and local
clinics. Potential customers include federal, state, and municipal authorities,
commercial nuclear reactor operators, hospitals, and medical clinics. A
successful product implementation will extend the reach of current biodosimetry
test networks outward from central laboratories directly to emergency response
sites. In the long term, the underlying technology employed here will lay the
foundation for a host of multiplexed point-of-care applications, with clear
clinical and commercial opportunities in infectious disease, cancer diagnostics,
autoimmune disease monitoring, trauma response, and in-the-field medical
testing.