* 1314144
* Elucidating the genetic determinants of organ identity using the C. elegans reproductive organs as a model
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Laura Mathies, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2015
* USD 444,309.00

How cells acquire their identity is a fundamental question in Developmental
Biology and one that has gained additional importance in the era of stem cell
biology. In order to harness the potential of adult stems cells, the genetic
factors that give them their unique potential must be understood. This potential
is intimately linked with their tissue of origin. In this project, the
reproductive organs of the worm Caenorhabditis elegans are used as a model for
defining the genetic determinants of organ identity. All somatic tissues of C.
elegans reproductive organs derive from two somatic gonadal precursor cells
(SGPs). The SGPs undergo a set of cell divisions to generate five mature tissues
in the female organ or four mature tissues in the male organ. The potential to
generate these particular cell types is imparted to the SGPs at their birth;
their sister cells differentiate shortly after they are born. A combination of
molecular, biochemical, and genetic experiments will be used to incorporate
newly identified genes into a genetic model for organ identity and to identify
critical early regulators of SGP identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of
this work will be a more complete understanding of the genetic controls of organ
identity and multipotency, which has the potential to impact significantly the
basic understanding of all stem cells, including human stem cells. An integral
part of this research project is the development of an advanced undergraduate
genetics lab course that will introduce students to inquiry-based research. In
addition, this project will provide training for future US scientists, in that
several undergraduate students, two graduate students, and one postdoctoral
fellow will be engaged in conducting the research in this project.