* 1315494
* SBIR Phase I:  Sketch-based interaction for designing for laser cutters
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Gabriel Johnson, Blank Slate Systems
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation of sketch-based interaction for agile manufacturing substantially
lowers the barrier to entry for novice engineers and designers. Low-cost rapid
prototyping hardware -- 3-D printers and laser cutters -- offers tremendous
educational potential, enabling students to personally design, engineer, and
build complex artifacts. This potential can only be realized if students have
modeling tools that facilitate such exploration. Unfortunately current design
software is hard to learn and use and its graphical interface and feature set is
poorly suited to exploratory prototyping. These problems impose a barrier: faced
with baffling interfaces many students wrongly "learn" that engineering design
is beyond their capabilities. This novel interaction paradigm aims to remove
this barrier by allowing learners to sketch what they want to make, quickly and
precisely. The Sketch It, Make It software will provide a paper-like interface
where designers create CAD drawings while retaining the creative and cognitive
advantages of freehand sketching. Combining sketch recognition and constraint
management in a tablet computer, freehand drawing could provide a powerful,
seamless interface to digital fabrication. This project will determine whether a
tablet computer can support a freehand drawing interface and whether it supports
student fabrication projects; and it will develop an architecture for sketch-
based design tools.

The broader/commercial impact: The market for rapid fabrication -- laser cutters
and 3-D printers -- is growing rapidly in both formal and informal education. As
schools, fab labs and eventually individuals acquire hardware, students and
other users will find that the software to operate this machinery is unwieldy
and complicated. The proposed software tools address a critical customer need:
make it easy to design for rapid fabrication. More generally, the proposed
innovative interaction paradigm has broad application in commercial software in
any domain where people sketch or make diagrams. Rapid fabrication gives
students opportunities to learn design by doing it. Making design accessible to
all empowers citizens to play active roles in engineering their world. By
sidestepping barriers that standard CAD tools impose, Sketch It, Make It enables
students to design and make things they otherwise could not have made. Students
learn that engineering design and fabrication is fun, useful, and (most
importantly) that they can do it. The underlying innovation --integrating
recognition with constraint management -- if widely adopted, can transform
human-computer interaction. After thirty years of mouse-driven interfaces,
tablet computers demand new forms of interaction. Through Sketch It, Make It we
may learn to think differently about interacting with computers.