* 1315099
* SBIR Phase I:  Source-code recovery from machine code for security analysis and enforcement
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Aparna Kotha, SecondWrite
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation in this project is to develop software to recover equivalent C
source-code programs from commercial off-the shelf machine-code programs
compiled from any programming language, and then analyze the code for security
purposes. Optional run-time checks for security enforcement can be injected in
the output code. The output source-code is functional: it can be modified,
recompiled, and executed as required. Because of extensive executable analyses,
the recovered source-code is readily comprehensible with features like symbols,
types, functions, arguments, return values, and control-flow constructs.
Alternately, the mechanism can recover the intermediate representation of a
well-known open-source compiler, allowing machine-code analyses with source-code
compiler methods. This is a significant advancement in bridging the gap between
machine-code and source-code analysis. The current prototype has been
successfully evaluated with executables compiled from over two million lines of
source code. Additional research is being conducted in two directions. First,
methods are being devised to detect interesting features in malicious software
like the underlying communication mechanism, input/output channels and
information flow. These methods are enhanced by innovations in analyzing memory
locations in machine code, rather than just registers, yielding greater analysis
precision. Second, several hybrid methods are being explored to statically
analyze obfuscated executables, optionally aided by dynamic
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of the
innovation is a dramatic improvement in the speed, efficiency and efficacy in
countering cyber threats, bringing a game-changing capability in cybersecurity
for both desktop and mobile platforms. President Obama recently cited cyber-
threats as one of our most serious economic and national security challenges.
Cyber-crime costs the US economy billions of dollars and poses a direct threat
to our national infrastructure and financial institutions. The losses from theft
of intellectual property alone cost American companies around $250 Billion per
year. The innovation has the potential to enable orders-of-magnitude
productivity improvements across the cyber security spectrum including malware
analysis, exposing undesirable behavior in untrusted code, detecting
vulnerabilities from proprietary software, and enforcing security. The mechanism
being developed results in a precise discovery of features and robust defense
measures against the threats. It also enables modification and maintenance of
legacy software whose source code has been lost. Consequently, the mechanism
enables a substantially faster, automated, and more detailed analysis of cyber-
threats resulting in a more robust defense capability. This ability directly
contributes to minimizing losses to the US economy. Better protection of our IP
and trade secrets also contributes to minimizing American job losses.