* 1315633
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficiency and Systems Improvements for Public Safety Radio Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Andrew McCandless, Bascom Hunter Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop leap-ahead improvement to public safety radio networks (PSRN). The
problems associated with communication during a catastrophic event are well
documented. One area of particular concern is the unreliability of PSRN.
Generally speaking the PSRN performance is worst when the system is needed most;
in the early stages of a disaster response. For example, the 9-11 Commission
Recommendation Card released on Sept. 1, 2011, specifically identified the PSRN
for first responders as a major weakness in disaster preparedness. Further, the
simple allocation of additional spectrum in public safety radio bands will not
fully address the problem. Taking into account the unique restrictions attached
to PSRN, this project will provide leap-ahead improvement in efficiency of
wireless communication bandwidth by minimizing the harmful effects of
interference and allowing graceful degradation of wireless systems. The program
will utilize recently developed RF interference cancellation technologies and
apply them to commercial wireless communication applications. Further new
resource allocation algorithms will be developed. The initial focus will be on
public safety radio networks, but can be applied a wide range of wireless
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to address the demand for RF bandwidth which has been growing
exponentially. This demand is driven by almost unlimited consumer demand for
wireless communication services. Though broadband wireless access networks
appear to be ubiquitous, we are rapidly running out of bandwidth as the radio
spectrum becomes more crowded. By 2015, the demand for data traffic is expected
to increase by over 3000%, according to Bernstein Research. To accommodate such
an increase in usage, cell towers are being located closer together, thus
increasing their interference. In addition, the Federal Communication Commission
regulates bandwidth usage with a very static allocation approach. As a result,
large amounts of spectrum are underutilized while other parts of the spectrum
are saturated, creating unnecessary bottlenecks. The proposed program will
demonstrate technology that will substantially improve the efficiency of
spectrum usage.