* 1315995
* Building Capacity for Science Standards through Networked Improvement Communities
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Jessica Thompson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2017
* USD 866,008.00

The college and career readiness standards in science represent both a challenge
and an opportunity for educators. The opportunity lies in the vision that new
standards set for the creation of a STEM ready workforce and scientifically
literate citizens. Specifically, the standards clarify important content and
science practices that students should be proficient in by the time they
graduate. The bar is set higher for students, not only in terms of the content
and practices but also in terms of the inherent linguistic demands of
participating in the practices. Consequently, more will be required of teachers,
teacher educators and the broader education community.

This project brings together teams of teachers, teacher educators,
administrators, and researchers to inquire into the development of ambitious and
equitable practices that support learning the scientific practices (such as
developing and using scientific models, and building evidence-based scientific
explanations and arguments, communicating findings, etc.) and creating scaffolds
for the special language demands of the scientific practices, particularly for
English Language Learners (Lee, Quinn & Valdés, 2013). The researchers are
implementing a model for change referred to as a Networked Improvement
Community, or NIC (Bryk, Gomez & Grunow, 2011). This community will link Local
Improvement Networks (LINs are groups of teachers, teacher educators,
administrators and researchers) through a web-based technological infrastructure
to support the continual improvement of rigorous and equitable forms of
classroom instruction. The LINs are all working with high English Language
Learner populations and are committed to improving science instruction for all
students. The investigators are helping LINs define a problem space using the
standards, performance progressions for ambitious teaching practices, and data
on students' performance on assessments. As a community, the investigators use
these resources to ask: What works? For whom? And under what conditions? More
than just sharing tools or training teacher developers, the NIC is engaged in
rapid prototyping of tools and practices with a specific focus on improving
instruction for English Language Learners. The Networked Improvement Community
affords the opportunity for members to share and empirically test tools and
other curricular resources so that productive variations of practices and tools
can be generated. The system will accelerate the development of both teaching
practices and professional learning models aligned with the college and career
ready standards in science and understanding how to develop and sustain NICs
that are oriented specifically around the improvement of instruction.