* 1315156
* SBIR Phase I:  Made in USA-Profitably
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Kerr-Jia Lu, FlexSys Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,683.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a framework for a unified Computer Aided Engineering software for the design of
systems that obtain their functionality through material compliance. The first
element required in this software is an interface that defines problem
specifications such as desired motion and forcing functions, available package
space, manufacturing limitations, material strength, and fatigue properties. The
second element is an engine that sorts through feasible candidate solutions to
find the best-suited form. The final element is an engine that iterates subtle
candidate-solution details to identify tradeoffs between costs, manufacturing,
and function. While commercially available design software can assist users in
evaluating designs, they lack the ability to tackle optimal design of compliant
mechanical solutions. Though the proprietary algorithms necessary for full-
service compliant design software exist, they have yet to be woven into a common
environment that can be accessed by a "non-expert" user. It is envisioned that
such a generic, easy-to-use, commercial software would proliferate compliant
solutions in the marketplace. This would promote an increase in domestic
production as labor-intensive "classical" mechanisms are replaced with compliant
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the proliferation of compliant mechanical solutions enabled to the
global marketplace. Single-piece compliant mechanisms are mechanical systems
that deform significantly under external load to perform a motion or forcing
task. As a result of the ?one-piece? construction, goods can be manufactured
using techniques that require no assembly. This attribute is especially of
interest to domestic manufacturing, where jobs are otherwise shipped overseas
because of labor intensive designs. In other words, shipping costs and value
lost in supply chain delays and inventories cannot be offset when labor is
minimized. As an example of the simplest class of compliant mechanisms, flip-top
bottles are commonly designed with motion localized in a "living hinge". While
they provide a low-cost motion function using unsophisticated design and
manufacturing methods, their overall life is limited. In contrast, mechanisms
with "distributed compliance" enable more demanding and complex motion functions
as they meet demanding fatigue requirements. These mechanisms can serve
applications in every sector of the economy, from consumer products to aviation.
The motive of this proposal is to develop a CAE environment to serve compliant
design, and in turn, promote design practices that favor "point of use" (i.e.
domestic) manufacturing.