* 1315654
* SBIR Phase I:  Adrenaline: A Browser-Based Platform for Mobile Enterprise Apps
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Samuel King, Adrenaline Mobility
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
challenges presented by increasing mobile device use in enterprises. These
mobile devices are managed by employees, contain personal data, and use diverse
hardware and software systems. The company developed a new web browser, which
they built from the ground up specifically for mobile devices. The company's
mission is to use their browser as a platform for enterprise developers to build
and deploy cross-­platform enterprise-­class mobile web apps. The fundamental
question this research will answer is whether a browser can be a suitable
platform for hosting enterprise mobile apps. As such, this research has three
primary objectives. (1) Advance the state-­of-­the-­art in mobile web app design
methodology by developing new abstractions, such as web push and background
execution, that enable mobile web apps to access native features in a platform
independent way. (2) Develop a system that encapsulates enterprise mobile web
apps and data securely, with management functions to enable information
technology (IT) staff to manage enterprise apps, data, and users. (3) Implement
advanced debugging tools for web app developers.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in enabling
enterprises to use mobile devices, such as smart phones and tablets, in the
workplace to access company apps and data securely. Although mobile devices
provide workers with ubiquitous access to enterprise apps and data, employees
often use these mobile devices for work and in their personal lives. The
company's technology provides a mechanism to encapsulate enterprise apps and
data and to keep enterprise data separate from personal data. Overall the
proposed technology makes it easier and more cost effective for enterprise
developers to write pure HTML5 apps that run on a diverse set of mobile devices,
gives users the freedom to use mobile devices for both work and for personal
use, and provides IT administrators with complete control over enterprise apps
and data. International Data Corporation (IDC) estimates that the market segment
the company operates in - mobile enterprise app platforms - will reach $3
billion by 2015. By providing fundamental advances in mobile web browsers,
development tools, and application services.