* 1315523
* SBIR Phase I:  Zipreel: High Performance Cloud Processing Platform for Internet and Mobile Video
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Kishore Ramachandran, Zipreel Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed
at the development and commercialization of a high-performance cloud processing
platform for Internet- and mobile-based video services. Target users of this
platform would initiate live video streams, or upload video files, through a web
portal or application programming interface (API) for processing services (such
as transcoding to produce formats and bit-rates suitable for display on mobile
devices). Building this platform is challenging due to the need to (a) provide
real-time guarantees on shared infrastructure, (b) achieve linear performance
scaling, (c) guarantee content security and (d) deliver high availability
(99.99%). To address these challenges, the feasibility of (a) a novel, video-
aware parallel and distributed stream processing framework (called Scarlet), and
(b) a low-overhead isolation framework (called Shield), will be explored in
phase I of this project. Scarlet's design and implementation aim for guaranteed
real-time processing and linear performance scaling (up to 100 compute units)
while delivering professional-grade video quality. Shield should isolate content
and resources for real-time media processing on shared infrastructure; content
security should be comparable with today's virtual machine (VM) technology but
without the associated performance penalties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be significant as the
underlying technology simplifies video processing workflows and reduces
associated costs for enterprises that work with large volumes of media content.
In particular, the cloud video services resulting from this project will benefit
TV broadcasters, Internet-based media companies and mobile video service
providers, ultimately benefiting consumers of video in terms of lower prices and
better quality. The proposed platform to be developed in this project will be
the first to leverage ground-up distributed processing techniques with a high
degree of parallelism, scale and reliability to achieve fast turn-around times
(&gt;&gt;10x real-time) for media processing. These characteristics will enable
this platform to serve as an efficiency enabler for this large and fast-growing
Internet video services industry, while also advancing our scientific
understanding of cloud technology as applied to media processing. Other emerging
vertical segments likely to benefit from this platform include on-line
education, surveillance, and augmented reality.