* 1315845
* Collaborative Research:  Time- and Temperature-dependent Cation Ordering in Natural Titanomagnetites with Applications to Paleomagnetism and Geospeedometry
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Michael Jackson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 05/31/2018
* USD 52,587.00

The main goals of this proposal are (1) to understand the time- and temperature-
dependent cation ordering process recently documented in natural
titanomagnetites; (2) to quantify the kinetics of the process and to develop a
titanomagnetite-based geospeedometer; and (3) to understand and model the
effects of cation ordering on magnetic properties and on the acquisition,
retention, and demagnetization of thermoremanent magnetization (TRM), partial
thermoremanence (pTRM) and thermoviscous remanence (TVRM). Newly acquired data
demonstrate that natural titanomagnetites of common composition undergo
temperature-dependent cation ordering at moderate temperatures (300-500°C) and
over timescales of hours to months. As a result, the magnetic Curie temperature
(Tc) is a strong function of prior thermal history, changing by up to 150°C with
no attendant chemical changes. As (re-)ordering may take place at T &lt; Tc,
this clearly has profound implications for our understanding of TRM acquisition
and stability, and may lead to increased uncertainty in absolute paleointensity
estimates, as well as in paleomagnetic paleothermometry. We propose to determine
the nature of the cation ordering process in complex titanomagnetites via
synthesis of samples of controlled composition, and characterization via powder
X-ray diffraction, Mössbauer spectroscopy, and X-ray magnetic circular dichroism
(XMCD). The degree of order will then be directly linked to Curie temperature
and other magnetic properties. Isothermal annealing experiments will allow us to
constrain the kinetics of the ordering process, and TC can then be calculated as
a function of order for a given cooling path. This titanomagnetite
geospeedometer will be tested against natural samples from locations with known
emplacement temperatures and cooling rates. Finally, we will determine the
effects of time- and temperature-dependent cation reordering on remanence
acquisition and stability, as well as on paleointensity estimates, via a series
of experiments with controlled thermal histories. Laboratory data and models
will be compared with observations on natural samples where cation ordering is
expected to vary systematically with known cooling rates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetization acquired by the iron-titanium oxide mineral
titanomagnetite (frequently found in volcanic rocks) provides a vital source of
information about geomagnetic field history and tectonic plate motions. Yet,
there are fundamental aspects of titanomagnetite mineral magnetism that remain
inadequately understood, particularly concerning the arrangement of metal
cations (Fe2+, Fe3+, Ti4+, Mg2+, etc.) in the oxide crystal structure, how the
cation arrangement may change with temperature, and resulting changes in
important magnetic properties. It has been recently observed that natural
titanomagnetites of common composition undergo temperature-dependent cation
reordering at moderate temperatures (300-500°C) and over timescales of hours to
months. This cation reordering affects the fundamental magnetic properties of
the titanomagnetites, and influences the mechanisms through which they record
the ambient magnetic field during cooling, thus introducing uncertainty into
estimates of geomagnetic field intensity derived from titanomagnetite-bearing
rocks. The proposed work aims to understand this cation ordering process and the
resulting effects on magnetization and magnetic properties. Further, the
proposed work will provide a greater understanding of uncertainty in commonly-
used paleomagnetic estimates of temperatures associated with past geologic
phenomena such as volcanic events or burial-related heating. The results may be
of wide interest in constraining emplacement temperatures and cooling rates in
pyroclastic flows (PF) -- hot mixtures of volcanic gas, ash and rock fragments.
PFs constitute one of the most significant volcanic hazards, and slow cooling
means the hazard may persist long after initial emplacement. Very few direct
temperature measurements of PFs have been made, and new methods for
quantification of cooling rates and emplacement temperatures will help in hazard
planning.