* 1315062
* SBIR Phase I:  High Throughput Static Light Scattering Platform for Monitoring of Aggregation and Stability of Protein Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Michael Drenski, Advanced Polymer Monitoring Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,978.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a new technology for monitoring aggregation in therapeutic protein
solutions that will have wide-ranging impact in the pharmaceutical and
biotechnology industries. Protein aggregation is a major problem across these
sectors engaged in developing new protein pharmaceuticals. Protein aggregation
can elicit immune responses against the protein itself, severely reduce
bioavailability, and is a significant hurdle in the drug development pipeline.
This new technology can simultaneously and quantitatively monitor the stability
of many independent protein formulations for hours, days, months, or longer, all
under the control of a single instrument and without any significant human
intervention. Because the technology is based on laser light scattering it
provides a rigorous means of monitoring the protein aggregation process, based
on fundamental laws of physics, and not on empirical or inferential means. The
implementation and use of this technology could revolutionize drug discovery,
formulation, and quality control dimensions and accelerate development of new
drugs while making existing ones safer and more efficiently produced. The
technology can be used wherever proteins are under development for fighting
diseases such as cancer, Alzheimer's, diabetes, and various forms of
cardiovascular disease.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
the value to the pharmaceutical industry in that it can potentially accelerate
not only research and discovery of new drugs, but also increase their production
efficiency and safety, thereby expanding their availability to the public. The
technology also has applicability in many other sectors; e.g. monitoring natural
polymers, such as dissolution of gelatin used in food or pharmaceutical
applications, flocculation of impurities by water purification polymers,
entrapment of oil by surfactants and other agents used in combating oil spills,
and more. The quantitative kinetics of molecular weight changes during all these
processes will allow deeper understanding of the fundamental physical and
chemical forces that drive them. Therefore, many commercial and scientific
opportunities exist for the proposed technology platform, yielding the potential
for significant impact across multiple industries. With demonstrated feasibility
on applications in protein therapeutics and early adoption by several key users,
the initial market for this technology and instrumentation could expand quickly,
and sales could easily reach $10M within several years of delivering a
commercial product. The overall market for the technology will increase in time
as other application sectors are developed.