* 1315685
* SBIR Phase I:  Contact-free RF-based tracking and fall sensor for aging-in-place
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Joey Wilson, Xandem Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
&lt;br/&gt;revolutionary new sensor for aging-in-place and assisted living which
uses a network of &lt;br/&gt;radio frequency (RF) transceivers as a sensor in a
home to track a person?s location and &lt;br/&gt;detect falls. The sensor is
contact-free, i.e., a person does not need to remember to wear it &lt;br/&gt;in
order to be monitored. The system monitors links for changes in signal strength
which &lt;br/&gt;indicate a person being near the line between two transceivers.
Algorithms use the link &lt;br/&gt;information to infer the location of a
person. With transceivers at two different heights, &lt;br/&gt;algorithms can
distinguish whether a person is standing, sitting, or laying on the floor, and
&lt;br/&gt;use the speed at which someone moves to the floor to detect a
dangerous fall. Room-level &lt;br/&gt;tracking can also be used to look for
unusual patterns which indicate physical or cognitive &lt;br/&gt;decline. This
project will develop methods to minimize deployment time and expertise. It
&lt;br/&gt;will develop novel algorithms that allow for a lower density of
transceivers in the system, &lt;br/&gt;and still achieve room-level tracking and
fall detection accuracy. Live demonstrations will &lt;br/&gt;be conducted with
potential investors and customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the ability for the sensor to
&lt;br/&gt;increase the ability of an elder to safely age-in-place in their
preferred living environment, &lt;br/&gt;benefitting them and reducing the costs
of nursing home care. Unfortunately, many older &lt;br/&gt;people fall each
year, often when alone, resulting in long delays before help arrives. The
&lt;br/&gt;fear of falling and being unable to get help is a reason many enter
nursing care. Older &lt;br/&gt;adults at risk for cognitive decline (e.g.,
dementia) could live independently longer with &lt;br/&gt;sensing systems that
help caregivers monitor their well-being. Beyond aging-in-place,
&lt;br/&gt;these technologies have application in hospitals; smart-building
systems for automation and &lt;br/&gt;energy efficiency; security systems;
retail analytics; and generally for context- and location-&lt;br/&gt;aware
computing applications. Existing technologies use (1) wearable sensors, which
are often forgotten, &lt;br/&gt;(2) video camera surveillance, which is seen as
too invasive of privacy, or (3) infrared motion sensors, &lt;br/&gt;which do not
detect falls and are prone to false alarms. In contrast, the proposed sensor
does not &lt;br/&gt;need to be worn, reliably senses falls, and is privacy-
preserving. Our sensor provides &lt;br/&gt;capabilities currently unavailable,
and will be bought by aging-in-place monitoring and &lt;br/&gt;system integrator
companies.