* 1315864
* SBIR Phase I:  Feasibility of US Grown Bamboo Fiber Processing for Use in Reinforced Composites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* William Riddle, Gradient Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,978.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the three
major factors currently limiting the global production of bamboo fibers for
composites. First, all natural fibers absorb water from the air and direct
contact from the environment. Second, the strength of natural fiber composites
is less than that of composites reinforced with glass fibers. Part of this
reduced strength is a result of the poor bonding between the fiber and the resin
matrix. The labor-intensive raw material processing requirements constitute a
third factor which inhibits the US in particular from developing a bamboo
industry. All three of these issues will be addressed through a novel fiber
extraction and treatment process. Development of bamboo fiber reinforcements
will advance the state-of-the-art for plant fiber products. Additional
significant innovative aspects of this process lie in the assessment of a bamboo
species capable of being grown in the US, automation of raw bamboo processing,
utilization of waste products for neutralization of treatment wastewater and
implementation of a fully optimized multi-step material functionalization
process.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be an increased
usage of sustainable materials, increased revenue for US agriculture, increased
domestic and international sales of a new and innovative product line, and
additional jobs in support of research, manufacturing, and sales of bamboo
fiber-reinforced composites. Bamboo in particular can provide manufacturers with
a reduced-cost reinforcing material that has similar specific mechanical
properties to fiberglass. An untapped market exists for the use of Bamboo fibers
as reinforcements in compounded thermoplastics and as fiber reinforcement
material in thermoset composites. The development of a novel processing
technique will enable the team to capitalize on this market by supplying
products which can compete with traditional fiberglass. This process will
support the birth of an entirely new industry that expands US agriculture and
encourages global distribution of US-manufactured, environmentally friendly
products. Moreover, increases in Bamboo cultivation as result of these new
products will help mitigate adverse environmental impacts and improve public
health. This will be done by the inherent sequestration of carbon dioxide in the
plant growth cycle, and a reduction in the pollution associated with the use of
high-energy fiber processing techniques.