* 1315258
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy, space efficient, low-impedance server cooling architecture for data centers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Lino Gonzalez, CoolChip Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
compact, energy-efficient 1U server cooling solution that uses rotating heat
sinks, or kinetic heat sinks (KHSs), to provide localized processor cooling
while also generating the airflow required to cool peripheral server components.
The cooling technology would eliminate all 40 mm case fans currently used in 1U
servers and replace the high-impedance processor heat sinks with flow-generating
KHSs. The proposed KHS solution has the following advantages over existing
technologies: (1) lower flow impedance, since each KHS generates pressure
instead of flow impedance; (2) lower power consumption, due to the larger flow-
generating blades of KHSs compared to those found in 40 mm axial case fans,
combined with the lower server flow impedance; and (3) smaller footprint, since
the air mover and heat sink are combined into a single component. Phase I
studies will involve component- and server-level computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) simulations and experimental validation of both the current state-of-the-
art cooling solution and the proposed KHS cooling solution. The goal is to
demonstrate 50% reduction in footprint and power consumption compared to the
state-of-the-art cooling solution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project stems from the rising power density
and overall power consumption in data centers. With the explosive growth of the
?cloud? there has been exponential growth in data centers, whose electricity
consumption is the fastest growing electricity-consuming sector in the U.S. The
miniaturization of components has resulted in more heat being generated per unit
volume, while smaller product form factors provide less space for coolers to
dissipate that heat. Kinetic cooling is an early-stage technology that has the
potential to significantly reduce cooling power requirements while using a
smaller footprint. There are no commercial KHS cooling solutions in the market
presently; consequently, the proposed KHS solution would be the first system
designed and sold in this category. The initial target markets for the proposed
server cooling system will be brand and whitebox server vendors and system
integrators. According to analyst reports, 7.6M server systems were brought
online in 2010 and this figure is growing at a CAGR of 4.7%. The total market
opportunity is approximately $400-$500M with the potential for providing a
return on investment under 30 months.