* 1315550
* SBIR Phase I:  Label-free, raman-on-chip sensor for single molecule analysis of biotoxins in fresh water
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* irene fernandez cuesta, P-BLINC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a novel
type of nanodevice for label-free detection and identification of single,
individual (bio)molecules. A unique nanomanufacturing technology has been
developed for low-cost and reliable fabrication of micro/nanofluidic circuitry
integrated with plasmonic nanostructures. Successful combination of these
components will allow the confinement of light and liquid at the nanoscale,
allowing the characterization of individual molecules flowing one-by-one along a
plasmonic hot spot. This technology will enable a breakthrough in the detection
and identification of single molecules, drastically simplifying the sample
preparation by removing the need for labeling. The Phase I work will focus on
the use of the nanochannel/nanoantenna system to detect the Raman signal of
substances confined in tiny volumes (10^-21 L). This will serve as the basis for
the development of a fully integrated system with on-chip read out capabilities
for detection of toxins in fresh water in Phase II.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the novelty and
versatility of the sensor, which will be able to detect, discriminate and
analyze individual molecules without the need for labels. Even further, the
system will be portable, fully integrated with on-chip read out capabilities,
and will require very small sample volumes (on the order of a few microliters).
The first market to be targeted is environmental monitoring for water control:
the device will be used to detect in real time the concentration of toxins in
fresh water, and to track their evolution over time. Once the label-free
detection and identification of single biomolecules on a portable chip is
demonstrated, the applications will be expanded to the biomedical and point-of-
care markets. The results of the research in Phase I will open a new route for
the fabrication of a large variety of fully-integrated, ultrasensitive,
portable, label-free biosensors.