* 1315431
* SBIR Phase I:  Agile track and trace system for pharmaceuticals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Albert Ho, AgileQR, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

The innovation is the usage of smart packaging technology as a pharmaceutical
track and trace (TT) solution deployed on the packaging of consumer drug
products. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will determine
its feasibility. The problem to be solved is the considerable expense and
inefficiency of drug recall and detection of counterfeit drugs in the
pharmaceutical industry. Existing solutions simply print a Standardized
Numerical Identifier (SNI) on drug packages, leaving it up to each player in the
drug supply chain to use and interpret without guidance or communication. For
these reasons, TT is not widely adopted, useful, easily accessible, or
understandable. The innovation eliminates these challenges by using a URL in
place of an SNI, unique to each drug package. Each URL directs to a landing page
with data specific to the associated drug that can be updated in real time. This
Phase I study aims to ensure that mass-scale creation and updating of these
codes is possible and efficient at the manufacturing level of the supply chain.
Validating the deployment of smart packaging at the manufacturing level enables
the affordable and flexible solution to propagate down the supply chain, an
ideal situation for broad market adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impact of track and trace (TT) technology is breaking the
pervasive state of inertia in the pharmaceutical industry. This state exists
from the FDA's failure to implement TT guidelines despite the 2007 FDA
Amendments Act which promised to deliver such guidelines. Firms are hesitant to
commit to implementing technologies that might prove to be ill-equipped to
manage future changes in regulatory guidelines. Available solutions are focused
on providing technology for the developing world as those countries are the most
impacted by counterfeit pharmaceuticals. While counterfeiting is a smaller
problem in developed nations, there are still many challenges in managing
recalls when contamination is discovered in the supply-chain. The innovation has
great commercial potential because "smart packaging" is future-proof due to the
technology's use of webpages that can be instantly updated to comply with
current regulations. The system allows for recalls to be managed more
efficiently which not only means less liability but also fewer human lives lost.
The innovation provides immediate value to pharmaceutical manufacturers and
consumers and can benefit all supply-chain participants in the future. It will
provide an opportunity to scientifically understand how different users consume
and share information between different points in the supply-chain.