* 1315779
* SBIR Phase I:  Actively-Controlled Transtympanic (ACT) Drug Delivery System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Reza Shekarriz, Yainax Medical, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to demonstrate
and develop a prototype of a minimally-invasive drug delivery technology to
address the need for a more practical and effective transtympanic drug delivery
system. The technology combines a proprietary trocar catheter with a MEMS-based
microfluidic system for controlled, sustained delivery of vestibulo-active or
cochleo-active drugs into the middle ear for absorption to the inner ear, for
common hearing and vestibular disorders for applications in the otolaryngology,
office-based setting. This Phase I project will utilize preliminary research,
including prior catheter studies with human temporal bones, as well as research
around dosing and micropumping to design and develop a breadboard prototype for
controlled, transtympanic delivery that includes: (a) insertion technology and
circulating system for improved drug perfusion, and (b) a microfluidics
technology to deliver drugs with the optimal protocol. The feasibility with
physician testers using both plastic ears and temporal bone cores will be
evaluated.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is anticipated to be in
more effective treatment of common inner ear diseases such as Meniere?s disease,
chronic labyrinthitis, sudden sensorineural hearing loss and intractable
tinnitus that impact millions of people worldwide. Meniere?s disease affects
approximately 12 in 1000 individuals worldwide, and it is estimated that 7.9
million individuals in the U.S. suffer from tinnitus. Although the advantages of
transtympanic delivery are generally understood, control remains a major
challenge to realizing optimal and consistent outcomes. Wide inter-subject, and
even intra-subject, variability in outcomes has presented a major problem with
current practice, introducing the potential of serious side effects, such as
oto-toxicity, that can lead to permanent hearing loss and vestibular
hypofunction, or dysfunction. Recent studies indicate these shortcomings can be
largely overcome with precise, controlled, sustained, low concentration delivery
to the round window membrane. While research is underway to develop products for
surgically-implanted controlled or passive time-release delivery, there is
significant value for advancing a non-surgical, less invasive and more actively-
controlled delivery. It is expected that this technology will overcome both
efficacy and practical shortcomings of the technologies on the market and in
development.