* 1315145
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficient Testing Methodologies for Adaptive Radios
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* John Carlson, Echo Ridge LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will perform
research toward developing new behavior characterization methodologies that
allow adaptive/cognitive radios to be rapidly introduced into the market
improving spectrum utilization and therefore broadband access for all. Expected
results include a closed loop test fixture design that dynamically creates
realistic RF environments in response to measured adaptive system behavior in a
laboratory setting, controlled by an efficient adaptive search algorithm. The
complexities involved in simulating realistic dynamic RF environments,
sufficient to characterize the behavior of adaptive systems, drive the number of
testing cases into the hundreds of millions and test time to many years. The
adaptive search problem will be solved using globally optimized experimental
alternatives and multi-dimensional splitting levels yielding high confidence
results and reasonable test times. The project will combine this efficient
search adaptive, rare-event approach with the company's unique dynamic RF
environment emulation capabilities to create virtual RF environments that
support comprehensive hardware-in-the-loop testing. The intellectual merit of
the proposed research lies in combining and improving these unique capabilities
in the critical application area of adaptive/cognitive radio testing yielding
improved spectrum access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is acceleration of the deployment of
adaptive/cognitive radios, offering the prospect of ubiquitous broadband access
to the nation's underserved. Lack of universal broadband access, increasingly
essential to daily life, is hurting the U.S. The 2012 PCAST report recommends
using adaptive/cognitive radio as a solution to meeting these increased demands
with existing spectrum, but acknowledges the lack of robust testing capabilities
to ensure non-interfering coexistence with incumbent systems. The challenge of
deploying adaptive radio technology is that it cannot be fielded without
comprehensive testing, and cannot be tested in a live, densely populated RF
system environment for fear of interfering with existing spectrum users. This
project will develop a system to efficiently validate adaptive radios in the
laboratory with field level fidelity. Efficient, high quality testing offers the
potential for quicker deployments at significantly reduced costs. The potential
uses for adaptive/cognitive radios include commercial fixed and mobile wireless,
ad-hoc network, satellite, aviation, DoD, Intel and public safety with potential
revenues of hundreds of millions of dollars. This project may benefit millions
of underserved individuals and enhance scientific and technological
understanding of adaptive, rare-event search techniques as applied to
adaptive/cognitive radios.