* 1315409
* SBIR Phase I:  A Multimodal Sensor Platform for Automated Detection and Classification of Pest Insects
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Johnny Park, Spensa Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a multi-modal sensor platform for robust detection and classification of
insect pests for automated monitoring of insect populations. More specifically,
the project will investigate the feasibility of extracting meaningful features
of insect pests using a set of low-cost, low-power sensors?namely ultrasound,
infrared light and bio-impedance sensors?and develop multi-modal sensor fusion
algorithms for robust detection and classification of multiple target insect
species against any non-target organisms that may enter the trapping device.
Measurement signals generated by the sensors will be analyzed to determine a set
of distinct features that can be computed on an embedded platform for real-time
processing. The critical requirements of employing low-cost, low-power sensors
with real-time processing capability make this research unique and challenging.
Different sensor fusion strategies based on these features will be investigated
and the performance of each fusion algorithm will be evaluated. Successful
conclusion of Phase I and II of this project will result in fully automated,
wireless insect traps capable of providing accurate, real-time populations of
multiple pest species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is that the proposed system could revolutionize pest
management practices in agriculture and drastically reduce the amount of
pesticide applications. The proposed system not only eliminates one of the most
laborious and dreaded activities of manually inspecting insect traps, but also
provides unprecedented access to accurate, real-time insect population
information to make more effective pest management decisions. This leads to
reduced, spatially-restricted pesticide applications, better understanding of
insect pest behaviors, and enhanced biological control. The potential market for
the proposed technology is quite broad. In fact, the technology can benefit any
industry that requires regular monitoring of insect populations such as tree
fruits (e.g., apple, grape, citrus, pear, etc.), row crops (e.g., corn, soy
bean, sugar cane, etc.), vegetables, nuts, coffee, ornamental trees, stored
food, etc. Furthermore, the proposed technology could be used for various state
and federal pest monitoring programs?such as the Slow the Spread (STS) Project
administered by USDA to monitor gypsy moths?that requires placing and managing
up to a few hundreds of thousands of pheromone traps annually.