* 1315284
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost, Copper-Based Metallization Pastes for Solar Cell Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Craig Peters, PLANT PV
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,969.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will study the
feasibility of using abundant elements in metallization pastes for crystalline
silicon solar cells. Currently, silver-based pastes dominate the market because
they do not oxidize and can be processed at high temperatures. Unfortunately,
these pastes contain a large fraction of silver (e.g. >50%), which is a precious
metal that currently costs ~$1000/kg. During this feasibility study, PLANT PV
will attempt to synthesize and fabricate low-cost thin films of composite metal
particles made from abundant elements that can be used as a replacement for Ag-
pastes. In order to achieve success, the films must be sufficiently conductive
and strongly adhere to the silicon solar cell while not reducing the overall
power conversion efficiency.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be a significant
reduction in the overall cost of PV cell processing. Currently PV modules cost
$0.70-0.80/W to produce with roughly $0.08/W cost coming from the silver based
metallization pastes. The global silver paste market in the PV industry is >$1.8
bn/year. We believe that by switching to non-silver alternatives it is possible
to provide significant cost reductions (e.g. >$0.05/W). Module cost reductions
have primarily driven the significant growth in solar cell installations in the
United States in the past five years. While PV is now cost competitive in
several regions in the US, further solar module reductions to $0.50/W, with
commensurate reductions in installation costs, would make solar power cost
competitive with >1TW of power production in the US without subsidies. Finally,
metallization pastes developed in this Phase I study may have applications in a
wide range of products including displays and integrated circuits.