* 1315359
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Technique to Manufacture Large Turbine Blades
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Neil Gupta, Green Dynamics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,800.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project intends to
eliminate the transportation problem faced by large wind turbine blades for
land-based wind farms. Transporting blades by truck constrains their size to a
limit that falls somewhere between standard dash 50m-60m, due to roadway length,
height and weight limitations. If blades over this transportation limit were
available for use at land-based wind farms, larger turbines could be used, lower
class wind sites would be opened for development, and capacity factors could be
increased using existing turbines. This SBIR Phase I project will further
develop a modular blade tooling concept that will allow continuous blade spars
of 100m or more to be produced on-site at wind farms thus eliminating road
transportation issues. This tooling concept encompasses an array of logistical
improvements that optimize the effectiveness of this on-site approach. The
unique manufacturing method allows superior integration of the structural
components of the blade, producing a more robust product that is not susceptible
to typical blade failure modes. During this Phase I feasibility will be
evaluated "across three major areas: Manufacturing Methodology,Structural and
Dynamic Performance, and Logistics and Cost Modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to reduce the cost
and therefore increase the penetration of wind power. Wind turbine power output
increases with the square of the blade radius. Offshore turbines (in the 5MW to
7MW range) use blades that are 60m to 80m in length. If transportation was not
an issue for land-based turbines, these turbines would continue to scale in
capacity with their offshore counterparts. Longer blades would also allow for
the development of lower class wind sites with currently available turbines
increasing the penetration of domestic renewable energy. Additionally longer
blades would allow an increase in capacity factors for currently available
turbines lowering their cost of energy, a topic of critical importance to wind
project developers. Blade manufacturing at the wind farm will create local jobs.
Although a 100m blade tool may be transportable, its logistics pipeline is large
and will still require local transport and all the supply chain logistics of
large scale production. However, instead of all this being done out of state or
out of the country and then transported to a US farm, a large portion of the
blade manufacturing work will occur at the turbine site.