* 1315595
* SBIR Phase I: Learning PM Skills Through "Experience"; Realistic Rehearsal for Project Teams in 3D Virtual Environments.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Lia DiBello, Workplace Technologies Research Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to enable
users to develop expertise in Project Management in the context of emulated
businesses, using 3D Virtual World platforms with the goal of developing
expertise through experience with tough problems. Teams of participants interact
with virtual replicas of actual processes and products in the context of an
ongoing business, with complex goals to accomplish. The environments are
enriched with embedded behavior and decision monitoring software designed to
automate the tracking of progress and provide feedback. Early pilots have shown
unintended success with novice project managers as a way to accelerate learning
by as much as two years. The objective for this project is to refine the
approach for use with novices with the intention of accelerating the development
of expertise in the key skills of project management that are normally learned
through years of experience, and specifically, from failure. The project will
also resolve a number of questions about the key features at play within
emerging Virtual Worlds platforms. "Smart" Virtual Worlds have the potential to
provide an optimal opportunity for experiential learning needed for the next
generation of project managers facing increasingly complex implementation
efforts that require agility and skill sets that go beyond current training
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of accelerating the
rate of developing project management expertise through no-risk experiential
learning that is engineered for the development of complex skills in less time
is nearly incalculable. Studies of expert project managers indicate that their
skill was acquired over many years and as a result of learning by failure.
Therefore, even though the value of expert project managers is widely
acknowledged, the cost and risk of getting that value is quite high and may
simply take too long. Further, the known risks involved in learning through
failure prevent other project managers from ever becoming experts. On the other
hand, the lack of expertise has costs of its own. Some studies have estimated
the organizational losses to upwards of $82 billion annually. These losses are
thought to be entirely preventable with better approaches to project management
education. Thus far, WTRI is one of the only companies that understands how to
build "smart" Virtual Worlds for accelerating expertise Being a leader and early
adopter of this emerging technology, we have the potential to lead the industry
in the kind of rehearsal and simulation-based techniques that will be
increasingly necessary educate professionals to manage complex problems of the
future.