* 1315836
* SBIR Phase I:  A Platform for Anthelmintic Drug Discovery using DAF-12 as a Novel Target
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Christopher Hopkins, Knudra Diagnostics
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project creates a drug-
screening platform for discovery of new antiparasitic drugs. Resistance to
current drug treatments is on the rise. New antiparasitic drugs under
development are mostly focused on neurotransmission targets, yet a new target
has recently emerged, the daf-12 gene. Knudra uses a core expertise in nematode
bioengineering to insert parasite genes into the C. elegans roundworm. Drug
candidates are found against the parasite gene by the use of biosensor
backgrounds, which use fluorescent gene-expression reporters that turn red upon
detection of antiparasitic activity. Phase I feasibility is demonstrated when
known agonist and antagonist of DAF-12 elicit expected activity on the parasite
gene. The platform may then be used to screen compound libraries to find
candidates for anthelmintic use.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
the creation of a screening platform for finding antiparasitics to help in the
battle against important diseases such as elephantiasis, river blindness,
trichinosis, Enterobiasis (pinworm), and parasitic infections in livestock and
crops. Parasitic infection in livestock and humans currently are treated with
more than 20 drugs on the market, but some are toxic and carry black box
warnings. Food and health security throughout the world would be enhanced with
the development of new antiparasites that are safer and more effective. In
addition, the technology will help to bring clarity of understanding to the
biology of infective-state formation in parasite lifecycle.