* 1315307
* SBIR Phase I:  Internal Photo Emission Energy Converters Based on a Wide Band Perfectly Absorbing Nanocomposite Metamaterial
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* BalaKrishna Juluri, Pacific Integrated Energy
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase (SBIR) I project aims to develop a
new class of solar cell based on an internal photoemission device geometrically
configured as a near perfect, broadband, isotropic absorber. Realizing the
potential of this technology would bring to market a solar cell that is
commercially competitive with other solar technologies on a cost per watt basis
and are able to fabricated on a flexible substrate. Internal photo-emission
converters have received renewed interest, but published power conversion
efficiencies are well below the theoretical limit. A primary limiting factor in
previous attempts has been limited light absorption in the metal. Our
preliminary simulations and tests show enhanced light absorption across a broad
range of angles and wavelengths when the absorbing metal is configured in a
nanocomposite layer in a perfect absorber structure. The objective of Phase I is
to validate the preliminary simulations by fabricating and testing a functioning
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is primarily in the field of solar energy conversion. Successful
completion of Phase I and Phase II of this research and development effort will
enable commercialization of a low cost and long lifetime solar cell technology
that can be manufactured on a flexible substrate using roll-to-roll processing
techniques. This technology will provide a new cost competitive entry into the
flexible and conformable solar cell market.