* 1315056
* SBIR Phase I:  Low cost, scalable and selective electrochemical TSV fill technology for 3D IC interconnects
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Val Dubin, NANO3D SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project advances a novel method
to fabricate 3D IC interconnects. Physical and economical limitations for 2D
scaling (Moore's Law) prevents further increase of integration density to
improve the performance of integrated circuits (IC). These challenges have
stimulated the development of 3D through-silicon via (TSV) technology (so called
'More than Moore') in order to increase the speed and the bandwidth of the
devices as well as to decrease the form factor and power consumption of
integrated microsystems. However, the implementation of 3D TSV technology is
limited by the high cost of 3D TSV fill (due to the use of expensive vapor
deposition and chemical-mechanical processes) and its poor scalability (due to
low conformality of physical and chemical vapor deposited films) to high TSV
aspect ratios and smaller via sizes (to increase I/O). The objective of this
investigation is to address this problem in order to enable cost-effective and
reliable fill of high aspect ratio 3D TSVs. This goal will be achieved with the
use of novel electrochemical materials and processes enabling conformal anodic
isolation and electroless barrier/seed films, as well as selective
electrochemical Cu TSV filling.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to accelerate
the mass-scale adoption of low cost and scalable TSV technology in semiconductor
manufacturing. The development of 3D TSV packaging is carried out by various
companies in USA, Europe, Japan, Korea, Taiwan, etc. However, the high cost and
low scalability 3D TSV filling process prevents mass-adoption of 3D IC
interconnects. Our proprietary low-cost, scalable and selective (electrochemical
TSV fill technology will allow us to decrease the cost of TSV fill technology by
a factor of > 2 and to increase the scalability by a factor of > 3 to fabricate
low cost, high speed, large bandwidth and broader functionality 3D devices.
Therefore, the successful completion of this project would not only have a
significant societal impact by accelerating 3D IC wafer technology adoption into
state-of-art high performance digital devices such as next generation of smart
phones, but also have positive economic impact by creating US semiconductor jobs
and maintaining US technology leadership over a wide range of semiconductor
applications.