* 1315182
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving cell loading efficiency for suture mediated cell therapy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Adam Collette, VitaThreads LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,477.00

This Small Business Innovation (SBIR) Phase I project will provide critical
advances in the understanding of interactions between mesenchymal stem cells and
a novel fibrin microthread suture construct in an effort to overcome significant
inefficiencies in the field of cell therapy delivery. This work will develop a
novel seeding vessel and associated regimen for highly efficient mesenchymal
stem cell loading to be applied to fibrin microthread sutures. Once such a
regimen has been developed, resultant devices will be implanted intramuscularly
in a rat model to explore cell delivery efficiency and host response to the
cell-loaded fibrin microthread device. The resultant cell seeding data will
provide insight into the extent to which cell seeding efficiency in vitro may be
manipulated by simplistic modifications to common seeding conditions including
vessel geometry, cell concentration, and total cell load. The in vivo work will
provide critical information describing the biocompatibility of fibrin
microthreads, cell delivery efficiency of syringe-mediated compared to fibrin
microthread-mediated interventions, and inflammatory/fibrotic potential of these
interventions respectively. In turn, the systems developed in this project will
be expected to provide a platform for further research of cell therapy performed
with discreetly delivered, highly viable, and accurately dosed cell populations.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project relates not only to the
specific indication targeted, Achilles tendon, but more broadly to other
connective tissue repairs, other enhanced healing indications, and other cell
delivery applications. Once fully realized, the Achilles tendon repair
augmentation market alone is projected to be worth $500M annually in the United
States. While the suture-like form factor may not be ideal for all applications,
several types of open surgeries performed upon poorly healing or non-healing
organ systems could readily benefit from cell delivery by this technology. This
would include indications such as myocardial infarct repair, neural tissue
regeneration in cases of stroke, and cochlear tissue regeneration. The
successful commercialization of our project represents a significant step
forward in tissue engineering and next generation cell-based medicines,
promising to improve both longevity and quality of life for countless people.