* 1315515
* SBIR Phase I:  Low cost shortwave infrared (SWIR) spectral imaging microscope camera based on Compressive Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Lenore McMackin, InView technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,272.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on
technology to improve microscopy through the development of a highly-innovative,
low-cost, high-resolution, spectral (multi-color) imaging video microscope
camera architecture for use in the shortwave infrared (SWIR) waveband. Low cost
SWIR microscopy supports compelling medical applications in microcirculation
imaging and infrared (IR) fluorescence microspectroscopy. Although ubiquitous
and cheap, CMOS cameras have low sensitivity in near-infrared (NIR) and no
sensitivity at SWIR wavelengths. This project proposes to apply recent
scientific advances in the area of Compressive Sensing to the design of a
uniquely capable scientific instrument at a fraction of the cost of current
cameras. This instrument will achieve a multi-color, staring high-resolution
imaging capability while requiring only a one-dimensional detector array and no
steering mirror, significantly reducing system cost and increasing acquisition
speed. This project will develop advanced algorithms, a compact opto-mechanical
design, and high-speed, low-noise data capture and processing
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this research is to open the multi-billion dollar microscopy community to the
benefits of low-cost, multi-color, SWIR video imaging. This will enhance and
possibly transform clinical modalities in dynamic multi-fluorescence imaging, in
vivo functional imaging, tissue viability and pathology studies, and advanced
imaging modalities such as optical coherence tomography. Medical imaging
research is showing growing interest in the NIR and SWIR wavelengths,
particularly in the development of IR fluorophores which produce practically no
autofluorescence background while simultaneously enhancing tissue penetration
depth. Additionally, multispectral IR detectors acquire a wealth of chemical
information for chemically complex, heterogeneous biomaterials. However,
investigations have been hampered in this regime because reasonably-priced,
multi-color, SWIR cameras are not available. Microcirculation imaging for
microvascular distributions and flow mapping represents an excellent entry point
and a good match for the optical and electronic capabilities of this technology.
Also, SWIR fluorescence molecular imaging with wavelength-tuned, single-walled
carbon nanotubes will benefit in biological and material science applications.
An affordable multispectral SWIR imaging platform will advance many other
commercial applications including food safety, solar panel and semiconductor
inspection, machine vision, navigation, security and surveillance.