* 1315784
* The role of pore-fluid pressure on fault behavior at the base of the seismogenic zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* J. Gregory Hirth, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2016
* USD 330,692.00

To characterize earthquake rupture, localization of deformation, stress and
rheology at the base of the seismogenic zone we will conduct an experimental
study on quartz-rich rocks. The project is focused on the mechanical role of
pore fluids and how the mechanical properties of fluid-rock systems respond to
variations in temperature and strain rate. Our study will provide new data
relevant for understanding the evolution of seismic hazards, by concentrating on
the links between long-term tectonic and earthquake processes. We are pursuing a
relatively unstudied area that may turn out to be critical for applying
geophysical data to constrain a wide range of fault zone processes that limit
the depth extent of earthquake rupture.

The role of fluids on the processes responsible for the brittle-plastic
transition in quartz-rich rocks has not been explored at experimental conditions
where the kinetic competition between microcracking and viscous flow is similar
to that expected in the Earth. Our initial analysis of this competition between
these brittle and ductile processes suggests that the effective pressure law for
fracture and sliding friction should not work as efficiently near the brittle-
plastic transition (BPT) as it does at shallow conditions. Experiments will be
conducted on low porosity quartzite and sandstone at T = 700-1100oC, strain
rates from 10-3/s to 5x10-7/s, and P = 100 MPa to 1 GPa. The results of our
study will be directly relevant for understanding many critical scientific
problems related to seismicity and the rheological behavior of plate-boundary
faults. For example (1) The long term strength of faults depends critically on
pore-fluid pressure, thus investigating where the long-term strength faults is
actually controlled by frictional properties rather than ductile creep ? and how
fault strength evolves during the seismic cycle ? remains a key problem. (2) The
presence of fluids (resulting in low effective stresses), and frictional
properties near the fault slip stability transition and a ?fully effective?,
effective pressure law are invoked in almost all models for the generation of
non-volcanic tremor. However, the interactions between crystal plastic processes
and pore-fluid pressure are not well constrained at these conditions. (3) A key
initial condition to understanding the evolution of fault resistance during
seismic slip and the maximum depth of seismic faulting is the stress state and
scale of strain localization at the base of the seismogenic zone during
interseismic periods.