* 1315129
* EAGER:  Self-Assembly of Complex Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/10/2012,07/31/2014
* Russell Deaton, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 142,989.00

Abstract for EAGER: Self-Assembly of Complex Systems Intellectual Merit: Self-
assembly is a model for how individual components arrange themselves through
local interactions to form organized structures. It originated as a model for
construction of nanotechnology. The theory of complex systems describes many
phenomena in nature, from human intelligence and evolving communities of
organisms to human social networks, economies, and cultures. In these systems,
complexity emerges in ways that is not immediately obvious from an understanding
of the component parts and the relationships between them. In this project,
self-assembly will be investigated as a mechanism for creation of complex
systems. Self-assembly can be shown to be equivalent to other models of complex
systems. In addition, it can be programmed like a computer. A goal of this
project is to develop efficient ways to program self-assembly to produce
interesting complex systems, which have practical applications. As a beginning
to this, we have developed a mapping of self-assembly onto graphs that enables
us to use an efficient algorithm to determine the system that is constructed.
Thus, self-assembly should be able to generate complex systems and to provide
efficient and realistic simulation of those types of systems. In the project,
the self-assembly algorithms will be applied to automatic content generation for
games, in which the self-assembly automatically creates situations and non-
player characters with which players of the game interact. The conjecture is
that this will provide more dynamic and realistic game environments, and
moreover, will be an interesting test-bed for investigation of the relationship
between self-assembly and complex systems. Broader Impacts: This research
integrates ideas from chemistry, physics, biology, and computer science to
relate self-assembly to complex systems, and to produce potentially
transformative tools that will not only improve understanding of complex
systems, but also form the basis for innovative complex systems in a variety of
application domains. These include nanotechnology, artificial intelligence, art,
literature, and computer games. There are many natural phenomena (i.e. human
intelligence, living systems) for which traditional symbolic models of
computation are only able to capture a part of their essential capabilities and
characteristics. Human language is an example. This research conceivably could
result in software that is able to produce target systems that capture some of
the capability, adaptability, and complexity that is observed in nature. If
successful, the project could result in a new paradigm for realistic and complex
behavior through computer programs, and would potentially impact not only
nanotechnology, but also applications that require automatic generation of
realistic content. Moreover, our models of self-assembly can generate this
content in tractable ways. In addition, under the direction of the investigator,
graduate and undergraduate students will work together in a team on this
project, and will be educated in the unique multidisciplinary approach that has
been proposed.