* 1315416
* SBIR Phase I:  Wireless Networks that can Scale Capacity with User Demands
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Hariharan Rahul, MegaMIMO Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Prgram (SBIR)Phase I project will
demonstrate the design and implementation of a wireless network whose capacity
scales with increasing user demand. Wireless spectrum is limited; wireless
demands can, however, grow unlimited. Wireless users have long suffered from the
inability of cellular and Wi-Fi networks to keep up with increased demand
resulting from the growth in mobile devices and applications. This is despite
the fact that individual wireless devices have improved dramatically in recent
years. The problem is that there is a mismatch between the way user demands
scale and network throughput scales; user demands scale with the number of
devices in the network but network throughput does not. Unless network
throughput also scales with the number of devices, wireless networks will always
find it hard to keep up with their demands, and the projected demands will keep
exceeding the projected capacity. This project will present the first practical
system that can enable a wireless LAN to keep increasing its throughput simply
by adding additional access points (APs) on the same channel. It will work with
existing unmodified end-user devices, and demonstrate throughput gains of 10x
compared to today's wireless technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development of new
minimal interference, graceful degradation wireless systems and broadband
solutions, and the financial, social, and productivity benefits accruing from
the resulting improvement in spectrum utilization. High speed wireless access
plays a key role in the modern economy, and is indispensable for every sector of
society: businesses, schools, homes, public safety workers etc. The need to
support the continued growth of wireless even in the face of the current
capacity crunch has made the efficient use of spectrum a national priority, and
led the government to start a National Wireless Innovation and Infrastructure
Initiative. A new technology that can enable wireless networks to scale their
capacity to keep up with burgeoning demand, and provide 10x throughput gains
compared to today, can provide improved access to existing applications like
medical tests, online courses, high speed video, cloud based services etc., and
enable new classes of applications, devices, and services. It will advance the
government's goals of enabling American economic growth and competitiveness
through homegrown innovation in the $40 billion enterprise wireless, carrier Wi-
Fi, and cellular markets.