* 1315011
* SBIR Phase I:  Shape-Memory Fabric Device for Muscle Atrophy in Rotator Cuff Repair
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* David Safranski, MedShape, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,973.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
mechanically-active soft tissue reinforcement device using a shape-memory fabric
to improve the tissue quality of chronic rotator cuff tears. With chronic tears,
the rotator cuff has degenerated to a point that prevents its ability to heal
back to bone using standard repair procedures. The intellectual merit of this
project stems from using the shape-memory effect to apply a continuous force on
the atrophied rotator cuff tissue in an effort to promote tissue regeneration
and improve the overall healing capacity. The research for this project will
focus on evaluating (1) how the physical attributes of the fabric will impact
the shape-memory properties and (2) the effect of applying a force, generated by
the fabric?s shape recovery, on the quality of the rotator cuff tissue. The
anticipated results of this work will be the identification of a fabric that can
contract via shape recovery at body temperature over a time scale required for
soft tissue reattachment to occur. This work will also demonstrate that tension
can be continuously applied to cuff tissue at a magnitude representative of
physiological tensile loading on the cuff.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the potential to
address a significant clinical problem pertaining to the treatment of chronic
rotator cuff tears. Over 400,000 rotator cuff repairs are performed each year,
but have a failure rate of 20%. The rotator cuff reinforcement device market is
estimated to be $91 M and growing 16% annually. There are currently no
reinforcement devices commercially available that can help improve tissue
quality in chronic cuff tears. Thus, a reinforcement device that can apply
continuous tensile force to improve tissue quality could serve as a disruptive
technology in a large market and significantly impact how rotator cuff
procedures are performed. From a technological/scientific standpoint, this
project will provide the fundamental knowledge of how shape-memory materials can
be applied to mechanically stimulate a biologic response in vivo, specifically
the effect of tensile force on soft tissue regeneration. In addition, this
shape-memory fabric technology could broadly lend itself to other clinical
applications including Achilles tendon repair, hernia repair, battle-
field/traumatic muscle injuries, and muscular disorders.