* 1315094
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a web-based authoring framework for online animated interactive university-level content via curated crowdsourcing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Smita Bakshi, Zyante Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 188,499.00

This SBIR project's innovation is a unique web-based authoring framework for
creating animated interactive web content that replaces university-level STEM
(science, technology, engineering, mathematics) textbooks in traditional or
online courses. The confluence of HTML5, cloud services, and ubiquitous portable
devices enables widespread use of web-native content having engaging effective
activities for students including animations, interactive simulators including
mini-games, and self-assessments. Such content is difficult to develop/maintain
in traditional publishing paradigms involving a small author/editor core team. A
wiki-style crowdsourced approach, with oversight by an author/editor core team,
is more scalable but web-based authoring tools support only limited content
types like text or drawings. The project's intellectual merit lies in developing
a novel web-based authoring tool for creating HTML5 code for animations,
including a novel automated synthesis of the code from abstract restricted-form
English-sentence specifications inspired by experiences in developing state-of-
the-art automated circuit synthesis techniques. The merit also lies in a new
repository of parameterized interactive simulations with potentially wide
applicability in STEM fields. Results will include the initial tool and
repository, plus use by instructors and graduate students from several
universities to demonstrate crowdsourcing feasibility.

The broader/commercial impact of this project includes catalyzing a new
partnering approach between a publisher and universities, striking a new balance
between core-team authored content and crowdsourcing. A core author/editor team
creates initial content and outlines needs, requiring less upfront investment,
and the community adopts the content and contributes items under the core team's
curation. Curated crowdsourced content can dramatically improve content and
reduce creation/maintenance costs. The approach can expand to curated
crowdsourced homeworks, automated grading, online help tools, quizzing services,
student performance analysis, and more, unleashing synergy among universities to
build common tools that benefit the community, a necessity made manifest due to
drastic reductions in university budgets. The project's initial focus on
computer science lower-division topics may yield company revenues of $5M in
textbooks within a few years and $10M considering expanded services shifted from
university to company, for CS alone, and $40M-$50M for multiple STEM
disciplines. The addressable market for lower division STEM is $1B textbooks and
$2B expanded services. The project's approach provides a practical strategy,
with individual instructors initially adopting the content as a textbook
replacement for campus-based or online classes, followed by possible expanded
service arrangements made with departments/universities.