* 1315895
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Deformability and Fluorescence Cytometer for Biomarker Development and Validation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Daniel Gossett, CytoVale, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 184,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
challenge of integrating two powerful single-cell analysis tools with the aim of
developing and validating new biomarkers for malignancy. The deformability of
invasive cells has long been hypothesized to confer their ability to migrate
through tight tissue barriers and form metastases. Recently, this idea has been
supported by mechanical measurements of cells either isolated from or directly
in biological fluid specimens. This convergence of ideas from both biological
and physical sciences represents a mechanical biomarker, and tools to be
employed clinically to assay these properties are rapidly being developed.
Cytovale?s technology measures cell deformability at a throughput of several
thousand cells per second, comparable to the ubiquitous flow cytometer, which
allows immediate measurement of cells directly in biological fluids. This
technology has a demonstrated utility: highly sensitive detection of malignancy
in cellularly heterogeneous clinical pleural effusions. Its integration with
fluorescence in this project will provide a transformational research and
clinical tool, well-aligned with the critical aims of improving patient care and
reducing costs through automation, early detection of disease, and use of
quantitative, novel biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is realized by appreciating the
applicability of the technology across research and clinical settings. Even
without integration with fluorescence (flow) cytometry the technology has
demonstrated its utility as a sensitive detector of malignancy in clinical
specimens, specifically, pleural effusions. However, cell mechanics is an
attractive biomarker for invasiveness, and is likely conserved throughout cells
found in many biological fluids, including urine and fine needle aspirates. The
proposed activity will further enhance the technology?s diagnostic accuracy. The
instruments developed by Cytovale will be placed in clinical cytology labs to
complement gold standard cytological methods, performing high sensitivity
screens of biological fluids and eliminating unnecessary, invasive, and costly
follow-up procedures. The hybrid instrument will also be an especially powerful
tool for exploring connections between cell mechanics and traditional markers,
which greatly extends the number of research laboratories which would benefit
from this enabling technology.