* 1315109
* SBIR Phase I:  Using Geopolymerisation of Natural Aluminosilicate Minerals to Develop Sustainable Masonry Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* David Easton, Watershed Materials LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to manufacture a
masonry building block from materials that could radically improve the
environmental profile of one of the most common construction products on the
planet. The research will investigate the feasibility of using engineered
alkali-activated soil blends to promote geopolymerisation in the presence of
nanoaluminosilicates using a novel manufacturing process. The specific fine
particle components, specifically clay minerals, micas and feldspars, are
commonly found in soil and recycled materials from commercial aggregate and
quarrying operations. The intellectual merits of the project include a deeper
understanding of geopolymerisation in the presence of nanoaluminosilicates, the
measurement of the structural capabilities of engineered soil blends composed of
these materials under extreme compaction, and the ability to utilize a wide
range of natural soil sources to produce durable, structurally-stable masonry
products. The anticipated result is an environmentally-sustainable stabilized
earth building block, with equivalent performance to traditional concrete
blocks, but with a reduction in embodied energy by as much as 90% due to the
total elimination of energy-intensive Portland cement
binders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the potential to transform traditional cement-based masonry products
on a global scale. The product will meet a clear market need for sustainable
materials in both the US and global construction marketplace. The elimination of
traditional ordinary Portland cement (OPC) in masonry blocks will provide
valuable social and environmental benefits to the public in the form of reduced
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, increased economic activity, and improved public
health. Approximately 8 billion concrete blocks are manufactured in the US
annually to support construction activities, requiring the use of 15 million
metric tons (MMT) of OPC. The manufacture of this cement emits approximately 14
MMT of CO2, which represents 0.25% of the 6,000 MMT of industrial CO2 emissions
overall in the US. The use of soil, a ubiquitous, innocuous and unlimited
resource, as the principal component of stabilized earth mix designs, promises
the possibility of sustainable cradle-to-cradle environmental performance over a
full product life cycle. From an economic perspective, green construction, which
is projected to reach $96-140 billion by 2014, is the fastest growing segment of
the construction market, which itself is a key driver of the national economy.