* 1315303
* SBIR Phase I:  Project to Create an Automated System to Identify and Curate Web-based Resources for Entrepreneurs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Bradley Davis, Enclavix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation in this project is the application of machine intelligence
technology to help entrepreneurs quickly connect to the specific resources and
services that will help them on their road to success. Entrepreneurs are a key
source of growth and economic development in the United States, but many
entrepreneurs need assistance in key skill areas ranging from raising capital,
to legal requirements to building a startup management team. Tens of thousands
of resources are available to entrepreneurs to help with these and other areas,
however their quality varies dramatically and it is difficult, at best, to find
the proper resources for a particular situation. The proposed online system will
use a machine intelligence engine to identify, categorize and pre-qualify a wide
array of resources, and then use the semantic network-based system to match the
needs of the entrepreneur to the resources that will best support their exact
need at the time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this
proposal will significantly accelerate the success of America's entrepreneurs to
include job creation. Many entrepreneurs fail because they "do not know what
they do not know", because they do not know about available resources, or
because they cannot readily find those resources. The proposed, online,
"freemium" system will be an invaluable tool to improve the rate of success of
America's startups, guiding the time-strapped entrepreneur to specific resources
and support whenever it is needed. These tools will include resources and
partnerships with non-profits, government agencies and quality sponsors. Beyond
the individual business owner, the system and involved communities will leverage
existing investments from federal, state and local agencies to better reach and
assist potential and emerging entrepreneurs. This project has attracted the
interest of organizations which want to partner with the team to bring this
system to their entrepreneurial communities. Preliminary work strongly indicates
that this machine intelligence-based system will quickly attract many
entrepreneurs and accelerate their success