* 1315814
* SBIR Phase I:  Optical Enzymatic Biosensor for Real-Time, Continuous, In-Situ Measurements of Trichloroethene
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Brian Heinze, OptiEnz Sensors
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a cell-free optical enzymatic biosensor for monitoring trichloroethene
(TCE) concentrations in water. The biosensing concept will be implemented in an
optical fiber format, in which optical biosensor tips are linked to a small
electro-optical unit. Chemical detection takes place on biosensor tips that are
coated with enzymes and fluorescent chemicals. In preliminary experiments,
sensors using whole cells containing the desired enzymes were shown to measure
TCE concentrations. However, those whole-cell sensors had limitations with
respect to their detection limits and manufacturability. Thus, the research
objectives of this project are to develop a cell-free version of this biosensor
by extracting the necessary multicomponent enzyme and incorporating the enzyme
onto the biosensor tips. Attainment of these objectives will advance the TCE-
sensing technology toward a robust and readily manufactured system for TCE
monitoring with improved detection limits, increased accuracy, and reliability.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
to increase the efficiency of identifying, mapping, and remediating water
sources contaminated with TCE. Water use has been growing at more than twice the
population rate. Both water quantity and water quality are becoming dominant
issues in many countries. The necessity of monitoring aqueous-phase TCE
concentrations will continue for many generations due to its widespread
occurrence in water sources, its toxicity, and its high stability. A significant
need exists and will continue to rise worldwide for devices that can measure the
concentration of TCE as well as other chlorinated organic chemicals in water,
and that can do so rapidly, accurately, and inexpensively. Continuous in-situ
data production in the field of environmental sensing will greatly increase
efficiency in all processes that require a measurement of TCE concentration.
This sensor will allow for continuous monitoring of possible contamination
sources in the case of a contamination event. Also, it will afford facile depth
and spatial profiling of TCE plumes in aquifers. This technology will replace
the current chromatography-based measurement protocols, which are not readily
adapted for in-situ, on-line, or in-the-field measurements, and cannot produce
data continuously.