* 1315705
* Understanding Genetic Mechanisms within the Natural World
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2017
* Jennifer Reithel, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2017
* USD 261,635.00

The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) is awarded a grant to enhance
its research and education programs by purchasing equipment to create an
ecological genomics laboratory. This will provide scientists the opportunity
apply rapidly emerging genomic techniques to understanding plants and animals in
relatively pristine environments. A number of fundamental questions in biology
require bridging the natural environment with genetics. What are the
physiological mechanisms linking genes to individual performance under natural
conditions? What environmental factors influence gene activity? Will evolution
keep pace with a changing world? This project, by creating an ecological
genomics laboratory in a field setting, will help create a bridge between one of
the best studied ecosystems and the powerful instrumentation scientists have at
their home institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Located in the southern central
Colorado Rockies, RMBL is a 501c3 organization that advances the deep scientific
understanding of nature that promotes informed stewardship of the Earth. Each
year RMBL hosts 160 student researchers and scientists from 100+ institutions,
providing access to protected research sites and the research facilities needed
to serve as a bridge between field sites and their home institutions. Research
at RMBL has provided critical insights into a range of ecological and
evolutionary questions, including evolution, stream ecology, climate change,
population dynamics, behavioral ecology, and mutualisms. Additionally, research
at RMBL has informed policy on management of streams, water and air quality, and
climate change. More information on RMBL can be found at
rmbl.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the explosion of tools that allow scientists
to study genes, field scientists have rapidly emerging opportunities to
elucidate the genetic and associated physiological mechanisms underlying how
organisms perform in natural environments. Funding from the National Science
Foundation will be used to purchase research equipment, including a laminar flow
hood, an autoclave, a freeze drier, an ultra-cold freezer, a thermal cycler,
plant growth chambers, and a Portable Photosynthesis and Fluorescence System. In
addition to funding acquisition of equipment to support scientists, the funding
will also support development and implementation of curriculum centered on
ecological genomics for the local community school. The curriculum development
will provide a unique opportunity for students in a rural community to receive
training in modern research techniques and will contribute to national efforts
to ensure maintain economic growth through a scientifically literate workforce.