* 1315200
* Ocean Acidification:  Effect on the Availability of Divalent Trace Metals to Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Francois Morel, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2016
* USD 494,404.00

The ongoing changes in seawater chemistry caused by the dissolution of
anthropogenic CO2 into surface seawater will affect the growth of phytoplankton
and, hence, the functioning of marine food webs. One effect of the acidification
(lowering of pH) caused by the increasing CO2 is a change in the chemical
speciation and bioavailability of essential trace metals. Recent work with
natural seawater samples has shown an unexpected result: a decrease at low pH in
the bioavailability of zinc (Zn), a metal that plays key enzymatic roles in
phytoplankton. Zinc, like other essential metals, is known to be bound to
organic complexing agents in surface seawater. Acidification is expected to
decrease the extent of Zn complexation and thus augment its availability to
phytoplankton. Such increase in Zn biovailability is indeed seen upon
acidification of laboratory media in which Zn is bound to a known complexing
agent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at Princeton
University will test whether the paradoxical decrease in Zn biovailabilty seen
in acidified samples of natural seawater is explained by a shift of Zn from weak
and bioavailable organic complexes to strong unavailable complexes. Proof of
principle for such a "two-ligand mechanism" has been obtained in laboratory
systems and is generalizable in principle to other bio-useful trace metals such
as manganese, cobalt, nickel copper and cadmium. The experiments will involve
parallel chemical and biological experiments with natural surface seawater
samples at different pHs: (i) electrochemical measurements of Zn and Cd
complexation by weak and strong ligands, and ( ii) Zn and Cd uptake experiments
with model phytoplankton species and natural populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project is directly relevant to an
issue of great concern to society and will further our understanding of the
possible ecological effects of global ocean acidification, an ineluctable
consequence of the ongoing increase in atmospheric CO2. It will also augment our
understanding of the processes that control the bioavailability of essential
trace metals to marine phytoplankton. The results of the research are thus
expected to generate wide interest and some will likely be published in journals
with broad dissemination and high impact. They will be also incorporated into
two of the courses taught by the Principal Investigator at the undergraduate and
graduate levels and in a "Science day" event at a local elementary school.