* 1315276
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Surface Free Energy Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Giles Dillingham, BRIGHTON TECHNOLOGIES GROUP, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,246.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
realtime surface energy sensor that can be integrated into existing surface
treatment systems to provide process control feedback. This sensor is based on a
rapid microwetting measurement that is exceptionally responsive to surface free
energy. Wetting measurements are a standard technique for determining surface
free energies, but are slow and unwieldy to perform. The proposed approach
involves ballistic deposition of a minute quantity of a probe fluid onto the
surface. The vibration that accompanies deposition greatly facilitates
attainment of equilibrium wetting of the surface. An image of the droplet is
analyzed to determine the angle formed by the droplet tangent and the surface
from drop volume and average diameter, which is a known function of the surface
free energy. The equipment to accomplish this task can be readily integrated
into existing robotically deployed surface treatment
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be to improve quality and yield of manufactured products through
rapid, automated, and quantitative control of surface treatment properties. It
will allow quantitative surface energy measurements, used for decades in
laboratory settings, to transition into automated manufacturing control
environments. Scientific and technological understanding will be enhanced by a
deeper understanding of the effect of various surface treatment processes on
extent and uniformity of surface energy and of the relationship of these
properties to adhesion. This project will allow for more efficient, higher yield
manufacturing processes that will increase the competitiveness of our domestic
manufacturing. The initial market for this technology will include automotive
OEM?s and their Tier suppliers, medical device manufacturers and manufacturers
of consumer and industrial electronics, and food packaging.