* 1315254
* Collaborative Research:  The impact of time-dependent mantle rheology and 3-D structure on models and observations of Glacial Isostatic Adjustment
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* James Davis, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2016
* USD 234,587.00

Mantle viscosity plays a fundamental role in the long-term evolution of Earth,
controlling cooling of its interior, convective flow in its mantle (which drives
plate tectonics), and the stability of its rotation axis. Knowledge of mantle
viscosity is also crucial for modeling the long-term changes in Earth?s shape
known as Glacial Isostatic Adjustment, or postglacial rebound. These changes are
associated with Earth?s glacial cycles, and accurate estimates of mantle
viscosity appear to be key to resolving a number of ongoing debates in climate
research. Our knowledge of the viscosity of the mantle, though, is highly
uncertain, since Earth?s interior cannot be directly observed, but only probed
indirectly through observations at its surface. Two of our most useful tools for
this are seismology, which provides high-resolution information regarding
important material boundaries in the interior of the Earth, and geodesy, which
provides observations relating to postglacial rebound, such as crustal
deformation, variations in sea-level and gravity, and changes in Earth?s spin
axis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine seismic models and geodetic
observations to estimate parameters of an Earth model that includes composition,
temperature, degree of melt, and other thermodynamic and compositional
parameters. By using seismological models and geodetic observations
simultaneously, the project can potentially take advantage of the best resolving
power and sensitivities of both observational techniques to determine a model,
unified in the sense of fitting both types of observations. The primary question
to be addressed in this project is how feasible (in terms of capability for
constraining multiple parameters of the Earth model) such an approach is. Along
with state-of-the-art seismic and geodetic information, the project will employ
recently developed methodology for calculating rheological properties across the
broad spectrum of time scales relevant to geophysics, from seismic wave
frequencies to strain rates associated with plate tectonics. This study will
lead to preliminary three-dimensional models for mantle rheological parameters
based on seismic models, and to consistent estimates of deformation, gravity,
and sea level change associated with postglacial rebound; these will lead to an
improved understanding of mantle convection and the impact of long-term climate
change on the solid Earth.