* 1315118
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhanced Dexterity Minimally Invasive Surgical Platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Shorya Awtar, FlexDex, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to establish
the feasibility of a novel minimally invasive surgery (MIS) technology platform
that provides enhanced dexterity, intuitive control, and natural force feedback
via a low-cost mechanical design. MIS is performed through small holes on a
patient?s body to minimize patient trauma, blood loss, and recovery time, and it
generally involves suturing, knot-tying, and fine dissection, all of which
require enhanced dexterity in the surgical tool. Existing MIS tool technology
offers a choice between affordability and functionality. Currently available
low-cost mechanical (or non-robotic) tools either lack the necessary dexterity
or are counter-intuitive to operate, resulting in surgeon fatigue and
significant training requirements. Robotic tools provide exceptional dexterity
and intuitive control, but are very expensive and beyond the reach of many
healthcare providers and patients. The proposed MIS technology overcomes this
affordability versus functionality tradeoff via a novel forearm mounted tool
configuration and innovations in parallel-kinematic virtual center mechanisms
that makes the tool input joint coincident with the surgeon?s wrist. This
results in a natural and intuitive motion transmission from the surgeon?s hand
to the tool end-effector via a low-cost design that does not require any
sensors, actuators, or computer-control.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be realized by the
development and commercialization of the proposed medical device technology will
enable surgeons to perform complex MIS procedures such as colectomy and
hysterectomy that require suturing, knot-tying and fine dissection with minimal
training and at a fraction of the cost of surgical robots. Moreover, the
proposed technology can be adapted to any style of end-effector (needle driver,
forceps, graspers, scissors, retractor, etc.) and therefore serves as a platform
technology for all kinds of surgeries. Given this versatility and reduced cost
and training burden, the proposed will enable a wider adoption of MIS, thereby
bringing its benefits to a larger portion of the society. In addition to
benefits to the patient, MIS also provides healthcare cost-savings due to
shorter hospital stays, less postsurgical pain medication, and reduced risk of
post-operative complications. Consequently, MIS has impacted several surgical
specialties, including bariatric, gastrointestinal, urologic, abdominal,
gynecological, and cardiothoracic. Although millions of MIS procedures are
performed in the US each year, wider adoption has been limited so far by the
high cost of current surgical robots, the training burden of traditional hand-
held instruments, and the complexity of certain MIS procedures.