* 1315266
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Lighting Source for Bioreactors using Plasma-Shell Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Adeline Miermont, IMAGING SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop Plasma-Shell technology for incorporation into large, highly efficient
and easily scalable, and conformable lighting sources for use in
photobioreactors. Plasma-Shells are small gas encapsulating devices that emit
light when energized. Plasma-Shell lighting systems offer opportunity not
available with currently available lighting technology including LEDs and high
intensity discharge lamps. Specifically, Plasma-Shells offer the ability to
produce a large area diffuse light that does not saturate the algae mass.
Additionally, the Plasma-Shell array systems will improve efficiency and
scalability of photobioreactors with a low cost, submersible, thin, flexible,
ultra-large area, rugged, light source. The parameters of the Plasma-shell
lighting system also will be easily tunable to adapt to the needs of different
algae species, such as different wavelengths and variable illumination intensity
and duration. Under this SBIR, a prototype Plasma-Shell light source will be
designed and fabricated for use in a photobioreactor. The proposed systems will
be submersible and have a surface area of several feet and a thickness of a
quarter inch. This novel lighting source will prove to be crucial for achieving
highly efficient production of algae in photobioreactors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project,
if successful, will be a novel technology that will provide a large, cost-
effective, diffuse, easily scalable, and conformable light source for use in
photobioreactors. This research has high commercial potential as the end product
will be more efficient and scalable than the current light sources for
photobioreactors. Lighting is the key to improved efficiency and scale up of
photobioreactor systems. Efficient scalable bioreactors will lead to greater
production of algae for use in pharmaceuticals, food supplements, livestock
feed, fertilizer, carbon dioxide sequestration, oxygen production, water
purification, and green energy. It is anticipated that the proposed novel system
will compare favorably to existing lighting source and thus, become a critical
component in many photobioreactor designs. The lighting system designed under
this SBIR is intended to be sold as custom and/or off-the-shelf photobioreactor
lighting system to satisfy the growing market for photobioreactors. Reduced
costs and improved yield will allow algae to be economically produced for
current applications and emerging markets such as biofuels.