* 1315350
* SBIR Phase I:  An automated software for dimensional analysis of nanomaterials from electron microscopy images
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jeffrey Whalen, FullScaleNANO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,681.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will further develop a
new software package for automatic dimensional analysis of nanomaterials from
electron microscopy images. The difficult task of manual dimensional analysis of
nanomaterials is a significant barrier to the success of the emerging
nanotechnology industry, nanotechnology research and development, and
nanotechnology-related government programs. The current methods of manual
analysis are slow and tedious, introduce human errors and have no traceable
standards or procedures. The innovation of this project lies in the application-
specific design of the proposed software and the special features that will
enhance the user's experience and understanding of the results. The main
objectives of this Phase I proposal are the refinement and validation of
algorithms and software routines for automated diameter and length measurements,
and self-calibration. Validations will be conducted by comparison of the
automatic measurement results with those from traditional manual measurements.
Images of samples in the form of both "string-shaped" and spheroid nanomaterials
will be used for this research and then calibrated using gold nanoparticles size
standards. The anticipated result of this proposal is a software package that is
well suited for nanomaterials dimensional analysis: fast, reliable, and easy to
use.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is its facilitation of
the emerging nanotechnology industry by saving time and money and reducing
errors during dimensional analysis of nanomaterials. The commercial impact to
industry will be greater profitability for nanomaterial manufacturers and
nanotechnology device producers, which will use the software package to conduct
rigorous but cost-effective dimensional quality control on their products.
Additionally, the proposed software package will foster trust along the
nanomaterials supply chain by establishing the first universal standardized
dimensional analysis procedure. The target market for the final software also
includes nanotechnology research facilities, where an educational impact will
result from the use of the proposed software by the next generation of
nanotechnology scientists and engineers. Regulation of nanomaterials and
nanotechnology will also benefit from the traceability and reliability afforded
by this software, and this will facilitate greater public acceptance and trust
of nanotechnology, stemming from improved nanomaterials quality control.