* 1315911
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-thick lithium-ion electrodes for efficient and low-cost manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Bryan Ho, Ballast Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is developing
ultra-thick lithium-ion electrodes to reduce the production cost and enhance the
manufacturability of advanced lithium-ion batteries. The manufacturing approach
in use today for lithium-ion batteries uses an expensive process for depositing
delicate, sub-millimeter electrode films, making the advanced chemistry cost-
prohibitive in many applications. This proposal is for the development of
engineered-porosity electrodes that enable high volume lithium-ion battery
production with simpler deposition methods. Major cost savings can be achieved
in both cell material costs and manufacturing capital investment. This project
will study the role of composite electrode composition, pore structure, total
porosity, and electrode thickness, in building robust commercial-scale
electrodes. Understanding the interplay of these engineering variables will
result in the laboratory production of large-format lithium-ion battery cells
meeting the power and lifetime requirements for near-term commercial
deployment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is to develop low-cost manufacturing processes that will disrupt
the cost curve of lithium-ion battery production, enabling widespread adoption
in large, price-sensitive markets. Furthermore, successful efforts will advance
the science of thick electrode architectures and promote structure-based
engineering approaches to lithium-ion electrodes that complement current work on
advanced materials. Lowering the manufactured cost of lithium-ion cells opens up
new opportunities in markets, which include segments of existing deep-cycle
lead-acid battery markets, totaling $1.4B, and emerging applications in grid-
level distributed energy storage, with $7B of potential in the US alone. In
lead-acid replacement applications, this technology will reduce opportunities
for lead to reach landfills. In emerging applications on the grid, economical,
long-life batteries can help build a more flexible electrical distribution
network and enable increased renewable energy integration. As this technology is
chemistry-agnostic, it will also be able to exploit future improvements in
lithium-ion chemistry. This flexible platform of energy, labor, and capital
efficient production will contribute greatly to the American advanced battery
manufacturing base.