* 1315093
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimized Signal Processing Solutions for Wireless Sensor Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Chung-Ching Shen, Streamlined Embedded Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2014
* USD 149,533.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
develop innovations that enable efficient design, optimization, and integration
of digital systems and embedded software for signal processing in wireless
sensor networks (WSNs). WSNs are used in an increasing variety of important
applications, including applications in building energy management,
environmental monitoring, and surveillance. However, deploying sensor nodes is
challenging because such devices must be developed and operated under stringent
constraints on energy consumption, cost, and reliability. The advanced signal
processing solutions developed in this project will enable deployment of WSNs
with significantly lower cost and energy consumption for a given set of
features, and will help to maximize the performance of new WSN application
features under given cost and energy constraints. This project will build on a
body of extensive research on dataflow-based design and implementation of signal
processing systems. The project seeks to bridge the gap between results from
this basic research on dataflow-based signal processing, and important
technology requirements and market needs in the digital mobile radio domain,
which is targeted as an initial application area within the WSN market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
to enable deployment of novel applications in the rapidly growing wireless
sensor network (WSN) market. The WSN market serves application areas of great
interest and societal importance, including building energy management, digital
mobile radio, defense, environmental monitoring, and surveillance. The utility
of WSNs often depends on the level of functionality that can be embedded in the
network nodes under severe cost and energy constraints. This project will help
to enable more powerful WSN deployments through its objectives in providing
energy-efficient use of more complex processing hardware, more sophisticated
software, and more advanced sensors. These optimized sensing and signal
processing capabilities can be leveraged to significantly enhance important
design objectives, including reliability and security, in addition to providing
more functionality to end users. Also, the innovation pursued in this project
will enhance scientific and technological understanding by enabling the
efficient integration of more sophisticated and heterogeneous combinations of
hardware and software subsystems in WSNs. This understanding will help WSN
system developers to envision new applications for their technologies, thereby
helping to catalyze further innovations and economic benefits.