* 1315916
* SBIR Phase I:  High Contrast Real Time Terahertz Imaging System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Patrick Tekavec, Microtech Instruments, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 148,932.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on the
demonstration of a real-time high-contrast Terahertz (THz) imaging system, based
on frequency upconversion of THz images into the near infrared (NIR) spectral
range. Due to low power of compact THz sources and poor sensitivity of room-
temperature THz detection techniques, imaging systems operating in 0.3-3 THz
range of frequencies remain far less advanced than optical or microwave
instruments. Upconversion of THz radiation to NIR enables the use of imaging
systems based on faster, more sensitive NIR detectors and detector arrays. This
technique has been demonstrated in the past, using broadband THz combined with
femtosecond NIR pulses, but the contrast of these real-time THz images was
limited. The objective of this project is to demonstrate high contrast, real-
time THz images using upconversion of high power narrowband THz and picosecond
NIR pulses in quasi-phase matched crystals. This approach will provide
upconverted THz-NIR images that can be spectrally filtered from the background
NIR light, significantly improving the contrast. The high contrast between
signal and background should allow for real time THz imaging using readily
available NIR cameras and recently developed high power narrowband THz
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project ranges from terahertz (THz) imaging systems for cancer screening to
airport security systems. Millimeter wave imaging systems, operating at 20-30
GHz frequencies, are being deployed in airports now. THz cancer screening
instruments have been in trials for a few years and have shown great promise in
the early detection of certain types of cancers. There are a variety of
industrial and security applications for non-destructive evaluation using THz
waves, which are not heavily absorbed or scattered by fabrics, plastics and many
composite materials. These and many other potential applications of THz have
been tested by researchers around the world for decades, but very few THz
instruments reached the broader scientific community and none are widely used in
the industry today. Limited sensitivity, long processing time of THz imaging
systems, and limited spectral bands not absorbed by water are the main barriers
for wider applications of these instruments. The proposed project targets all of
these barriers, focusing on a water transmission window at 1.5 THz and
potentially enabling much more practical THz instruments for a broader research
and industrial community.