* 1315037
* SBIR Phase I:  Macroscale Knudsen Pumped Solar Thermal Collector
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Mark Miles, Mark Miles Consulting Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,377.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will assess the
feasibility of a novel flat plate solar thermal collector with significantly
improved performance and economics. Current small scale collectors are limited
by radiative losses to a maximum operational temperature of 120C at efficiencies
of 45% to 55%. The proposed design will use a novel heat retention strategy for
both insulation and IR loss reduction. The design will also be optimized to
induce thermal transpiration pumping. This effect will minimize or eliminate
parasitic losses caused by pumping heat transfer fluids. For the proposed
collector, recent models indicate theoretical operating temperatures in excess
of 250C, efficiencies &gt; 70%, and a &gt; 3X cost reduction are attainable. The
project will develop a comprehensive 3D multi-physics model of the collector and
perform basic experiments to support it. A solar heating and cooling system
performance/economic model will also be developed along with a preliminary
manufacturing cost analysis. The result will provide the basis for the
fabrication of a scaled up prototype in a follow on Phase II
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to lay the groundwork for a high performance solar thermal collector
suitable for urban deployment in distributed solar heating cooling systems.
Because of their performance, solar collectors on the U.S. market are limited to
the generation of hot water. Due to low energy prices in the U.S., the solar
water heating systems these collectors support have achieved only limited market
penetration. Systems based on the new collector design will be capable of
providing hot water as well as higher value energy resources such as space
cooling and heating. The additional revenue streams will make them economically
viable in a low-cost energy landscape. Conventional water heating via gas and
electricity costs the US economy in excess of $27B per year and produces more
than 180 megatons/year in CO2 emissions. Commercial and residential HVAC
consumes 15% of the total energy used in the U.S., representing $150B/year in
expenditures and over 80 megatons/year in CO2 emissions. Addressing these
combined markets with solar solutions would realize hundreds of megatons in CO2
emissions reductions and save hundreds billions of dollars in energy
expenditures in the U.S. alone.