* 1315983
* Improving Discovery Prospects and Measurement Precision for New Physics at the Large Hadron Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Can Kilic, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Can Kilic at the
University of Texas at Austin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) has been operational since 2010, probing nature at shorter distance scales
than any previous collider experiment. In 2012 the LHC has led to the discovery
of the Higgs boson, the only particle in the Standard Model (SM) of particle
physics that had not been observed previously. After this final triumph of the
SM, the primary mission of the LHC will be to look for new physics beyond the
SM. The existence of such new physics within the reach of the LHC is motivated
by several observations which cannot be explained within the SM, but which point
to the distance scales that are being explored at the LHC. The existence of Dark
Matter (DM) in the universe with the correct properties is an example of this.
In light of the fact that no clear signs of such new physics have been observed
so far, the possibility needs to be considered that the new particles in
question may be difficult to discover, either because they are rarely produced,
or because their experimental signatures can be easily mistaken for those of
known particles present in the SM. The results of the LHC searches for new
physics will define the path of high energy physics in the future, which makes
it essential that all efforts be made to maximize the discovery potential.
Professor Kilic's research project will address how further optimization for
discovery and higher precision for measurements can be obtained in the
challenging scenarios mentioned above. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are also
several broader impacts of the research described in this project. A significant
portion of the research will be conducted by graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, which will allow them to develop critical research skills in pursuing
an academic career path. In order to make it possible for young people to
appreciate the excitement associated with particle physics, Professor Kilic will
also give lectures about aspects of modern physics at local high schools
including the Liberal Arts and Science Academy (LASA) and Travis High School. At
a more formal level, Professor Kilic also teaches a class on the SM and on
beyond-the-SM physics at the University of Texas at Austin at the postgraduate
level, the curriculum of which will be modified in light of future discoveries
made at the LHC.