* 1315356
* SBIR Phase I:  Green Solvent-Enabled Synthesis of Biobased Furans
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* David Alonso, Glucan Biorenewables LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on providing the
proof of concept that a gamma-valerolactone (GVL) based reaction system can
deliver yield and cost advantages to convert real biomass feedstocks to useful
biorenewable chemicals. Glucan Biorenewables envisions developing a scalable
furan-based chemical platform using GVL, a biomass-derived solvent, for both the
sugar separation and reaction system. Bench-scale evidence shows GVL delivers
significant improvement in dehydration selectivity and conversion of C5 and C6
sugars to biorenewable chemicals like furfural and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural
(HMF). The GVL-based reaction system provides important advantages over current
biomass dehydration processes. These include increased reactivity of homogeneous
acids for hydrolysis and dehydration, improvements in the use of solid
catalysts, increased yields through minimizing degradation, and the
solubilization and recovery of lignin/humins. These advantages translate to the
potential to improve biomass conversion with higher yields and lower energy and
capital cost than commercially available processes. The technology has been
demonstrated to be effective using pure xylose and glucose however this project
will prove the commercial viability by demonstrating efficient conversion and
solvent recycling using real feedstocks such as corn cob, corn stover, bagasse,
oat hulls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the development of a cost competitive process to deliver biorenewable
chemicals produced from waste biomass. These intermediate furan derivatives,
furfural and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), have multiple uses with enormous
opportunities to replace petroleum-based chemicals in applications ranging from
packaging to insulation. The processing and logistical costs that have long
hindered large-scale biorenewable chemical production of furfural and HMF are
addressed with GlucanBio?s novel solvent system. Given the Midwest alone boasts
more than five-hundred thousand tons of collected biomass waste such as oat
hulls, corn cobs and corn stover, GlucanBio is in a unique position to build
partnerships and create value for utilizing these waste streams. Large
innovative corporations are publicly touting their commitment of 100% plant-
based bottles by 2016. Polyethylene furanoate (PEF), a downstream derivative of
HMF, has been proven to have superior bottling properties to PET and multiple
companies are looking at the development of PEF as a substitute for PET bottles.
This is just one of many examples of uses for furan derivatives. The proposed
project provides the critical proof of concept regarding successful, cost
effective biomass conversion to furans which can address both existing market
needs and grow new markets.