* 1315612
* SBIR Phase I:  Manufacturing from Sustainable Nanocomposites Using Injection Molding
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Laura Hollingsworth, PolyNew Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project develops sustainable
materials for use in injection molding. The technical problem addressed is the
development of novel biobased polymer nanocomposites that are suitable for
injection molding. The research objective is to exploit a novel polymer
nanostructure known as a stereocomplex to make superior materials suitable for
high temperature applications. However, the material must be engineered so that
it can still be molded using conventional manufacturing equipment. Carefully
controlled experimentation, guided by quantitative calculations, is used to
address the relevant technical issues.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project has many aspects. The
biorenewable nature of the materials reduces enhances sustainability.
Fundamental scientific issues regarding the hierarchical structure of
sterocomplex containing nanocomposites will be addressed and dissemination of
results through the patent and open literature is expected. The expected impact
is the development of a superior material that enables a greener, more
sustainable, plastics products. Target markets include both commodity durable
goods applications as well as specialty materials suitable for high temperature
capable application such as steam sterilizable bone screws used in medical
applications where their biodegradability is essential.