* 1315394
* SBIR Phase I:  Project Near-Earth Object
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Michael Brewster, Triad Interactive Media
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I innovation addresses
deficiencies in science content knowledge exhibited by many elementary school
teachers. Project Near-Earth Object is a game-based professional development
product that teachers can also use as a self-assessment tool to evaluate their
content knowledge in science. It uses interactive science experiments in the
form of fast-paced mini-games to increase pre-service and in-service elementary
teachers' ability to teach science topics. Research indicates that teacher
competence in the content area greatly affects elementary students? interest in
and success in science. The innovation relies not only on gaming, but also on a
narrative in which players are "recruited" by a league of scientists to help
Earth prepare for a pending asteroid collision; they must stop a villain
determined to destroy the Earth's anti-asteroid defense. In the interactive
science experiments, teachers: use simulations to gather information related to
the problem; test hypotheses to solve to science problems; and collaborate using
social networking. The innovation uses computer-adapted differentiated
instruction, meaning that each mini-game has six levels of difficulty and the
computer adapts difficulty levels according to the learner's performance. Other
features include scaffolding of instruction, instant feedback, video tutorials,
mobile access, and a backend administrative dashboard for viewing performance
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercialization impact of Project Near-
Earth Object lies in its unique design and large but targeted market niche.
There is no direct competition for this product. Project Near-Earth Object is
the only intervention on the market that is a science learning game for
teachers, available on both Web and mobile platforms, aligned with recognized
national standards, featuring a community-based social component, and an easy-
to-use dashboard for viewing and tracking performance. There are approximately 3
million teachers and 1200 teacher education programs in the U.S., and demand for
elementary teachers is growing. Research indicates that elementary teacher
interest and subject matter knowledge in science is low. Teachers recognize that
content knowledge is essential for good teaching. 99% of elementary teachers say
that performance evaluations should include knowledge of subject matter. This
game can be easily integrated into existing teacher training curricula or
offered as a stand-alone professional development product. Its scalable online
design is conducive to distribution through multiple channels and to competitive
pricing structures. Project Near-Earth Object can significantly impact teacher
understanding of science content and more importantly how to "do science," which
will contribute to better attitudes about science and ultimately to better
teachers in the classroom.