* 1315372
* SBIR Phase I:  Dynamic Infrared-imaging of Skin Cancer (DISC)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Sanchita Krishna, SK Infrared LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,948.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project proposes to develop a
novel non-invasive diagnostic imaging tool for the early detection of skin
cancer. In this project, a controlled temperature stimulus is applied to the
suspected lesion and the thermal recovery process is captured with an Advanced
Longwave Infrared-imaging and Analysis System (ALIAS) capable of measuring
temperature differences < 0.02°C. The underlying hypothesis of this approach is
that the dynamic temperature response of malignant cells will be different from
that of the surrounding normal skin cells due to heat generation caused by
abnormal processes such as cell proliferation and thermal diffusion, increased
metabolism and excess blood flow. The Phase I effort will involve a pilot study
to develop a quantifiable metric to capture the differences in the temperature
curves and investigate whether malignant lesions such as Basal Cell Carcinoma
(BCC), Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC) and Malignant Melanoma (MM) can be
distinguished from benign lesions using this metric.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project would be a dramatic
reduction in savings to the US health care industry. For millions of people who
observe a suspicious lesion on their skin, the only options available today in
the dermatology clinic are either a subjective visual test or an invasive
biopsy. Since doctors perform biopsies on any clinically atypical lesions to
minimize risk, the ratio of benign lesions biopsied to confirmed melanomas is 80
to 1. There is a need for a real-time, non-invasive, pain-free technology that
can bridge this gap. The proposed approach is based on a fundamental quantity
associated with cancer growth, namely heat generation. Currently, we spend
$10.8B/year on skin cancer biopsies in the US along with a project increase of
14% increase annually. If this approach is successful and the number of biopsies
can be decreased by a factor of two, it would represent a $5.4B savings to the
US health care industry. The NSF SBIR funding will provide a critical bridge
funding that will enable the reduction of technological risk to solicit
commercial venture capitalist funding.