* 1315336
* SBIR Phase I:  Objective Assessment of Agitation and Sedation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Behnood Gholami, Autonomous Healthcare Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is will investigate the
feasibility of developing an objective agitation and sedation assessment
algorithm for patients in the intensive care unit (ICU). Use of machine learning
to identify clinically relevant information to characterize the agitation and
sedation state of the patients is investigated. Furthermore, a plan to
?calibrate? and validate the agitation and sedation score provided by the
algorithm will be designed. Agitation and sedation assessment is a challenging
problem for patients undergoing critical care. Agitation, which is primarily
characterized by excessive gross motor movement, is experienced by 74% of adults
during ICU stay. Agitated patients may do physical harm to themselves by
dislodging vital life support and monitoring devices with excessive
musculoskeletal activity. Oversedation increases risk to the patient since
liberation from mechanical ventilation may not be possible due to a diminished
level of consciousness and respiratory depression from sedative. Currently, the
assessment is performed by the clinical staff and no technology exists for such
assessment. It is anticipated that through this research, novel algorithms for
reliable detection of a patient?s agitation and sedation state using their
physiological signals will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes reduction in
clinical staff workload and healthcare costs. Current clinical practice in
patient critical care requires the nursing staff to assess the patient's
agitation and sedation state and provide sedatives to ameliorate the patient's
agitation. The process relies on subjective assessments and may result in
oversedation, which in turn increases the number of interventions, length of
mechanical ventilation, and duration of stay in the ICU, and hence, increases
healthcare costs. Development of an objective agitation and sedation assessment
system can have a great impact on the quality of care in a critical care
setting. Such a system can enable continuous patient monitoring and increase
quality of care. Currently, clinical staff need to attend to multiple patients
and continuous monitoring of patients is not feasible. In addition, in the
absence of an automated agitation and sedation assessment algorithm, early
indications of undersedation or oversedation can be overlooked due to the
complex nature of the patient critical care problem and clinical staff's
workload.