* 1315943
* Assessing Student Engagement in Math and Science in Middle School: Classroom, Family, and Peer Effects on Engagement
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Fredricks, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,999.00

The proposed project uses a comprehensive mixed methods design to develop
theoretically-grounded measures of student engagement in middle school math and
science classes that reflect a multidimensional construct within an ethnically
and socioeconomically diverse sample of urban youth. The project conceptualizes
student engagement as a multidimensional construct including behavioral,
emotional, and cognitive components. This multidimensional perspective of
student engagement provides a rich characterization of how students act, feel,
and think. The project has three aims which are to 1) develop reliable and valid
measures of student engagement in middle school math and science classes for the
use of teachers and researchers; 2) field test and validate these measures of
student engagement in math and science classes; and 3) test a) whether
classroom, peer, and family characteristics predict student engagement in math
and science classes, which in turn, predicts their course enrollment patterns,
academic achievement, and educational and career aspirations in math and science
and b) whether these associations differ by gender, race, and socioeconomic
status. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these goals, the proposed project includes
two studies. In study 1, twenty-five middle school students and 10 math and 10
science teachers participate in focus groups and individual interviews to inform
the development of survey instruments in fulfillment of Aim 1. In study 2, 450
middle school students and their teachers and parents participate in a field
study to test the psychometric quality of the newly developed instruments in
fulfillment of Aims 2 and 3. The sample is recruited from four middle schools
located in a socioeconomically and ethnically diverse community. Data to be
collected includes information on math and science course enrollment,
performance, educational and career aspirations, student engagement in math and
science, and support from teachers, peers, and parents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops easily-administered and
psychometrically sound instruments for teachers and researchers to assess
student engagement in math and science classes, so they can identify groups of
students who are at risk for disengagement and potentially turning away from
STEM careers as a first step towards designing appropriate school interventions.
It is anticipated that the project findings provide research-based solutions to
some of the specific behaviors that influence youth motivation in math and
science. Specifically, the project identifies family, peer, and classroom
predictors and educational outcomes of student engagement in math and science
classes that are amenable to future interventions, as well as examines
differences in the relations between context, engagement, and educational
outcomes by gender, race, and socioeconomic status. The study also yields
information that can directly and immediately support teachers in the partner
school districts to enhance the quality of math and science education. As
findings are disseminated to math and science teachers, they are able to develop
effective strategies to promote student engagement in math and science. This
multidimensional approach will advance current scholarship and practice
concerning middle school students? pursuit of math and science related fields.