* 1315026
* SBIR Phase I:  Defect Mapping Instrument for Optimizing Wafer Manufacturing Process
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Araz Yacoubian, Ler Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,871.00

This Small Business Innovation Research project will investigate the feasibility
of detecting subsurface defects in semiconductors. Integrated circuit
manufacturing involves a number of processing steps. Starting from bare wafer,
each step can lead to defects, which, if not detected, can lower yield and
increase cost. Certain buried defects are not detectable using standard imaging
techniques due to presence of absorptive layers. This proposal describes a non-
contact, non-destructive tool that utilizes optical/acoustic technique that
enables rapid wafer scan, producing subsurface defect map to locate and minimize
defects during integrated circuit manufacturing. When the tool is used in
infrared focal plane array manufacturing line, it increases detector array
operability from 95% to near 100% due to early detection of defects. The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity is applying novel optical/acoustic
technique for detecting subsurface features and defects. The research objectives
are to demonstrate the ability to detect subsurface defects that occur in wafers
during semiconductor processing. The research activities include design,
fabrication and testing to demonstrate a defect map in wafers that are not
detectable by surface imaging. The outcome will be a measurement tool that can
rapidly identify and locate subsurface defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will greatly benefit the
semiconductor manufacturing industry by providing a tool that increases yield
and reduce manufacturing cost. The end user will also benefit from the lower
cost of electronics resulting from increased yield. Environmental benefits
include reduction of wasted wafers and associated materials and chemicals used
during wafer processing. Other use of this technology is as a laboratory
instrument, providing a new subsurface characterization tool to the scientific
community.