* 1315732
* SBIR Phase I:  Wildlife Detection and Deterrence
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Neil McClure, TKO Enterprises, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2014
* USD 149,919.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project applies
innovative image recognition technology to address the nuisance and dangers
caused to society by white-tailed deer, whose populations have exploded in the
United States. White-tailed deer cause hundreds of million dollars of plant
damage annually and are involved in about 1 million car accidents per year that
kill 200 Americans, cause more than 10,000 personal injuries, and result in $1
billion in vehicle damage. No effective and affordable deer detection capability
is commercially available for warning motorists or scaring away the deer. This
project researches improvements in the image analysis field to process daylight
and low-light images produced by low-cost image sensor components to reliably
detect the presence of deer. Low cost image sensor components optimized for all
light conditions require new image analysis techniques to account for the
varying image quality. This project also researches and tests techniques that
will humanely scare/haze away nuisance deer. When the image analysis output
drives a hazing device, this demand performance capability prevents habituation,
a historical problem inherent in other scare tactics. The result of the research
is demonstration of a reliable white-tailed deer detector that incorporates an
effective, yet humane deer deterrent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is driven by the advancement of
image processing techniques using low-cost image sensor components to create a
new category of detection technology with never before realized price-
performance utility. There is no known, standalone sensor system that can be
specifically configured for the detection of pre-selected, objects of interest
or pre-determined events. White-tailed deer are one of many wildlife species
that cause damage to property and traffic accidents, affecting every rural and
urban societal demographic, and the problem continues to grow. Demand
performance deterrence is humane, applicable to any animal species, and supports
a variety of end uses including administering species-specific contraceptives,
selective trapping, and an array of traffic warning systems. This research moves
forward the creation of a generic device that can be configured for a multitude
of applications across most every segment of industry, including recreational,
medical, industrial, security, and military. The ultimate strategy for the
technology is to reduce the sensor system cost to a consumer-level price range
so that it may be incorporated into to a variety of low-cost appliances that
provide new levels of utility around the house and home.