* 1315326
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanomanufacturing process simulation and design
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Daniel Hudgins, Nanofoundry, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses
challenges in producing an industrially-feasible alternative to rare-earth-based
magnets. Rare earths comprise over 65% of all magnets in use today, which are
sourced almost exclusively from China, and their production poses serious
environmental concerns. While small samples of exotic materials can be produced
in labs, this project aims to demonstrate the feasibility of producing a viable
material at industrial volumes. The project addresses this challenge from two
fronts: by evaluating a manufacturing scheme that is new to this class of
material (magnets), and by producing a new type of material. The process
innovation is the establishment of supercritical conditions in a continuous flow
technology using a technology called ?microreactors?. This enhancement enables
the manufacturing of difficult-to-stabilize nanoparticles at industrial scales
by eliminating problems related to alternative formulations and facilitates the
refinement of the final product. The second innovation is the discovery of a new
ferromagnetic material based upon nanoscale cobalt carbide particles. The
combination of the process with the product results in a material with superior
cost performance compared to that of rare earth magnets in a wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is the future mitigation of supply and pricing risk in the magnet
supply chain due to an imminent shortage of rare earths. Further, this
innovation is expected to prove disruptive to existing global markets, will help
reinvigorate the US manufacturing industry by creating skilled jobs on US soil,
and will help offset the environmental impact associated with the mining and
refinement of rare earths. The magnet described herein will be a price-
competitive alternative to all commercial magnet types, including rare earth
magnets, in a number of applications. In the short term, it will help absorb
unmet demand arising from the rare earth shortage. In the long term, it should
penetrate a wide range of markets. The total global market for this product is
on the order of several hundred million dollars. Finally, by reducing the
reliance on rare earth materials, this magnet alleviates national security risks
associated with shortages in Chinese sources for rare earths. The research will
extend the use of an existing technology-microreactors-to make completely new
materials, thus building a basis for new production technologies and making
feasible new materials categories.