* 1315828
* SBIR Phase I:  Surface Modified Ground Tire Rubber for Additives of Asphalt Based Shingles
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* David Bain, Polymeric Designs LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project relates to the
application of a surface modification to ground tire rubber (GTR) particles,
enabling use of GTR as an additive to asphalt for roofing shingles, and
improving its use in paving. This additive replaces the costly all-polymer
additives currently used, while making use of an otherwise waste commodity.
Existing processes degrade the GTR, consume excessive energy, are high-cost, and
decrease the elasticity of the GTR if devulcanization occurs. Altogether, this
makes the final product unsuitable for use in roofing shingles, and reduces its
performance in paving asphalt. The objective of this research is to develop
alternative approaches to the current technology. The intellectual merit of this
proposal arises from the research related to polymer surface modification of GTR
particles via a combination click chemistry and atom transfer radical
polymerization (ATRP), with a polymer having considerable temperature
resistance. The anticipated results and advantages include: simplification of
the surface coating process, reduced degradation of the GTR particles in an
asphalt compound, optimization of the viscoelastic properties of the rubber-
asphalt mixture, shortening of the mixing period, reduction of the cost and
energy, and improved dispersion and compatibility of rubber particles within the
asphalt.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will stem from the
successful development of a low cost, high quality, thermally stable asphalt
additive with high dispersibility. It will be based on surface modified Ground
Tire Rubber (GTR), enabling the development of flexible, durable, high-quality
roofing materials, and enhanced paving asphalt. The polymer coated GTR particles
provide the advantages of a polymer additive, but using far less polymer.
Commercial polymers alone have been incorporated into mixtures of asphalt for
roofing and pavement, but at high cost, with current market prices of $1.50 to
$1.80 per pound. In contrast, the addition of GTR particles would cost only
$0.25 per pound. The initial estimated cost to surface modify the GTR particles
with a polymer coating has been calculated to be ~30% above material cost. The
incorporation of surface-coated GTR particles into the roofing mixture reduces
the production cost up to ~20% by reducing and/or substituting the amount of
expensive polymer additives currently used. The precursor materials are
commercially available at low cost. Aside from enhanced performance, and low
cost, using GTR particles will provide an environmental benefit, allowing reuse
of tire rubber waste typically disposed in landfills, and substantially reduces
use of a nonrenewable resource.