* 1315483
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving Electrolyte Stability in Li-Air batteries using Superoxide Dismutase
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Lin-Shu Du, MaxPower, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 145,194.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project focuses on improving
lithium-air battery system, one of the most promising electrochemical power
sources for energy storage application due to its highest theoretical energy
density. The major technical issue which has been gradually unveiled over the
last couple of years is electrolyte decomposition, which is likely the cause of
poor round trip efficiency and cycle life which hamper the commercialization of
this technology. So far most of the commonly used electrolyte solvents being
tested are not stable in Li-air batteries. A few solvent candidates have shown
improved stability, but they react with the lithium metal anode and/or show poor
rate performance. Many researchers are working on finding new electrolyte
candidates, which is challenging and time consuming. This proposal relies on an
innovative approach, inspired by nature, via introducing a catalyst to shorten
the half-life of the reactive intermediate to eliminate/reduce the root cause of
electrolyte decomposition. This approach if successful will allow the access of
current widely used electrolyte systems which have been studied for more than
decades. The approach will improve the roundtrip efficiency and capacity
retention and will open the opportunity for the commercialization of Li air
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broad Impacts/Commercial Potential of This
Project is believed to remove the major hurdle on aprotic Li-air battery system
? electrolyte decomposition and provide a longer cycle life and good round trip
efficiency at a lower cost. Once the controlled manufacturing of the nano-sized
catalyst and the mechanical processing of the material to produce a prototype
electrode material for the energy storage cells are completed, the necessary
foundation to consider a manufacturing technology program for the
commercialization for energy storage applications such as solar, wind power and
smart grid systems will have been provided.