* 1315510
* SBIR Phase I:  Microwell Array Plates for Dual-Mode Screening of Bead Libraries
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Vladislav Bergo, Adeptrix Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
the first-in-class microwell array plates for dual optical and MS imaging of
bead libraries comprising up to one million members. As a cost-effective
alternative to the traditional flow cytometry-based screening, optical imaging
of planar bead arrays has the potential to become a preferred method of analysis
in a variety of multiplexed bead-based bioassays. The preliminary experimental
data shows that the beads arrayed on optically transparent glass microchips also
can be measured with high sensitivity by MALDI TOF MS. The microchips evaluated
in this project will be fabricated from fused optic fibers, micro-structured
glass and thermoplastics to determine the optimal supports. The unique 3D
structure of the microwells will be utilized to perform highly specific elution
of selected compounds from individual beads and their localization in tightly
focused microspots near the surface of the microwell plate. Fluorescence imaging
performed at varying focus distance will provide quantitative detection of the
bead-bound and eluted analytes while the mass spec imaging will enable
structural characterization of the eluted compounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be the
availability of microchips with dual optical and mass spec readout that will
facilitate development of new methods of high-throughput screening (HTS), and
enable the use of mass spectrometry in various HTS-based applications. Such
ability will be particularly important in the field of biomarker discovery given
the need for detailed characterization of proteomic biomarkers including
identification of the protein sequence variants. This technology also will
significantly benefit the field of drug discovery, which relies heavily on the
HTS assays. The high-resolution microarray scanning techniques that will be
developed in the course of this project are expected to make significant
contribution to the rapidly growing field of mass spectrometry imaging, which so
far has been focused primarily on measuring distribution of various analytes
within biological tissues. Overall, the proposed work will accelerate progress
toward a single analytical platform that seamlessly integrates fluorescence and
mass spectrometry for the analysis of diverse libraries of microbeads including
peptide, protein and antibody bead arrays.