* 1315196
* SBIR Phase I:  Microneedle Based Home Blood Test for Early HIV Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Wendy Strongin, UHL II, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,927.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
method to allow for a home test to detect early (12 days post infection) and
chronic HIV infection. This technology will address the lack of easily available
access to private, highly accurate HIV testing that detects both early stage and
chronic HIV infection. Detecting early stage infection is important because HIV
is highly transmissible during this stage; however, early HIV infection is
rarely detected, and thus HIV is spread unknowingly. A home test will improve
access because many people find it too inconvenient or embarrassing to go to a
doctor or clinic. This is especially significant given that repeated testing is
necessary when risky behavior is continued. A highly accurate test that can
detect early infection requires blood. However, there is no simple, rapid,
painless method of drawing blood at home. If successful, this method will
quickly and painlessly draw blood, integrated into a highly accurate home HIV
test device.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to greatly reduce
the number of HIV infections in the US and worldwide. There are millions of
people at risk for HIV in the US and considerably more throughout the world. the
proposed kit is simple to use, inexpensive and confidential. This is important
because many people with HIV don?t know it, or don't tell their partners. The
impact on society could be very significant by preventing many new HIV
infections. This will both reduce human suffering, and decrease government
spending on AIDS. This project could also lead to additional inexpensive assays
that require testing of blood and, therefore, have broad applications to many
point of care (POC) testing devices. POC devices are inexpensive and accurate,
allowing for the healthcare system to realize substantial savings by replacing
expensive testing methods with simple POC tests at home, in emergency
departments, and in primary care settings.