* 1315878
* SBIR Phase I:  Automatic Extraction of Financial Data from Text
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Hassan Alam, BCL Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

The innovation is the development of a linguistically-driven machine learning
system that will extract financial data from financial text such as 10-Q
documents, with an accuracy of over 85%. To be useful to the analysts, financial
data needs to be a triple of "Financial Concept", "Numeric Value" and "Date
Range." Because of the complexity of sentences in the financial domain,
detecting the Financial Concept and attaching it to the correct Numeric Value
and Date Range remains a challenge. Current financial extraction systems record
an accuracy of less than 50%. The proposed method will use a combination of
Financial Named Entity Recognition, Semantic Nearest Neighbor location and
Support Vector Machines to improve Financial Concept detection, attachment and
semantic tagging to 85%. By combining these methods in its Phase II Research,
the innovation is the development of an end-to-end 'Automatic Extraction of
Financial Data from Text' system that is usable by computerized systems. At the
end of Phase I, the proposed method will demonstrate the feasibility of
financial data extraction on the Notes section of 10-Q documents. The Phase II
system will be designed to scale up to handle very large data sets, including
non-American English documents in near real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impact of Automatic Extraction of Financial Data from Text
system is the availability of relevant financial information in computer-
readable format with high accuracy in near real time. Currently, data embedded
in financial text are extracted manually by hundreds of people working for data
warehouses. This manual effort takes on the order of weeks making the bulk of
the data unavailable in easily computer-usable forms in real time. The benefit
of Automatic Extraction of Financial Data from Text will be in three areas: 1.
Algorithmic Trading programs will be able to use all data published worldwide
immediately after the data is published; 2. Financial data warehouses will be
able to provide much larger types of data concepts - there are 18,498 concepts
in the US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles taxonomy versus less than 180
available in commercial data warehouses; 3. There will be increased transparency
in the financial market as financial information embedded in the text becomes
computer readable. The algorithmic trading was estimated to reach over $5
Trillion with 750 Billion shares traded, generating a profit of over $600
Million in 2012. The impact of financial transparency is an intangible benefit
that will improve financial market efficiency.