* 1315090
* SBIR Phase I:  Live-cell metabolite sensors for improving biofuel production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Karen Wu, Lucerna, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,733.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the
development of fluorescent metabolite sensors that enable high-throughput
screening of genetically improved biofuel-producing cells. Currently, there are
no analytical technologies that can screen large cell populations to identify
metabolically superior cells for the purpose of improving biofuel production.
This project will identify RNA aptamers that can selectively bind pyruvate and
phosphoenolpyruvate, two essential intermediates in the metabolic pathways that
generate sugar-derived and cellulosic biofuel. The identified aptamers will be
designed in conjunction with reporter RNA tags to generate sensitive fluorescent
biosensors that can measure real-time pyruvate and PEP metabolism in
metabolically engineered host strains. The resulting fluorescent metabolite
sensors address an unmet need in the biofuel technology space and will result in
the development of a high-throughput screening strategy for improved biofuel
production. This screening approach would allow hundreds, thousands, or even
more conditions to be rapidly screened to identify and optimize conditions for
culturing microorganisms. Additionally, this screening approach would allow
metabolic engineered mutants to be readily screened and isolated, resulting in
new mutant strains with higher metabolic rate and better tolerance to high
concentrations of substrates and products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be faster and cheaper
generation of biofuels that could eventually replace fossil fuels as the major
energy supply. Limited fossil oil resources, national security, and
environmental concerns have been major drivers in the development of biofuels as
alternative and renewable energy sources. Currently, sugar-derived ethanol is
one of the only two renewable biofuels that is produced at a large scale with
global ethanol production reaching 23.4 billion gallons a year in 2011. However,
concerns with raising crop price and sustainability have propelled the
explorations of ethanol production from cellulosic feedstock as well as
algaculture. Although cellulosic and algae-based ethanol productions have been
demonstrated at the pilot level, significant scientific research is still needed
in order to transform current production methods into a cost-effective,
commercial-scale ethanol production platform. New screening tools that enable
microorganisms that produce higher target molecules at various culture
conditions and genetic modifications to be identified with unprecedented speed
has the potential to markedly impact the yields of biofuel production, which
will result in lower cost on biofuel production and help make sustainable
biofuels more commercially available.