* 1315805
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Large-Area Crystal-Aligned Substrates for Epitaxial Graphene
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Vladimir Matias, iBeam Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
need for substrates for graphene films. Graphene is a unique two-dimensional
material that has been called the ?miracle material? because of its
extraordinary structural and electronic properties that can be used in many
applications. However, graphene is a relatively new material and as such is
still not reproducibly fabricated in large areas. Highly perfect epitaxial
graphene films have been synthesized on single crystals via surface
decomposition on silicon carbide and by chemical vapor deposition on catalytic
metals such as copper. However ?epitaxial growth? where graphene atoms are in
registry with the substrate is limited by the single-crystal substrate
requirement. Electronic properties of graphene deposited on standard
polycrystalline materials are not optimal due to grain mismatch in the
substrate. In this project we utilize ion-beam assisted deposition technology to
make single-crystal like coatings on a variety of surfaces such as glass and
metal foils. We explore these artificially aligned films to produce large area
substrates for deposition of epitaxial graphene. Such substrates would enable
one to deposit high-performance epitaxial graphene on many different surfaces
without the need for rigid single-crystal substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide a technology
for large-area fabrication of high-quality graphene films. Graphene offers a
singular combination of properties such as very high conductivity, optical
transparency, and mechanical robustness, making it an excellent candidate for
transparent electrodes in photovoltaics, displays, and other optoelectronic
devices. However, what is still needed is a technology for providing large-area
high-performance graphene on a variety of different surfaces. By providing a
scalable method of ?crystal-aligned? film deposition, the ion-beam film aligning
technology can in turn enable large-area epitaxial graphene films to be
produced. These graphene films should approach the quality of those made on
small single-crystal wafers. Use of such crystal-aligned templates has already
been proven for epitaxial superconducting films that are used to manufacture
high temperature superconductor wire in kilometer lengths.