* 1315383
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-linear Mechanical System for Creating Propulsive Thrust in a Fluid Medium
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Baoxiang Shan, Pliant Energy Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,943.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
biologically inspired undulatory swimming device in which all motion is achieved
by the cyclical elastic deformation of a pre-stressed form-finding structural
system actuated by Electroactive Polymer (EAP) transducers. The design presents
and integrates multiple mechanical, electrical and system control innovations
to:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;? separate the challenges of form-finding from
actuation to enable a relatively simple system to reproduce undulatory motion
(simplifying manufacture and control, improving reliability)&lt;br/&gt;?
maximize energy efficiency by recycling priming energy, both electrical and
mechanical, required by EAP transducers.&lt;br/&gt;? overcome limitations of EAP
transducers as pull-actuators&lt;br/&gt;? develop low duty cycle power
electronics and control algorithms for flexible support of phased EAP
actuation/generation cycles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using numerical modeling and
transfer functions, analytical models will be developed for (i) the
electromechanical response of selected EAP transducers (ii) the microcontroller-
driven architecture for operating arrays of high-voltage, low duty cycle
transducers (iii) the fluid-structure interactions produced by resilient bi-
stable finlike elements. The company will integrate these models with its
existing Abaqus FEA model of fin-like elements to achieve system virtualization
and parameter extraction for proof of concept and further optimization. A drive
system subassembly will be built for testing and model
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be development of a propulsor emulating the high efficiency and
maneuverability of animal models with potential applications in propulsion and
as well as other fluid-structure-interaction devices. Implementation in Unmanned
Underwater Vehicles (UUVs), particularly if a potential self-recharging variant
is developed, would enable enhanced performance and endurance. The market for
new UUV?s 2010-2019 has been estimated at 1,144 units, value $2.3 billion,
indicating the economic incentive to enhance UUV energy efficiency and
reliability to minimize downtime and operational risk associated with re-
charging or repair in the field. Improved economics for UUV technology may
facilitate socially important work in engineering and research, including
development of offshore power generation and oceanographic surveying and sensing
to monitor climate change and its impacts. The work explores the opportunities
presented by bi-stable form-finding behavior in actuated systems to achieve
useful mechanical work. Rigorous physical modeling is required both to develop
such systems and test the limits of EAP actuators.