* 1315275
* SBIR Phase I:  Proof of Concept for a Manufacturable, Cost-effective, and Highly Efficient Solid State Transformer, Enabling Grid Modernization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Chad Eckhardt, GridBridge, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project demonstrates a
proof of concept for a solid state transformer (SST) that is commercially
feasible and can ultimately meet electric utility requirements: highly
efficient, cost-competitive, manufacturable within a specific market window, and
scalable both to high power and high voltage. Although there has been early work
in the area of SST research, current state of the art designs are based on
components that aren?t yet commercially available, limiting the ability to
commercialize and manufacture at a reasonable cost. GridBridge will introduce
revolutionary circuit topology and uniquely incorporate commercially available
devices in order to achieve the project goals. This project facilitates a cost-
effective and electrically-efficient solution, which will prove SST feasibility
to the market and ultimately enable complementary grid technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
the successful transformation of fundamental research into a commercially
feasible and customer-desirable product: the solid state transformer, or SST.
Specific to the proposed revolutionary SST circuit topology, the proof of
concept is enabling technology for numerous applications: electric vehicle
chargers, energy storage devices, and renewable integration. Phase I results are
therefore worthy of paper submissions to various IEEE divisions, including
Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition. This project will also predict an SST
market introduction and the results will therefore be disseminated through pre-
existing utility partnerships, via industry white-papers, and through conference
presentations. The societal benefit of a commercially feasible SST is colossal,
as it is the step-function change required to truly orchestrate a modern grid:
sending or receiving signals, making decisions, regulating power flow, and
easily accommodating green technology. As a direct replacement to today?s
100-year-old-design of the distribution transformer, the SST will eventually
replace numerous installed units and an incremental number purchased annually.
Savings in electrical efficiency can be calculated in the trillions of dollars.