* 1315392
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Novel Weed and Moisture Control Mat for Tree Protection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Hailing Yang, Zynnovation LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will study the
feasibility of developing a novel weed control and moisture conservation (WCMC)
mat from recycled diapers for tree protection. Disposable diapers are the most
disposed household products in United States and contribute more than 2% to
municipal solid waste. The majority of disposed diapers are currently
accumulated in landfill fields. By capitalizing on many of the unique features
of disposable diapers, the WCMC tree mat product will promote the growth of
young trees, protects against drought stress, and allows
reforestation/afforestation in arid or semiarid areas, on degraded soils, and on
wastelands. It can also reduce water usage and maintenance costs for urban
forests. The WCMC product will permit maximum usage of limited water resources
by its strong water retention capability and by its suppression of weed growth.
Investigations will be carried out on the effectiveness of this product in
protecting young trees against drought conditions, the feasibility of using low-
cost and environmentally benign manufacturing technologies, and the potential
environmental impacts. The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be threefold. If successful, it will enable 1) reduction in solid waste
accumulation, 2) faster, easier, and cheaper afforestation / reforestation
processes; and 3) reduced environmental impacts. The commercial potential of the
WCMC products will be global, and will focus on usage in arid/semiarid as well
as urban areas. The WCMC products can serve markets including weed barrier,
garden mulch, fruit and nuts tree care, and urban forestation and landscaping.
The estimated market size is about $1.2-1.9 billion. This product will help
trees survive through drought stresses with less water consumption and less
after-planting care. It will naturally lead to a reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions and increased carbon sequestration, and to a reduction in the carbon,
nitrogen and water footprints.