* 1315555
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy Efficient Conversion of Waste Tire Rubber into a Novel Slow Release Fertilizer/Soil Amendment Formula
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Alexander Oliferenko, EigenChem Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 148,135.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a novel
technology for an economical conversion of waste tire rubber into a unique ?two-
in-one? fertilizer/soil amendment formula. This is in a sharp contrast with how
the scrap tires are disposed nowadays: either by landfilling or by burning for
energy or by shredding. Landfilling and burning are environmentally harmful,
while mechanical methods as well as pyrolysis approaches are energy demanding.
This innovation introduces an energy efficient one-step chemical process that
turns waste tire rubber into a highly useful multi-purpose agricultural product.
When introduced into the soil, it serves as a slow release nitrogen fertilizer
enriched with sulfur and zinc micronutrients as well as a water-holding agent, a
soil conditioner with the bulking, aerating, and drainage functions. This
multifunctional material will be useful for horticulture, nurseries, sod
production, and also for turf grass management in golf courses and athletic
fields. The goal of this project is to prove the process chemistry technically
viable and scalable and to determine chemical, physical, and environmental
characteristics of the proposed product critical for a commercial
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project involves about 300 million automotive tires discarded annually in the US
and up to one billion in the whole world. This potentially disruptive innovation
will deliver a sustainable solution for the pressing waste management problem of
tire recycling. It will provide a valuable and affordable slow-release
fertilizer/soil amendment formula for the agricultural sector as well as for
athletic and recreational facilities. Another possible application will be an
oil absorbent/bioremediation accelerator for oil spills emergency responses.
Experimental and theoretical knowledge obtained due to this project will enrich
diverse scientific disciplines such as waste management, soil science, chemistry
and technology of rubber, and organic chemistry. Rendering waste tires a
renewable resource and a commercially viable product will promote the values of
sustainable development among the public, which is important in the era of
reducing natural resources.