* 1315984
* New constraints on and models of global and plate-scale anisotropic mantle structure
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Goran Ekstrom, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 362,443.00

The goal of this project is to advance our knowledge of the large-scale elastic
structure of Earth's interior using seismological imaging techniques and a broad
range of seismological observations. This research will lead to an improved
characterization of the anisotropic velocity structure of the mantle and will
thereby help resolve the significant differences that are found between current
seismological models. In particular, the research will address the existence and
strength of large-scale anisotropy in the transition zone and the lower mantle,
the correlation of density and elastic moduli in the deep mantle, and the
scaling between shear- and compressional-velocity variations. New measurements
of surface-wave overtone dispersion will be collected, which will be diagnostic
of the validity of existing models that indicate strong variability in
anisotropic fabric in the Pacific asthenosphere. The research will elucidate the
relationship between radial and azimuthal anisotropy in the oceanic lithosphere
and asthenosphere. Two linked investigations will be pursued. A global study
will build on the data sets collected and analysis tools developed in the
determination of the recent global model S362ANI (Kustowski et al., 2008).
Project research will extend this earlier work in several ways, most importantly
by (1) inclusion of normal-mode center frequencies and Q values to constrain
better the global average structure, (2) incorporation of published normal-mode
splitting functions to resolve transition-zone and lower-mantle velocity
heterogeneity and anisotropy, and (3) formulation of the inverse problem using a
flexible parameterization of covariation of model parameters (wave speeds,
anisotropy, and density) to facilitate model interpretation and investigations
of model resolution. A regional study focused on the Pacific will involve the
analysis of new and existing seismological data sets derived from permanent and
temporary seismic stations within and surrounding the Pacific Basin. Love and
Rayleigh wave fundamental-mode and overtone measurements will be collected.
Together with several existing travel-time data sets, and incorporating
knowledge of crustal thickness and plate age, the surface-wave data will be
inverted to determine the radially and azimuthally anisotropic structure of the
lithosphere and asthenosphere. Following the approach of Nettles and Dziewonski
(2008), a variable-resolution parameterization will be used to embed the
detailed model of the shallow mantle beneath the Pacific in the coarser global
3-D model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis and interpretation of the seismological
models developed in this research will lead to better-supported inferences
regarding the state, composition, and deformation of the Earth's mantle. Tighter
constraints on elastic and density heterogeneity in the deep mantle, and their
covariation, will inform geophysical models for planetary-scale dynamics.
Better-resolved models of the anisotropy of the oceanic lithosphere and
asthenosphere will sharpen constraints on possible mineral fabrics and strain
geometries, as well as on the potentially ubiquitous presence of melts in the
shallow mantle. The new seismological models will be useful for a broad range of
geoscientists investigating the composition, evolution, and dynamics of the
Earth's deep interior.