* 1315693
* SBIR Phase I:  Instrument to Evaluate Tissue and Circulatory Health
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Sanna Gaspard, Rubitection Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project objective is to
evaluate the technical feasibility of a hand-held, point-of-care instrument for
the detection of early-stage pressure ulcers. Pressure ulcers (PUS) are a common
healthcare problem that affects approximately 2.3 million people in the US.
Improvement in the objectivity of the early detection of PUs can advance PU
treatment and management to improve outcomes. In this project an instrument will
be designed with commercially available sensors to allow a clinician to
quantitatively measure blanching and erythema, the primary diagnostic cues of an
early stage PU. By applying the principals of tissue reflectance spectroscopy
blanching and erythema can be accurately measured independent of a patient?s
skin color. The instrument will also be designed to measure supporting
properties of the skin to provide comprehensive data for PU assessment. The
results of the Phase I project are expected to demonstrate the feasibility of
developing a low-cost device for rapidly identifying pressure ulcers and at an
early stage when they can be treated most effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this project is the address an $11 billion healthcare problem,
PUs, in the United States. The primary at risk population for the condition,
PUs, is the elderly. The elderly population is expected to double from 40
million to 80 million within the next 15 years. The availability of a low cost
diagnostic instrument will improve patient outcomes and cost of PU care. An
instrument that can allow caregivers to evaluate the presence of a PU early and
objectively will improve patient outcomes through the reduction of advanced
stage PU. It will also help maintain and improve the quality of life for people
confined to wheelchairs or beds by reducing the incidence of painful ulcers. The
financial impacts of the technology include significant potential cost savings
to hospitals, rehabilitation centers, and long term care facilities. Based on
our an average cost of $43K for an advanced stage PU, a 5% reduction in the
incidence of advanced-stage PUs will save the average institution $166K/year.