* 1315343
* SBIR Phase I:  Alumina Nanowire Battery Separator Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Xinjie Zhang, Novarials Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop an
unprecedented battery separator technology - alumina nanowire battery separators
- to address the stringent requirements for large-sized lithium ion batteries
for the coming era of electric vehicles (EVs) and plug-in Hybrid EVs (PHEVs).
The proposed battery separator will provide high temperature stability, long
term stability and high ion conductivity, which are unachievable by the state-
of-the-art commercial separators. The successful development of the proposed
separator technology will result in large-sized lithium ion batteries with a
much higher level of consumer safety and lifetime compared to present and even
improved batteries. The successful commercialization of the proposed separator
technology will assure the large scale commercial use of large-sized lithium ion
batteries in EVs/PHEVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is paramount. The global automotive battery market is
expected to grow at a CAGR of 6.3% during 2012?2017 and surpass $41 billion by
2017. Lithium-ion batteries are gaining worldwide attention as a preferred
battery option for transportation vehicles. Large-sized lithium ion batteries
with high energy density, high power density, long-term stability and safety,
sufficient power performance at a wide temperature range are highly desirable
for electric vehicles and plug-in hybrid vehicles. Battery separator is a
critical component in lithium ion batteries, since it is critical for the
overall safety and long term stability of large package batteries. The overall
market for lithium-ion battery separators is expected to grow to $2.5 billion in
2020, mainly driven by the demand for electric vehicles. Moreover, if the high
temperature stability of our flexible ceramic separator is further explored, it
is possible to construct high temperature batteries in which new battery
chemistry can be adopted.