* 1315589
* SBIR Phase I:  Minimally Invasive Device for Harvesting Autologous Bone Graft
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Neil Shah, Avitus Orthopaedics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
important unmet clinical need of enabling orthopaedic surgeons to collect bone
graft from the patient?s pelvic bone in a minimally invasive manner without the
patient morbidity and added surgical time intrinsic to the current standard bone
graft harvesting methods. The research objectives of the proposed project are to
ensure an acceptable level of safety and efficacy of the technology in a
simulated use environment (technical feasibility) and to determine the
feasibility of attaining the desired manufacturing cost point for this
technology (commercial feasibility). These objectives will be completed by
investigating various materials and manufacturing processes as well as
conducting several key verification tests to develop the current proof of
concept into a functional prototype. This project has strong intellectual merit
because this transformative technological concept has the potential to disrupt
the current methods that surgeons employ for harvesting bone graft by
introducing a novel solution that improves patient outcomes, surgical time, and
hospital costs.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project can strongly influence
the healthcare system. The technology of the proposed project has the potential
to make a broader impact by decreasing the risk of performing the bone graft
harvesting procedure compared to current methods and consequently increase the
number of surgeons who choose to collect a patient?s own bone graft in lieu of
using inferior bone graft alternatives/substitutes. Furthermore, whereas fewer
new, inexperienced surgeons are currently being trained to utilize the patient?s
own bone graft because of the risks of current harvesting methods, these
surgeons may be encouraged to perform the harvesting procedure with the
introduction of the proposed concept. The increase in use of the patient?s own
bone will benefit patients because of the widely accepted clinical benefits of
autogenous bone graft compared to synthetic or exogenous alternative solutions.
The proposed technology may also have a significant commercial impact to
hospitals because of potential decreases in operating room time and post-
operative patient hospitalization time (compared to the standard harvesting
procedure) as well as decreased per-procedure product costs (compared to
substitute bone graft products).