* 1315850
* SBIR Phase I:  Measuring the dynamics of a patent-innovation?s intrinsic value using eigenvector network centrality
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Monte Shaffer, Entrepreneurial Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

The innovation aims to develop a patent-valuation system that considers the
totality of a United States patent's ?prior-art? patent-citations. Using network
mathematics of eigenvector centrality, a patent's intrinsic value is calculated
based on recursively weighting associations between a patent and other patents
(its backward and forward citations). This methodology establishes the values of
the patents relative to each other so we have a uniform evaluation standard for
all patents in the United States Patent & Trademark Office (USPTO). This
algorithm has the potential to bring order to the patent-valuation problem. At a
particular point in time, every patent within the entire universe of United
States patents receives a score which can be ranked in a myriad of ways, such
as: within a respective patent portfolio (a firm portfolio, an inventor
portfolio, a patent-agent portfolio), within a technology classification (e.g.,
705/310: DATA PROCESSING/Intellectual Property Management), universally within
the entire network, and so on. Monitoring the diffusion of a patent's marginal
score over time (i.e., a patent's Schumpeterian shock) also makes it possible to
predict a potential lifetime value of a patent.

The broader/commercial impact of this project is to develop an objective metric
for the value of patent innovations (i.e., to deliver transparent and objective
patent-network dynamics and in the long term become like the credit-rating FICO®
score for patents). The successful completion of this project would provide
additional tools and products for those engaged in intellectual-property
management, specifically the patent holders and other organizations that strive
to estimate a patent's current and potential value. This meta-innovation about
technology will benefit all facets of commercialization ecosystems, including:
identification of viable entrepreneurial opportunities, assessment of
internal/external technological venturing, evaluation of patent-assertion
prospects, and overall management of radical innovations.