* 1315697
* SBIR Phase I:  A Smart and Collaborative Science Experimentation Tool To Inspire Future Careers in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Krissa Watry, Dynepic LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 178,500.00

The innovation is a novel Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)
science experimentation tool. This sensor-based tool is a smart and
collaborative system that will offer a friendly introduction to science
experiments for elementary aged children. The system will be developed as a
commercial product, including a game-like application to help the child
interpret and control the science experiment tool. Additionally, an educational
product line for classroom use, including grade-level appropriate curriculum,
will be developed. The innovation will engage young children in exploring the
world around them and provide STEM foundational knowledge and skills. The intent
is to foster long-term interest and subsequent higher level study in these
subject areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this
innovation will seek to produce a more technically adept workforce, by providing
young children with a gentle and friendly introduction to modern technology for
use during science labs and exploratory play. The innovation will teach critical
science, math, engineering, and elementary programming skills, providing
children with foundational knowledge to help them excel in technical school
subjects. The smart education and learning market in 2011 was worth upwards of a
hundred billion dollars and is growing rapidly. However, many of the electronic
learning toys on the market dictate the answers to the child versus allowing the
child to experiment and learn from the result. This innovation will encourage
children to follow the scientific method before they even hear the term or fully
understand the concept. Despite the commercial world benefitting from dramatic
decreases in sensor costs, very little corresponding technological improvements
have been made in science classrooms due to a lack of inexpensive, yet
effective, educational technology based tools. This innovation will offer a low
cost, engaging, and educational tool to encourage young children to explore the
world around them, teaching them that the everyday world can be viewed through
the lens of scientific literacy.