* 1315106
* SBIR Phase I:  Microcast: Cooperative Video Delivery to Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Anh Le, Shoelace Wireless, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop a novel cooperative networking technology for delivering video to a
group of mobile devices within proximity of each other. Cellular providers
cannot currently meet the demand for mobile video, which grows faster than
wireless access bandwidth. The problem is particularly challenging when a large
number of users in a cell access the same content at roughly the same time, as
it is the case during real-time popular events. The proposed solution allows a
group of mobile devices to leverage device-to-device connections and to use all
cellular connections in the group in a cooperative manner, so as to efficiently
utilize resources and adapt to wireless variations. Each device can use
simultaneously two network interfaces: cellular to connect to a remote server
and download parts of the content, and another (WiFi or Bluetooth) to connect to
the rest of the group and exchange those parts. The technical novelty lies in
the design of the cooperative network architecture as well as in the algorithms
in each building block. As a result, the common rate from the source to each
user can increase by a factor up to the group size.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project stems from the value
proposition it brings to all players involved in mobile video delivery. The
proposed technology enables mobile users, within proximity of each other, to
download a video faster and consume less cellular bandwidth. The end result is
not only a better user experience (faster download, reduced cost of data, as
well as synchronous viewing and easy sharing) but also access bandwidth savings
with direct benefits to the entire ecosystem including cellular carriers,
content providers, device manufacturers, and application developers.
Furthermore, the solution does not require changes in the infrastructure and can
be implemented as a mobile application, thus can be readily adopted. With the
unprecedented growth in mobile devices and services, this project has potential
for significant social and economic impact. Example customer segments include
the following: young people who want to share video, college athletic
departments that provide content to fans in the stadiums, cellular providers who
want to improve subscribers? experience while saving access bandwidth, and
online education in remote areas with poor wireless connectivity.