* 1315019
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultrasonic Assessment of Bone Mineral Density of the Bottlenose Dolphin: A Proposed Method for Monitoring Dolphin and Ecosystem Health
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* JONATHAN KAUFMAN, CyberLogic, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project has as its long
range objective development of a portable and non-invasive 'ocean-ready'
ultrasound device for measuring dolphin bone mineral density (BMD), as a means
for assessing and monitoring dolphin and ecosystem health. At present there is
no way to assess bone health in dolphins in managed or in free-ranging
populations. The specific objectives of this project are (i) to determine the
BMD associated with an extensive set of archived skeletal samples from stranded
bottlenose dolphins across a range of geographically distinct populations and
obtain a set of normative BMD curves versus age, according to gender and other
individual-specific morphometric features; (ii) to determine a functional
relationship between age and BMD and other individual-specific features; and
(iii) to develop an ultrasound method and laboratory system capable of
accurately estimating dolphin BMD. X-ray densitometry will be used to determine
the BMD of the dolphin radii, and computer simulated and in vitro ultrasound
measurements will be used to determine a set of ultrasound parameters. An
ultrasound based-estimate of BMD will be established, and the degree to which
BMD and morphometric measurements can estimate dolphin age (a key aspect of
understanding dolphin/marine ecosystem health) will be established.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in its potential for
managing and dealing with changes in the ecosystem such as through climate
change and from exposure to contaminants. The proposed technology therefore has
the potential for significantly expanding the ability of the scientific
community to assess not only dolphin but overall marine ecosystem health. In
addition, an ultrasonically determined value of BMD that could further be used
to estimate dolphin age would have significant and additional commercial value
worldwide. This value will be realized by marketing a commercial ultrasound
product and by offering a commercial service to marine ecosystem health
assessment groups. The degree to which the understanding of dolphin and
ecosystem health may be positively impacted by the ultrasound technology to be
developed in this project cannot be understated. As already noted, there is
virtually little if anything presently known about bone properties of dolphins,
how they may change over time, and how they may reflect changing climates and
contaminants in the oceans. This research may also have analogous significant
impacts on the health assessments of other aquatic mammals, such as sea lions
and whales. In addition, the USB-based portable ultrasound technology developed
in this project should also have large commercial value in the field of non-
destructive testing.