* 1315313
* SBIR Phase I:  A Next Generation High School Chemistry Educational Platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Christine Felice, MolySym, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation is a novel teaching platform and related lesson plans that
leverage touch-screen mobile computing devices and molecular modeling tools that
will improve student comprehension of and interest in chemistry. Understanding
the properties and three-dimensional (3D) structure of molecules is key to
succeeding as a chemist; however, it is difficult to teach this to high school
students using traditional media such as lectures, textbooks, and laboratory
exercises. Students can have difficulty understanding how two-dimensional (2D)
drawings used in textbooks represent the real 3D structures. Also, concepts such
as chirality, molecular interactions, steric hindrance, and energetic stability
are inaccessible without a 3D understanding of molecules. The proposal is to
develop an electronic notebook, molecular visualizer, and interactive
educational tool designed to increase student engagement, collaboration, and
learning in high school chemistry. The software will run on touch-screen mobile
devices, including mobile phones, making the technology accessible to a broad
population. The combination of 3D molecular visualization, interactive lessons,
annotated scenes, and traditional text, will make it much more intuitive to
learn chemistry concepts that are traditionally considered difficult.

The broader/commercial impact is a novel educational environment accessible by
mobile devices, making it available to a wide audience of chemistry students
both in the classroom and at home. The greatest immediate benefit will be to
both high school and university students. Using currently accessible mobile
devices, they will be able to visualize and manipulate molecules as never before
in an intuitive and connected environment. This type of engagement will improve
understanding of fundamental chemistry principles and will motivate more
students to continue studying chemistry or other sciences, eventually increasing
the number of Americans in scientific fields. The product of this proposal will
be distributed to high school and college chemistry classrooms. In addition,
personal versions will be available to individuals who want to further their
educational experience or for home-schooling applications. Finally, the
commercial value of this project becomes even more significant when considering
potential extensions to other subjects, such as physics, biology, and chemical
engineering. This application will also benefit researchers in the life sciences
who frequently must visualize, manipulate, and share molecular models to make
informed decisions.