* 1315692
* SBIR Phase I:  Reversible Introduction of Multiplex Automated Genome Engineering (MAGE) Competence in Yeast
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jay Konieczka, Enevolv, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
general process to enable microorganisms for rapid genome engineering. Current
technologies to engineer cells are expensive and time consuming due to reliance
on inefficient, serial modifications of DNA. Multiplex Automated Genome
Engineering (MAGE) is a disruptive technology that allows for rapid engineering
of microorganisms at substantially reduced cost. MAGE enables large-scale highly
specific genome modifications via incorporation of synthetic oligonucleotides at
multiple locations simultaneously - akin to massive parallel reprogramming of
the genome. However, use of MAGE is currently limited to E. coli due to key
genetic requirements. The goal of this project is a general process to identify
and optimize the requisite genetic features for MAGE in new microorganisms. As a
first step, the project will build on progress in making a MAGE-competent yeast
strain, which is not yet efficient for use in commercial applications. Moreover,
since potential industrial partners use their own strains for production, it
will be necessary to quickly and reversibly endow existing strains of yeast with
the capacity to undergo MAGE. The successful application of this process will
result in the ability to rapidly and reversibly deploy MAGE-competence in
existing commercial yeast strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be the rapid
and reversible introduction of the capacity to reprogram numerous species of
microorganisms for specific functions (e.g., production of specialty chemicals,
enzymes, etc.). The successful application of this process to introduce MAGE-
competence to strains of the widely utilized budding yeast, S. cerevisiae, will
result in immediate commercial opportunities - making yeast genome engineering
faster and significantly less expensive. Additionally, the demonstration of this
process paves the way for deployment of MAGE-competence in other high-valued
commercial yeasts, such as Pichia pastoris and Kluyveromyces lactis. This
project will establish the basis for a generalized process to port MAGE to other
yeasts, and ultimately other microorganisms. The introduction of MAGE engenders
the ability to rewrite or edit novel genomes, making our process synergistic
with the extraordinary decline in sequencing costs and increasing wealth of
informatics tools. Each new MAGE-competent species confers the ability to
rewrite, understand, and utilize sequence information at an extraordinary pace -
opening the door to new opportunities for understanding and engineering biology.