* 1315524
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Tissue Engineered Trachea
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Jed Johnson, Nanofiber Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop an artificial trachea made from synthetic nanofibers that is seeded with
the patient?s own stem cells in the operating room using a disposable, closed
system seeding chamber. There currently are no commercially available solutions
to large tracheal lesions that may occur from large tumors or traumatic
injuries. The research objectives of this project are to develop a reproducible
stem cell seeding protocol, determine the efficacy of seeded tracheal grafts
versus non-seeded tracheal grafts and characterize the mechanical properties of
the neotrachea after implantation for specified time points. It is anticipated
that the stem cell seeded tracheal graft will become fully accepted by the
patient?s body and facilitate the body to regenerate a new trachea on the
implanted nanofiber scaffold.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the results of
this project will not only save the lives of patients with tracheal lesions that
currently have no other viable options, but it will advance the field of
regenerative medicine and have significant benefits on the commercial
development of other tissue engineered organs. By creating scaffolds with
synthetic polymers, we are able to create the framework of nearly any type of
organ in the body ranging from blood vessels to tracheas to skin. If we can
develop a robust, fast, efficient method to seed these scaffolds with stem cells
from the intended patient in the operating room, then we have the potential to
recreate organs for any patient without the risk of rejection, without the need
for an organ donor, and without the need to be a waiting list. The ability to
repair or regenerate tissue/organs addresses a market size estimated to be
several hundred billion dollars annually. This platform technology will create a
new paradigm of regenerative medicine and advance patient care to new levels.