* 1315095
* SBIR Phase I:  Dynamic Data-Plane Verification in Heterogeneous Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Serena Chan, Veriflow Systems
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation of this work is a platform for automatic verification of network
behavior. Every aspect of our society is now tightly intertwined with the
functioning of computer networks such as the Internet. Unfortunately, modern
networks are also extremely complex, leading to a rich variety of failure modes
and outages. These errors have very high costs for businesses, including lost
revenue and customers, fines from violating regulations such as HIPAA, leaks of
sensitive information, and decline in corporate image. Automated tools to help
operators by verifying network-wide correctness do not exist. To address this
need, Veriflow will build a system, which automatically verifies security and
correctness of computer networks in real time, discovers vulnerabilities, and
assists network operators in determining their cause. Veriflow functions by
scanning a network, constructing a formal model of the network's behavior, and
using custom formal logic algorithms to automatically derive whether the network
contains faults. Veriflow's algorithms are real-time, able to vet networks
continuously as the network state evolves, detect transient errors and signal
immediate alarms, and scale to large and highly dynamic
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of Veriflow's
work will significantly enhance reliability and security of critical network
infrastructure, and ease network management tasks. The strong formal foundations
of our tool coupled with its high-speed and advanced scaling properties will
enable us to gain an important part of this emerging market. The company's past
research has demonstrated potential of the system through two working
prototypes, which have found 23 real bugs in a campus deployment serving over
70,000 machines, and perform real-time network-wide verification within one
millisecond. Veriflow's work will produce new tools and implementations which
Veriflow will make freely available for non-commercial use. Veriflow also hopes
this work will serve towards enabling interdisciplinary research across formal
methods and networking, with the common goal of enabling highly available
networking infrastructures. Veriflow will work with the University of Illinois
CITES group to deploy the system in their campus network, and in the Urbana-
Champaign Big Broadband (UC2B) network, a community broadband project to provide
gigabit fiber-to-the-premise to 2700 under-served residences and 350 community
anchor institutions. Veriflow has also established working relationships with
several large companies that serve large user populations as well as provide
outreach to academic and research institutions.