* 1315209
* SBIR Phase I:  Low power hardware-software subsystem for intelligent sensory stream analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Atif Hashmi, Thalchemy Corp
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project will develop an
ultra-low power reconfigurable hardware watchdog preprocessor for identifying
and acting upon spatial and temporal trigger signatures (events of interests) in
continuous sensory data streams. The proposed approach offloads continuous
sensing and trigger signature detection from the application processor to the
watchdog. Current cyber-physical systems rely on an application processor to
analyze continuous sensory streams of real world phenomena to identify trigger
signatures. However, continuous monitoring and analysis of sensory streams in
software on an application processor requires a significant energy budget,
particularly for high volume data streams, making this approach unsuitable for
battery-operated devices. The proposed watchdog preprocessor will effectively
process multiple sensory modalities and timescales, will easily be reconfigured
for a broad range of trigger signatures, and will consume minimal energy,
allowing continuous deployment in energy-constrained systems. During Phase I,
the module will be validated via software emulation by performing trigger
signature detection in a continuous data stream. It will then be prototyped on
an FPGA, connected to a smartphone development board, and tested using real time
sensor data input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project is to enable continuous sensing applications in a wide range of
battery-operated sensing devices, including personal mobile devices like
smartphones, tablets, and smart watches; wearable health monitoring devices for
tracking EKG/EEG and other vital signals; and remote sensing devices for
monitoring structural integrity, emission levels, pollutant concentrations, or
seismic data. In these applications, continuous sensing triggers context- and
location-aware computation or communication in response to sensory stimuli in
the device?s environment. Without dramatic innovations in the development of
ultra-low power sensory processing, continuous sensing will remain a niche
application limited to environments with a stable and plentiful power source. In
contrast, this project will demonstrate the viability and potential widespread
deployment of continuous sensing in mobile and remote environments. The ability
to flexibly deploy continuous sensing for these and other applications has the
potential to revolutionize these markets and create entirely new and unforeseen
application domains, dramatically altering the extent to which cyber-physical
systems can interact with their physical environments.