* 1315792
* SBIR Phase I:  Hands Free Silent Tactile Obstacle Avoidance System for Blind Travelers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Dan Ballard, Fauxsee Innovations LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 164,500.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to design,
develop, evaluate and specify an ultrasonic blind mobility assistance device
that will provide an effective, affordable, lightweight and intelligent
navigation assistant for vision-impaired people. Over 46% percent of the 11.4
million visually impaired people in America experience head injury at least once
a month of which 23% require medical attention while in motion. The long cane
and the guide dog or seeing-eye dog have been the most used method of providing
mobility assistance for the blind for decades. Since these technologies focus on
lower body protection they can actually lead the unsighted user into an upper
body hazard, causing injury rather than protecting the user. A new systems
innovation is needed that combines the latest available sensor technology and
components with embedded intelligent functions to provide motor related
assistance to those with vision disabilities. A new method designed by a blind
inventor is proposed to provide hands-free and silent communication of
information to these users, transmitting adequate, accurate obstacle-avoidance
information for the sight disadvantaged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be an affordable assistive
device to accurately and effectively protect the unsighted from head and upper-
body injury while in motion. There are 11.4 million people with extreme vision
impairment in the US and more than 160 million globally. The resulting design
will use modern technology to enhance movement by allowing more freedom and
confidence. The Phase I goal is to evaluate, analyze and finalize a system
design of a mobility device for the blind that silently and without vibration
detect and convey detailed location information about hazards and obstacles that
make safe and effective travel difficult. The product is envisioned to be a pair
of sunglasses that would contain sensors that would detect objects and
communicate when it nears an object within a specified range. The system design
will consider pace of technology improvements and maturity of wireless, mobile
internet, higher density manufacturing for more capable microcomputers and
sensors; forecasts of these ever improving technologies and their product
maturity to address system features will be considered as the system transitions
to Phase II.