* 1315059
* SBIR Phase I:  Computational Screening &amp; Synthesis of MOFs for Hazardous Gas Storage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Mitchell Weston, NuMat Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project searches for
better materials to efficiently and safely store gases used in semiconductor
manufacturing. Currently these gases are stored in tanks at low pressures in
dilute concentrations for safety reasons, which requires the use of many tanks
that need to be frequently refilled. This increases the cost of semiconductor
manufacturing which drives up the cost of consumer electronics. Porous
materials, which soak up gases like bath sponges soak up water, can be used to
store these gases in larger concentrations while maintaining safety. However,
the number of porous materials that we can use to potentially store these gases
is enormous (i.e., hundreds of millions) and so quickly finding the best
material requires advanced computational screening methods. This project will
computationally generate millions of hypothetical porous materials and screen
them for their ability to store gases used in semiconductor manufacturing at
industrially relevant temperatures and pressures. The computationally screening
data will be used to synthesize and test an optimal material in the laboratory,
which could subsequently be manufactured at larger
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be the cheaper production of electronics and a safer working
environment in semiconductor manufacturing facilities. This will open the door
to designing porous materials for other gas storage applications in such areas
such as adsorptive heat exchange, carbon capture, and commodity gas
transportation. Even more broadly, the successful determination of an optimal
material via large-scale computational screening will further validate the
utility of ?big data? in the modern scientific enterprise.