* 1315650
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Efficient Spraying System for Staple Polymeric Nanofibers onto Nonwoven Rolled Good Manufacturing Lines
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Miles Wright, Xanofi, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
methods to efficiently spray staple polymeric nanofibers (NFs with avg. diameter
~400 nm) of short lengths (200-700 micro-m) in wet or dry form at high rates
onto rolled good nonwoven substrate manufacturing lines. Existing nanofiber
technologies simultaneously produce at low throughputs and apply NFs at very
slow line speeds (~1-30 m/min) as a low basis weight surface coating onto
nonwoven substrates. Due to the inefficient delivery and high costs of NFs, they
are commercially only used in high-end applications in filtration, acoustics,
medical, energy and textiles. By separately producing bulk NFs and developing
methods to efficiently spray them at high rates (&gt;150 m/min) inline, the
significant value of NF?s can be more widely applied to the US nonwovens
manufacturing sector. The key research objectives include developing methods to
disperse NFs for wet or dry spraying, determining how to spray NFs using
commercially available equipment, and testing the value that sprayed nanofibers
add to air filtration and acoustic nonwoven products. It is anticipated that
methods to spray and disperse NFs will be developed and pilot spraying equipment
design requirements will be determined as a result of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact / commercial potential of this
project could unleash the high value that NFs can add to nonwoven products by
spraying bulk, short-length polymeric nanofibers (NFs) inline at full line
speeds (&gt; 150 m/min) in nonwoven manufacturing processes using commercially-
available spraying hardware. The NF spraying equipment would be a fraction of
the hardware costs compared to existing electrospinning and melt blowing NF
technologies. Recently a novel transformative NF closed-loop chemical production
process has been scaled up and it addresses a fundamental limitation of current
NF processes ? high throughput off-line production of short length NFs. Spraying
nanofibers at full nonwoven line speeds would accelerate the growth rate
(estimated at 34% per year) of the existing $176 million market for nanofibers.
In the $6.6 billion air filtration market, this novel NF spraying technology
will be a key to improving filter efficiency and lowering costs through new
improved products worth hundreds of millions of dollars. The first target
markets for spraying nanofibers in-line will be for air filtration and acoustics
applications. The broader impact of developing nanofiber spraying capabilities
will make the US nonwoven industry more competitive worldwide and improve North
Carolina?s economy through job creation.