* 1315726
* EDU: Collaborative: When Cyber Security Meets Physical World: A Multimedia-based Virtual Classroom for Cyber-Physical Systems Security Education to Serve City / Rural Colleges
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2013,10/31/2015
* Thomas Morris, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 10/31/2015
* USD 51,360.00

This project establishes a multimedia-based virtual classroom with a virtual lab
teaching assistant for the education of cyber physical system (CPS) security.
Such a virtual classroom helps college students in resource-limited rural areas
to learn the latest CPS security knowledge via an on-line peer-to-peer learning
environment with other students from larger schools. This project includes three
novel contributions: (1) all learning materials embrace an application-driven
learning approach, with examples from diverse areas such as healthcare,
renewable energy, and industrial controls used as the basis for CPS attack
analysis; (2) with the help of a multimedia company, the project is building
interesting virtual classroom lectures; and (3) to meet the open access lab
requirements, the project is building interactive virtual lab helper software to
enable remote students to conduct virtual hardware lab experiments and obtain
help using multimedia tools. The design encourages innovative learning in
several ways: developed labs require an iterative process with idea incubation
to force students to follow a more mature creative design process; all labs
intentionally include some ambiguity to encourage the search for multiple
answers to a single problem; and the 3E (Explain-Exploit-Explore) based pedagogy
is adopted for all CPS security labs/projects. The basic level labs emphasize
concept explanations. The intermediate level senior projects require students to
exploit previous knowledge to perform a multidisciplinary CPS security task. The
advanced-level labs require independent exploration to reach creative solutions.
The resulting teaching methodologies can be extended to other rural colleges and
this project uses a proactive dissemination plan to achieve this aim.