* 1315651
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of High Energy/Power Polymer Cathode for Li-ion Battery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Rong Kou, EC Power
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
novel high energy/power density polymer based cathode material for Li-ion
battery. There is great demand for inexpensive, lightweight, and environmentally
friendly Li-ion batteries for emerging applications such as plug-in hybrid and
electric vehicles and efficient utilization of intermittent renewable energy.
The most desired improvements on the current LIB technology include higher
energy/power density, better safety characteristics, and more renewable
synthesis of battery materials. The greatest challenges of LIBs mainly lie with
the cathode. Transition metal oxides and phosphates are currently the dominant
cathode materials, but their specific capacities of below 200 mAh/g limit their
energy density. These materials are non-renewable and energy-intensive to
produce, and they can evolve oxygen gas during cycling, which raises great
safety concerns. To address these issues, this project will develop a high
energy/power density polymer cathode with stable cycling and excellent rate
performance at a lower cost compared to conventional cathode in LIBs. The
polymer cathode synthesis can utilize renewable biomass resources and consist of
eco-efficient processes, making sustainable Li-ion batteries possible. The use
of polymer cathodes may also improve thermal safety of Li-ion batteries compared
with conventional cathode materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is that the high energy/power
density polymer cathode will significantly improve the performance of cathode in
conventional LIBs with the utilization of environmental friendly material. If
successful, it is anticipated that the proposed polymer cathode will have a
higher gravimetric energy density than that of conventional cathodes, such as
LiCoO2, LiFePO4 and LiMn2O4. Eco-efficient synthesis processes using
inexpensive, renewable resources should also lead to a production cost below
that of conventional cathodes. Particularly, the merits of the polymer cathode,
including high energy density, lightweight, high flexibility and environmentally
friendly will make the products highly competitive in the military market.