* 1315259
* Algorithms and modeling for nonlocal models of diffusion and mechanics and for plasmas
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Max Gunzburger, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,000.00

The project involves the modeling, analysis, algorithmic invention, and
numerical analysis of novel models for three physical systems, namely diffusion,
solid mechanics, and plasmas. In the first system, the PI considers a nonlocal,
integral model for non-Fickian (or anomalous) diffusion. The model has as
special cases fractional Laplacian and fractional derivative models but
generalizes these models in several ways such as allowing for spatial
heterogeneity and anisotropy, less smooth solution behavior, and a simple means
for treating problems posed on bounded domains. The project addresses several
issues that are crucial to the efficient, robust, and accurate approximation of
the nonlocal diffusion model. In particular, the effects of truncating kernels
and data so that computations can be done on finite domains are analyzed,
combined finite element/domain and data truncation error estimates are obtained,
and a goal oriented, adjoint equation-based grid adaptation methodology is
developed, analyzed, and tested. In the second system, the PI considers the
nonlocal, spatial derivative free peridynamics model for solid mechanics. The
model allows for discontinuous solutions so it is especially well suited for
modeling defects. As such, its efficacy has been demonstrated in several
sophisticated applications, including the fracture and failure of composites,
crack instability, fracture of polycrystals, and nanofiber networks. The project
involves the development of a computational methodology that takes full
advantage of the multiscale properties inherent in peridynamics and which
results from the phenomenological horizon parameter that limits the extent of
interactions. In the third system, both the Vlasov-Poisson and cold-ion systems
for modeling the expansion of ions from high to low-density regions are
considered. The project includes the development of a new cold-ion model that
remains valid beyond the time of singularity creation, showing that solutions of
the new model remain the limit (as the ion temperature tends to zero) of
solutions of the Vlasov-Poisson system, studying analytically and
computationally the transition that occurs as the density ratio decreases from
solutions having no singularities to ones that do, treating problems with
multiple species of ions, and developing efficient numerical methods for two and
three-dimensional settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
fundamental issues that arise in the mathematical and computational treatment of
three physical systems that are of huge importance in a wide variety of
applications. These include but are not limited to the nucleation and
propagation of defects, (cracks, delaminations, etc.) in solid bodies (airplane
wings, nuclear reactor containment vessels, etc.); anomalous diffusive behavior
observed in subsurface water, oil, and gas flows, in animal foraging behaviors,
in polymeric flows, in exotic materials, etc.; and in ionized flows in lasers,
space propulsion systems, supernovae, etc. Obtaining useful information about
such complex systems requires massive computational efforts which can be greatly
aided by improvements in mathematical models, qualitative theoretical
information about solutions of those models, and, most of all, by better, more
efficient and more accurate computational algorithms. Because of the wide-
ranging settings that the project impacts, the results obtained will be of great
interest to scientists, engineers, and policy makers involved in, among other
things, the theoretical study of physical phenomena, in the design and
manufacture of new devices, and in the assessment of risks and design of
remediations.