* 1315477
* SBIR Phase I:  Linear Media Handling System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Mark Spieker, Infinity Physics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,983.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project creates a commercial
linear media handling system (LMHS) that automates the manufacturing of magnets
made from new superconductor (SC) materials. SCs offer the promise of tremendous
energy savings and innovative devices due to increased energy density compared
to existing limitations of conventional conductors. To date the expense of
manufacturing and operating SCs have limited them to use in little more than
MRIs and particle accelerators. Conventional SCs require extreme environments
for operation and remain prohibitively expensive to deploy. Recent advances in
SC materials science, cryogenic refrigeration, and controls systems have created
the possibility for modern SCs that allow higher magnetic fields at higher
temperatures, to deploy in mainstream applications such as MRIs and wind turbine
generators. The one remaining challenge is physically shaping these fragile new
materials into wound magnets that can replace conventional magnets, for example
in motors and generators that power our world. By combining unique controls and
mechanical designs not in the market today, this machine improves industrial
fabrication methods for magnets that exploit benefits found in fragile
materials. The result is a production capability that offers economically
attractive output rates while simultaneously delivering technical reliability
for dependable devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is that LMHS provides the remaining piece of
technology that will initiate an industrial revolution. Given the achievement of
a production line for reliable SC windings, devices will be shaped by existing
manufacturers that take advantage of the efficiency and energy density possible
with SCs. The reason for the phrase industrial revolution is the breadth of
industries affected. The benefits of SCs will rapidly spread to devices that
span scientific, military, industrial, and eventually even individual consumer
applications. MRIs could even be made portable using new SCs. Winding precision
will create magnetic fields with greater precision and increased controlled
magnetic flux densities. This will impact research from medical to material
science. Military applications range from more efficient and small profile yet
high power motors and generators for defense to civilian applications. It cannot
be stressed enough that without the achievement of technical reliability in SC
windings, none of these applications will occur. Current winding machine
manufacturers rely upon human intervention and mechanical means of control.
These cannot deliver the accuracy needed for the precise control of handling
fragile media. LMHS is the bold innovation required to bring on an industrial
revolution.