* 1315663
* SBIR Phase I:  In-Situ Sketching: Drawing on the Real World
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Julie Dorsey, Mental Canvas, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project
demonstrates the feasibility of a sketching system that bridges traditional
drawing and three-dimensional modeling, offering a novel way to develop, explore
and share visual ideas in 3-D. Using a fusion of hand-drawn strokes and captured
imagery that can replicate the spatial and geometrical relationships found in
the real world, these scenes are developed in 3-D at a speed and flexibility
impossible with existing technology. The success and widespread adoption of the
technology depends on the creation of a compelling and intuitive user
experience. In order to confirm feasibility and bring the new platform to the
market, the primary objective of this project is to complete the development of
a tablet-based version of the system. The proposed research necessary to achieve
this goal includes four interrelated parts: capture and exploration of exterior
scenes, development of a user interface tailored to the new sketch paradigm,
expansion of the sketching system to leverage data captured dynamically in situ,
and a thorough evaluation of the user experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop technology
that will directly impact creative design as practiced by professionals (e.g.,
architects, film makers, engineers, artists) by offering a new platform for
creating and editing 3-D scenes, and will also impact the communication of
ideas, where D representations predominate. In today's market place, the
competitive position of many firms is often determined by their ability to
rapidly design products, generate concepts, and evaluate new solutions.
Moreover, over 70% of design costs are committed during the conceptual design
phase. This technology has the potential to markedly speed this phase while
qualitatively improving the development of these ideas. 3-D printing technology
presents another application for this technology, whose commercialization (even
to home users) has increased the demand for CAD software by hobbyists,
independent inventors, and small businesses. The technology developed through
this project will seize on this market opportunity and will also generate other
business opportunities in software authoring tools, direct content creation, and
consulting services. The core technology will also have applications in areas of
cultural heritage, consumer marketing, and advertising.