* 1315040
* SBIR Phase I:  The Development of Higher Voltage, Longer Life and Lower Cost Activated Carbon Materials for Supercapacitors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Edward Buiel, Coulometrics
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 148,138.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project seeks to solve
the problems of limited voltage, energy density, and lifetime in Electric Double
Layer Capacitors (EDLCs). These issues have largely lead to the failure of EDLCs
to become a significant part of the energy storage landscape. Over the years,
many different efforts have focused on developing new carbon materials for
EDLCs, including those focused on exotic and expensive materials such as carbon
nanotubes, carbide derived carbons and Graphene. None of these have so far
succeeded at matching the energy density, lifetime, or voltage range of 15 year
old commercial carbon materials. This project will attempt to prove that this is
related to functional groups on the carbon surface that, when assembled in an
EDLC and charged, are REDOX active to form water in the electrolyte. The
objective of the research will be to eliminate these species and other surface
functional groups, while maintaining the exceptionally high surface area
necessary for high capacitance, through precisely controlled thermal treatment
of activated carbon. This will result in dramatic increases in the voltage,
energy density, and life of current EDLC products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will involve dramatically
expanding the value of ultracapacitors to various applications and enhancing
their societal impact. Supercapacitors have failed to meet expectations for
market growth largely due to high cost, premature failure, low voltage (matching
Li-ion battery voltages requires two devices in series) and low energy density,
and have seen minimal technical progress over the last decade. Our technology
would increase the energy density, lifetime and voltage to levels that would
enable much more widespread adoption in applications currently restricted to
batteries alone. Additional societal impact, and directly related commercial
advantage, would stem from the fact that this technology could eliminate the
requirement for exotic and expensive precursors for carbon production, allowing,
for the first time, the use of inexpensive water filtration carbons. The
combined lower cost and improved performance would expand EDLCs use in
applications like hybrid cars, buses, wind turbine pitch control and grid
storage, all of which have tremendous societal impact and where cost is the
primary barrier to entry for EDLC manufacturers.