* 1315817
* SBIR Phase I:  "Innovative drug development kit platform to advance cancer therapy"
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Marcela Karpuj, BioA2Z
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,893.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a high-throughput, loss-of-function (LOF) humanized pre-clinical tool
that is specific to membrane proteins (MPs), and addresses limitations of
existing technologies. This LOF technology consists of an array of cell lines
each expressing a single tagged membrane protein (t-MP). Specific down-
regulation, through internalization of the t-MP, occurs within 2-4 hrs,
following exposure to a synthetic molecule (SM) that explicitly binds to the
tag. Reversible gain-of-function is achieved when cells are exposed to new media
devoid of the SM, providing a simple and accurate internal control. The proposed
studies will examine translation of this tool to MPs associated with cancer.
Feasibility tests of this approach will be achieved by over-expression of
tagged, well-characterized oncogenic MPs that mimic their biological activity
in-vitro. Down-regulation of these MPs, assessed by the loss of their oncogenic
characteristics, will provide final validation of this technology. This approach
will then be utilized on several other membrane proteins to prepare this
platform as a potential product or service.

The broader commercial impact of this project, if successful, is improved LOF
tools such as knockout mice, RNAi, small molecules, and antibodies that are
widely used in pharmaceutical development processes from basic research to
large-scale manufacturing. The proposed technology is affordable, rapid, easy to
use, and specifically down-regulates MPs in a reversible manner. These
attributes enable unique kinetic assays performance in a physiologically
relevant manner, providing broad applicability including target validation, drug
discovery, biomarker identification, and functional analysis. Development of
this next generation LOF method will open LOF analysis to all researchers by
eliminating technical barriers, reducing costs, and increasing speed to results.
Additional attributes that make this technology attractive to personalized
medicine include the potential for single cell-specific mutagenesis analysis.
Phase I of this grant will concentrate on creating a cancer in-vitro platform,
while Phase II will expand these findings into other diseases and translate it
to in vivo models.