* 1315067
* SBIR Phase I:  Nano-textured Light Management Layers Fabricated by a Roll-to-Roll (R2R) Nanoimprint Manufacturing Process - Significant Impacts to The Solar Photovoltaic Industry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jim Wang, Nanonex Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,781.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
commercialize innovative light management films that will improve the
efficiencies, reduce manufacturing costs, and benefit the overall deployment
economics of wafer- and film crystalline-silicon (c-Si) solar photovoltaic (PV)
cells. These films will be created from inexpensive materials by a scalable
roll-to-roll nanoimprint production process. These films are designed to be
applied simply to near-standard PV cells in the PV manufacturing facility, at
relatively low temperatures. These light management films will combine light-
trapping and anti-reflection properties to increase cell efficiencies, while
reducing costs below those of existing technologies. This technology will
significantly reduce the cost per unit power ($/W) of photovoltaic modules in
several PV manufacturing sectors, and will increase in value as the thickness of
crystal silicon solar cells decreases over the coming years.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will benefit the overall
deployment economics of wafer- and film crystalline-silicon (c-Si) solar
photovoltaic cells, therefore benefit the 90% of the current solar PV market.
This approach has significant near-term impact because it first addresses one of
the largest, mature segments of current PV and mc-Si technology, which will
translate to substantial annual cost reduction impact. Because the proposed
technology is additive to the nearly-finished cell, it easily integrates within
existing process flow at low cost. In the mid-term, the approach has even
stronger, enabling impact. As the wafers continue to get thinner, the light
trapping becomes increasingly important to keep the module efficiencies at a
competitive level thus critically affecting the emergence and adoption of the
thin-wafer and film c-Si technologies. The approach is especially critical to
those technologies because it is additive and there is no material loss of the
already thin wafer or film. It is important to note that increasing module
efficiency has the benefit of lowering Balance-of-System costs across system-
level installations and thus will create other cost savings.