* 1315770
* SBIR Phase I:  Wise-Irr: Smart Irrigation via Wireless Underground Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Mehmet Vuran, Wildsense
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 129,661.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project
investigates the feasibility of novel wireless underground communication
technologies for real-time agriculture field monitoring to establish the proper
timing and amount of irrigation for greatest effectiveness. Existing solutions
cannot be widely adopted due to their high costs and disruptive operations. This
SBIR Phase I project leverages novel underground communication techniques
developed as part of an NSF CAREER award to commercialize smart irrigation
management solutions and validate business hypotheses. An underground
communication system was innovated based on empirical and theoretical
underground communication models. The resulting underground communication design
is employed to provide communication ranges of up to 85m from an underground
sensor to a center pivot irrigation system. Accordingly, this SBIR Phase I
project focuses on two main research topics: (1) Error Control: An adaptive
error control scheme is devised to provide reliable communication under varying
environmental conditions and (2) Sampling Scheduling: Effective soil moisture
sampling scheduling algorithms are developed to improve the lifetime of an
underground sensor network and minimize operational costs. Based on these
innovations, the devised systems will feed real-time soil information into
irrigation management systems for improved crop for
drop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is significant in facilitating more efficient irrigation management
technologies through real-time soil information provided by wireless underground
sensors. Currently, 40% of the world's food is produced by irrigated
agriculture, and 70% of all available water is used for agriculture irrigation.
The increasing demand for food and the emerging scarcity in freshwater resources
increase market demand for more efficient water management tools to improve crop
per drop. Out of the 56.8M-acre of irrigated farm lands in the US, about 53.7%
(30.5M acres) are irrigated by center pivot systems with 8.5M acre irrigated
land in Nebraska. Proper irrigation management will help prevent economic losses
caused by over- or under-irrigation; movement of nutrients, pesticides and other
chemicals into the groundwater and other water bodies; and wasting water
resources and energy consumption. The novel wireless underground communication
techniques reduce the operation costs significantly compared to existing
systems. Accordingly, farmers can make better-informed irrigation application
(timing) decisions without the need for tools that obstruct field operations,
thereby significantly reducing costs and improving water efficiency. The
developed wireless underground communication solutions will have significant
impacts on the commercial development of systems that operate in confined
environments.