* 1315321
* SBIR Phase I:  Fiber-Loop Cavity Ring-Down Spectroscopy for Contamination Monitoring in Cryogenic Liquids
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Helen Waechter, Tiger Optics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 125,119.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop a "Fiber-loop Cavity Ring-down spectrometer" to address the critical
need for an in situ means to measure contaminants in cryogenic liquids. Lacking
a way to measure impurities in the liquid phase, cryogenic liquids makers and
their users must rely upon gaseous samples from the headspace of the container
or extracted and evaporated samples. Such methods are costly, time-consuming and
tend to be error-prone. The two major hurdles in developing a concentration
sensor for cryogenic applications are achieving sufficiently low detection
limits and operating at extremely low temperatures. For the Phase I project,
Cavity Ring-down Spectroscopy, offering very low detection limits, will be
combined with optical fibers, which have been proven to work well at cryogenic
temperatures. The Fiber-loop, a ring-cavity comprising a strand of optical
fiber, must contain a sensing section to permit the guided light to interact
with the sample. Since the sensing section ultimately determines the detection
limits of the sensor, multiple fiber tapers or a fiber section without cladding
will be incorporated into the loop and optimized for sensitivity. The resultant
device will perform fast, accurate and sensitive measurements in cryogenic
liquids.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project serves diverse
applications of cryogenic liquids, such as high-purity gas manufacture; cooling
high-tech equipment, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); hydrogen fuel
cells; frozen food; blood banks and biotechnological applications, such as
freezing vaccines and execution of chemical reactions. Moisture build-up within
cryogenic processing systems promotes ice and blockages, posing a safety risk.
Increased levels of impurities in cryogenic liquids for high-purity gas
production reduce purifier lifetimes and lead to contamination at the point of
use. Hydrogen fuel cells offer cleaner and more efficient power than traditional
sources, but require relatively contamination-free materials to guarantee their
performance and lifetime. The purity of cryogenic liquids used to freeze food,
as well as biological and medical samples, has public health implications. Here,
in situ measurements of potentially harmful contaminants, such as benzene,
carbon monoxide and biological species (viruses, bacteria), are critical. An
effective and affordable means of monitoring contaminants in the liquid phase
will improve safety, reduce waste and promote better process control.