* 1315053
* SBIR Phase I:  Quest-based Creative Thinking Games for Students
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Farzad Eskafi, Sparkting
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 158,500.00

The innovation of this SBIR Phase I project will be to design cloud-base social
games to enhance the students' creativity and develop a set of computational
methods to measure the creativity quotient (CQ) score. Creativity is the first
step along the journey towards innovation which leads to commercialization and
job creation. SparkTing will design quest-based creative?thinking mobile and
browser-based games. The quests will be designed using the well-known pragmatic
approach in which the students have to come up with more than one effective way
to complete them. This approach is the core of idea-generation (also known as
"ideation") which encourages outside-of-the-box thinking and hence, enhances
creativity. The project plans to develop a unique way to evaluate the responses
using the combination of two methods: (1) Divergent-Thinking approach in which
the responses will be evaluated based on fluency, originality and flexibility.
This approach will use word or phrase-based associative weight where the
algorithm will measure the uniqueness of the associations between words and
phrases. Any unique association has a higher weight. (2) Hybrid of Consensual-
Assessment approach by others in which the responses are rated and influenced by
experts and non-experts to assess the level of creativity. Understandably
experts have higher influence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial
impact comes from the cloud-based infrastructure that can process large amount
of real-time data to measure an accurate CQ score. The cloud infrastructure
should support a range of client-side applications on smart-phones, tablets, and
browsers. Furthermore, the metrics and modeling approaches will be easily
customized for any age group. The initial focus is on students enrolled at the
high school and college levels as these groups are beginning to enter the work-
force. The initial distribution channel is through a planned partnership with
nonprofit organizations such as JA, YEAH, Get-Schooled and NFTE.