* 1315772
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Attractants to Control the Spotted Wing Fruit Fly, Drosophila suzukii
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Daniel Woods, Inscent, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop novel attractants for the spotted wing fruit fly, Drosophila suzukii. D.
suzukii is an invasive insect pest endemic to South East Asia that targets a
variety of economically important soft-fruit crops, thus posing a serious threat
to US agriculture. The pest's range is rapidly expanding and traditional control
methods, such as pesticide treatment, are problematic. An effective bait-and-
kill device would offer specific advantages by avoiding the wide dispersal of
broad-range insecticides and protecting the environment, beneficial species, and
organic farms in the area. However, this device depends on the availability of
effective attractants, the focus of this proposal. This project incorporates
several novel platform technologies comprising a high throughput assay system
for rapidly identifying molecules that interact with insect chemosensory
proteins. These molecules have the potential to affect D. suzukii behavior, and,
once identified, they will be subsequently evaluated for behavioral effects on
living flies. Thus, the project will result in lead molecules for a next-
generation, effective D. suzukii attractant formulation useful in trapping and
population control.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
the development of a platform technology applicable to rapidly generating novel
control products for insect pest species of economic, agricultural, or medicinal
significance. No specific D. suzukii attractant currently exists; bait-and-kill
devices for D. suzukii would allow a shift away from the widespread spraying of
insecticides to a more targeted, responsible control methodology utilizing
efficient bait-and-kill stations. A device utilizing an effective attractant
would benefit the US agriculture industry since it would allow safe and
effective D. suzukii control. Moreover, the platform technologies utilized
herein have broader commercial impacts, as they are directly applicable to the
control of other insect pest species.