* 1315432
* SBIR Phase I:  Virtualization Tolerant, High Performance Computing in Servers, Using Compute Intensive Multicore Accelerators
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Jeff Brower, Signalogic, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 178,840.00

The innovation addresses problems of data I/O inefficiency and virtualization in
High Performance Computing (HPC). Conventional High Performance Computing (HPC)
methods are both inefficient and incompatible with virtualization methods
commonly used in servers, creating a roadblock to supercomputing server farms
needed for practical AI (Artificial Intelligence) applications. GPU (Graphics
Processor Unit) and "many integrated x86 cores" (many-x86) accelerators, while
offering high performance, generate excessive heat, are physically large, and do
not offer direct, high-speed, low-latency I/O. For example, GPU and many-x86
accelerator boards are full-length, double-wide, consume up to 300W, and do not
connect high-speed, low-latency I/O directly between their compute cores and
external networks. This project describes research and development efforts based
on a novel approach combining arrays of high performance, low heat compute
intensive multicore CPU accelerators with network I/O connected directly to the
cores, and a superset of the popular OpenMP standard for multicore programming.
Results will demonstrate the first fundamentally virtualization tolerant
accelerator available on the market, using a single 1U server with (a) 2.5
Teraflop acceleration, (b) 450 W total power consumption, and (c)
virtualization-compatible, OpenMP based programming model with high degree of
ease-of-use and suitable for rapid adoption by AI application developers and
programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of the
innovation include increased High Performance Computing (HPC) efficiency and
virtualization compatibility in supercomputing server farm applications and
enabling new Artificial Intelligence (AI) server farm applications. Commercial
examples include practical AI applications that require real-time network data
I/O, such as mobile device speech and face recognition, fast and automated
analysis of drone and surveillance video (for example detecting human behavior
and divining human intent in real-time), financial data modeling and trading
network risk checks applied directly at the network edge, and real-time social
media data analytics. Breakthroughs in HPC efficiency and virtualization will
lead to greater scientific understanding of heterogeneous CPU systems, in this
case x86 and ARM server motherboards combined with compute intensive multicore
accelerators. The OpenMP programming model will be enhanced to allow compute-
intensive, direct I/O cores and general-purpose x86 cores to coexist within a
unified platform, under a standards-based model. A practical, scalable server
acceleration paradigm will be demonstrated with four (4) compute intensive
multicore CPU accelerators inserted in a 1U server, running video analytics and
computational finance application examples.