* 1315944
* Ocean Acidification: Coral Inorganic Carbon Processing in Response to Ocean Acidification
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* William Fitt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2017
* USD 312,328.00

A significant portion of the carbon dioxide generated by human activity and
released into the atmosphere dissolves into ocean waters, leading to ocean
acidification. Acidification can impair the ability of many calcifying
organisms, including reef-building corals, to form their calcium carbonate
shells or skeletons but the mechanism of these effects is not well understood.
This project will improve understanding of inorganic carbon processing in corals
thereby providing insight into the effects of ocean acidification on
calcification and photosynthesis in corals. Microelectrodes and membrane inlet
mass spectrometry (MIMS) will be applied to measure the concentration and
reaction rates of inorganic carbon and other chemical species involved in
calcification and photosynthesis in three species of Caribbean corals. A major
goal is to validate the use of MIMS techniques and microelectrodes in corals.
Measurements will be used to develop a numerical model of inorganic carbon
processing in corals, allowing chemical fluxes and the composition of the
calcifying fluid to be constrained. Improved mechanistic understanding of the
effects of ocean acidification on corals will permit robust predications about
the longer-term effects of ocean acidification on corals and coral reefs.
Broader Impacts: This project will improve predictions of the effects of ocean
acidification on corals and coral reef ecosystems. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be trained on the project and outreach activities include
educating K-12 students and the general public about ocean acidification. A
teaching module on the effects of ocean acidification on corals will be added to
an existing set of ocean acidification lesson plans and a collaboration with the
Driftwood Education Center will be established to make use of the ocean
acidification teaching module. The investigators will host an annual mini-
symposium called "Symbiofest", which attracts scientists working on corals and
other symbioses from around the south-east and beyond.