* 1315083
* SBIR Phase I:  Stopping Cybercrime in Social Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Anirban Banerjee, CloudFlare, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation proposed in this project is a novel technology to protect people
and businesses from socware, which refers to cyber-crime activities enabled by
and propagated on Online Social Networks (OSNs), such as Facebook, Twitter, and
Pinterest. First, it is clear that OSNs is the new battleground of cybercrime
with worrisome trends, and a plan towards a secure the Internet has to include
safer social networks. Second, socware will require novel security solutions, as
it is significantly different and cannot be detected with existing security
solutions for other security threats, like viruses and malware-infected
websites. The innovation of this project is a holistic and effective approach
for securing OSNs and their users. The technical novelty the approach lies in:
(a) how it determines socware, by combining all possible useful information, and
most importantly the "social context" of a post, and (b) the extensive
repertoire of questions it answers, which include detecting malicious: posts,
users, and Facebook apps. A key technical challenge is to engineer the solution
for a large-scale deployment. Using an early prototype, it is observed that more
than 60% of people are exposed to at least one malicious link in 5 months in
Facebook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a tremendous opportunity for the company
to become the security pioneer in this space, given that these are still the
early years of the social-web era. With 800M users, Facebook has become the new
web: Facebook profiles are now the face of companies, instead of stand-alone
websites. The effect of socware will only increase as users spend substantial
time in OSNs and are influenced by them. Historically, every time a new
technological platform emerges (PCs, Internet, and web), new cyber-threats and
new specialized security solutions have emerged. The security landscape in OSNs
is currently wide open, without a dominant player. Initially, the project will
focus on Facebook, leveraging its current Facebook security application, but it
will expand to other OSNs, to become the go-to security place for any social
network. Outside the scope of this proposal, the long-term future plans will be
opportunistic and could include services for Google+, Twitter, LinkedIn, and
eventually, foreign-language networks, like the Chinese Renren, Weibo, which
will be a non-trivial, but potentially lucrative expansion. The project has a
multi-pronged strategy for monetizing the proposed technology, which will help
create new services and complement the current successful services of the
company, as evidenced by the feedback from the company's partners.