* 1315661
* SBIR Phase I:  Exposure Controlled Projection Lithography for Fabrication of Physical Shaped GRIN Optics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Wenchao Zhou, AlpZhi, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 178,769.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to create a unique
maskless lithography technology called "Exposure Controlled Projection
Lithography" (ECPL), to enable manufacturing of gradient index (GRIN) optical
components with controlled physical aspheric shapes. ECPL is an advanced
additive stereolithography fabrication technology which will reduce the
manufacturing cost and time, and provide high flexibility over the shape and
refractive index distribution compared to existing manufacturing processes. A
key advantage of the ECPL approach is that smooth optical surfaces can be
fabricated, without the stair-stepping caused by typical layer-by-layer
fabrication methods, on flat as well as curved substrates. The primary focus of
this proposal is to further ECPL fabrication capability to include three-
dimensional lenses that possess multi-dimensional varying GRIN profiles. The
primary intellectual merit of this project lies in furthering the scientific
understanding of advanced photopolymerization in stereolithography processes,
and developing high fidelity multi-directional control over these physical
behaviors. Key intellectual advancements include constructing high-fidelity
models of resin response, advancing the development of an interferometric real-
time monitoring system, and improving process planning and control algorithms.
This effort will result in an intelligent, flexible aspheric GRIN microlens
fabrication process.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop an
enabling technology for a wide range of research and commercial products, and
represents a key advancement in an industry trend towards single-step
fabrication at low cost, high throughput and yield, and without re-tooling or
equipment downtime. The processes and control algorithms proposed to be
developed have potential to facilitate technologies throughout the Opto-Electro-
Mechanical systems' industry, including numerous biomedical and bio-inspired
design applications, micro-fabrication, holographic data storage, nano-scale
manufacture, micro-scale quality assurance and non-destructive testing,
surveillance systems, and health care, amongst many others. The broad appeal of
ECPL-like processes is simple: utilizing dynamically controllable micro-
fabrication techniques to create microstructures that vary three-dimensionally
in both shape and material properties without the need for pre-formed masks,
molds, or tooling greatly improves the flexibility of micro-manufacturing
systems while keeping production costs to an absolute minimum. ECPL technology
will enable research of bio-inspired optical designs, including the GRIN contact
lens for human vision correction and the wide field of view (fly's eye) concept.
The real-time monitoring system ECPL supports nearly any stereolithographic
process, and since virtually all raw materials are converted into final product,
provides an additive benefit of environmentally friendly part production.