* 1315369
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated Millimeter-Wave Electronic Photonic System on a CHIP (EPSOC)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Keith Shubert, DGNSS Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an
Electronic-Photonic System on Chip (EPSOC) for millimeter wave imaging.
Millimeter-wave (mmW) imaging is an enabling technology for imaging and
detection in degraded visual environments. However, the energy emitted in the
mmW spectrum is approximately eight orders of magnitude lower than the energy
emitted in the infrared spectrum. Consequently, passive mmW imaging is only
viable with mmW receivers with very high sensitivity and inter-channel
stability. Our proposed approach overcomes the limitations of traditional mmW
receivers by using photonic technologies to up-convert the mmW radiation to
optical frequencies, enabling a dramatic increase in sensitivity. The proposed
system is integrated on a 3D hybrid electronic-photonic chip and maintains the
phase information from the received mmW signals, thereby eliminating the need to
integrate mechanical scanners, which reduces the overall system size and weight.
Furthermore, our EPSOC leverages advances in the scaling of silicon technologies
to provide high performance (fT and fmax frequency up to 300 and 400 GHz),
integration density, and favorable economies of scale. Consequently, the
proposed EPSOC is compact (2mmx2mm) and provides 5X better performance
(0.1K-0.2K temperature sensitivity at a 33Hz rate) compared to existing mmW
imagers on the market today.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
low-cost Silicon Electronic Photonic Network on Chip (EPSOC) for millimeter wave
imaging. Traditional mmW imagers are based on high gain III-V amplifiers that
are noisy and difficult to integrate densely into focal plane array systems.
These systems do not maintain phase information, which necessitates the use of
scanners, making them bulky and slow with high power requirements. In contrast,
our hybrid silicon electronic-photonic approach ensures dense integration, and
uses photonic phase shifters, which will eliminate the need to integrate
mechanical scanners. The EPSOC will have an impact on a broad range of
application areas that require mmW sensitivity including astronomy, aerial
reconnaissance, stand-off threat detection, portal screening, persistent
surveillance, situational awareness, and video imaging navigation in the absence
of GPS signals. Furthermore, it will be particularly useful for applications
that require high resolution imaging through smoke, fog, sandstorms, clouds and
dielectric materials including plastic and clothing. Lastly, this project will
demonstrate the feasibility of 3D electronic-photonic systems on chip with high
sensitivity, stability and integration density. This would have applications to
other areas as well, such as, RF communications and signal processing.