* 1315554
* SBIR Phase I:  Linguistic Analysis of Web Content for 21st Century Inquiry Learning
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Eleni Miltsakaki, Choosito!
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 183,924.00

This SBIR Phase II innovation is twofold. First, advanced natural language
processing techniques are used to analyze the content of websites and identify
features of the text that determine processing difficulty for the individual
student. After the initial evaluation of text difficulty, the system becomes
adaptive and automatically updates its decision for the suitability of a website
by keeping track of the user's reading experience. This machine learning
technology enables differentiated learning and, thus, enables fair access of web
content to English Language Learners and special education groups. Second, the
content of websites is characterized by advanced text analysis and
classification to detect school subject areas. Elementary school students, for
example, will find science content written at a level that they can comprehend,
thus, being enabled to laser focus their attention to accessible content and
engage with it critically. The proposed technology addresses the critical
problem of information management and helps teachers teach their students the
skills that they need to find, evaluate, and take advantage of available
information in any context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact
of the proposed technology will be in the integration of the recently
articulated common core standards (21st century learning) in the K-12 classroom.
The development of the proposed technology will offer unprecedented opportunity
for differentiated learning and give students a life-long tool to help them
understand and critically engage with the information available to them. Early
integration of information literacy and inquiry based learning is enabled not
only by identifying age appropriate resources but, also, by offering a total
project management platform. Teachers and curriculum developers will save
valuable time and effort because they will have community space to find curated
up-to-the-minute resources and core projects, which they can edit, save, and
share, assign them to students, and receive submitted work, all in one window.
Students, too, have personal space to keep notes, automatically keep track of
resources for later review and citation, collaborate, prepare, and submit their
reports. The platform can integrate with school library resources, thus,
becoming a powerful tool for librarians. Application Programming Interfaces can
be developed for collaboration with publishers enabling them to smoothly
integrate core standards in their curricula and update them for 21st century
learning.