* 1315426
* SBIR Phase I:  Bioinformatics Tools for Biology Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Sandra Porter, Digital World Biology
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 155,000.00

The innovation evaluates the feasibility of developing a tablet-based suite of
applications that allow students to interrogate relationships between molecular
sequences, molecular structures, and their biological functions. One of the most
difficult concepts for students to understand is why certain mutations affect
the function of a protein and others do not. Students are better able to
understand this relationship when they compare molecular structures from
different allelic forms of a protein, locate the mutation site, and identify
structural changes that occur as a consequence of a mutation. Few students have
the opportunity to carry out these kinds of investigations because they lack
suitable software tools and their teachers lack both experience and relevant
instructional materials. These problems will be addressed by creating a tool kit
to support molecular investigations. The tool kit will be designed for tablet-
based computers and will contain an application for viewing and manipulating
structures, an interactive digital lab manual that supports bioinformatics
investigations related to genetic disease, an instructor guide, and a data set
with superimposed and annotated structures.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project relates to the potential
in this suite of tools for interesting students in careers related to science,
technology, engineering, or math (STEM) and in increasing student understanding
of the connections between genetics, proteins, and protein function. The ease of
interacting with molecular objects through touch with tablet-based computers and
the availability of instructional materials that guide students through the
process of discovery will lower the barriers to learning about protein structure
and genetics and make student-driven investigations possible for a wider group
of students in both high school and college courses. The instructor guide will
assist instructors in implementing these materials by describing example work-
flows and providing guidance in using different types of applications to achieve
learning outcomes by helping students carry out these new types of laboratory
investigations. The technology developed through this project will generate
business opportunities through licensing fees and by providing opportunities to
develop additional molecular investigations and learning materials.