* 1315316
* SBIR Phase I:  Stereoscopic Plug-and-Play Dermatoscope and Web Interface The 3Derm System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Elizabeth Asai, 3Derm Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates a
dermatological home monitoring tool. Two million Americans develop skin cancer
every year and one in five Americans will be diagnosed with the condition in his
or her lifetime. With better skin monitoring, skin cancer can be diagnosed in
the earlier and more treatable stages, leading to improved patient outcomes and
lower treatment costs. The proposed technology consists of an easy to use imager
and web interface that allows patients to take clinical quality 2D and 3D images
from the comfort of their homes. These images are uploaded automatically to a
web interface and are analyzed to track changes in size and color. The images
are also displayed for the dermatologist to review and monitor remotely. The
project aims to build, test, and review our next generation prototype. After
manufacturing a small number of imagers, a study will be conducted to test their
effectiveness as a home monitoring system. Feedback from the dermatologists and
patients who use the system will be used to improve the early prototype and
prepare for commercialization.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the system?s
expected ability to make teledermatology practical. This can revolutionize the
current standard of dermatological care by allowing dermatologists to diagnose
patients quickly and inexpensively. Dermatologists currently use magnifying
lenses and digital cameras to image patients? skin lesions, but these methods do
not have the capability to take standardized images and log them over time. More
advanced equipment exists but is too expensive and complicated for patient use.
The technology will capture an untapped market for a low cost skin monitoring
solution that automatically creates electronic patient histories. Such a system
could be of use in rural or remote areas, including developing countries, where
dermatological care is unavailable or substandard. Additionally, the system can
create a large database of de-identified images and case files from consenting
patients. This resource could be used in future research to find trends among
cancerous lesions and to help train dermatologists to diagnose skin conditions
using 2D and 3D images.