* 1315290
* Ocean Acidification: Implications for Respiratory Gas Exchange and Acid-Base Balance in Estuarine Fish
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Andrew Esbaugh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2018
* USD 723,801.00

Anthropogenic carbon dioxide release is causing unprecedented change in the
oceanic carbonate system (partial pressure of CO2, pH and alkalinity), and if
current trends continue ocean PCO2 could reach 1,000 µatm before the end of the
century. This predicted change in ocean chemistry has been shown to impact
marine fish in a number of ways, from sensory and behavioral disturbances to
reduced growth and survival. These cumulative impacts are estimated to
profoundly affect global fish populations; however, to truly comprehend the
population level consequences of ocean acidification, it is crucial to
understand the underlying physiological mechanisms that impact individuals.
Respiration is the key physiological process governing internal PCO2 levels and
acid-base status, and therefore is particularly important when considering the
impacts of ocean acidification. Recent work has shown ocean acidification to
impair CO2 excretion in fish, resulting in a compensated respiratory acidosis
with downstream physiological implications related to intestinal water balance.
This research will focus on the estuarine red drum to build upon previous work
through continued investigation of the respiratory and acid-base consequences of
ocean acidification, as well as the potential for physiological adaptations in
response to environmental change. More specifically this work will examine three
specific areas related to respiratory gas exchange and acid-base implications of
ocean acidification: 1) the ventilatory responses to ocean acidification in
estuarine fish, 2) the adaptive capacity of respiratory gas exchange pathways in
response to ocean acidification, and 3) the ontogeny of acid-base regulation and
its role in determining larval sensitivity to ocean acidification. These studies
will provide an in-depth examination of an inherently integrative process, using
a combination of molecular biology, biochemistry and whole animal physiology.
Furthermore, this work will not only seek to provide a worst-case scenario for
ocean acidification, but also investigate possible routes of physiological
adaptation in response to this unprecedented environmental change. These
research activities will train multiple undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as one post-doctoral researcher. The findings of this work will also be
used in a variety of outreach programs intended to inform the public about the
impacts of ocean acidification on fish populations.