* 1315159
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimization of a Sintering and Manufacturing Process for Prototype MgB2 Wires for Next-Generation Cryogenic-Free 1.5T and 3.0T MRI
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Yong-Jihn Kim, Cutting Edge Superconductors, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,737.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
prototype MgB2 wires for next generation cryogen-free 1.5 Tesla (T) and 3.0 T
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) systems, by adding both magnetic and
nonmagnetic impurities. These impurities will amplify the vortex pinning due to
magnetic impurities, while compensating the concomitant magnetic impurity-
induced transition temperature reduction with nonmagnetic impurities. This new
technique will lead to a significant enhancement of high field properties of
type II superconductors (i.e. increased critical current densities and upper
critical fields). This conversion of ordinary superconductors into magnetic
superconductors will open a new frontier for superconducting magnet technology.
This SBIR project employs optimization of a sintering and manufacturing process
for prototype MgB2 wires to guarantee the homogeneous dispersion of impurities
along the wire and to achieve the maximal critical current density in a cost
efficient way. This project will determine the optimum sintering conditions
(i.e., temperature, pressure, and time), utilizing liquid phase sintering of
impurities, and will test both in-situ and ex-situ powder-in-tube (PIT)
manufacturing processes for producing the highest critical current densities in
MgB2 wires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes the possibility of fabricating next-generation cryogen-free
1.5T and 3.0T MRIs, using the resulting MgB2 wires. The low-cost next-generation
MRIs will replace the current Nb-Ti-magnet based MRIs, enhancing the public
health significantly, because these envisioned MRIs will operate at a higher
temperature, 20 K, obviating the need for expensive liquid helium. The
elimination of liquid helium cryogen will lead to simple and versatile designs
and almost maintenance-free operation, reducing the MRI scan cost up to 40%. The
resulting prototype MgB2 wires will be also crucial for next generation of
cryogen-free magnets for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), particle
accelerators, and fusion reactors. Additionally, it is straightforward to apply
this technique to Nb-Ti and Nb3Sn magnet materials. Accordingly, this novel
technique has the potential to revolutionize superconducting magnet technology
and opens a new research field of converting ordinary superconductors into
magnetic superconductors. MgB2 wires are a viable candidate for follow-on
applications in electric power transmission, superconducting fault current
limiters, generators, and motors, all of which could be enabled by this
innovative technique.