* 1315027
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Diagnostic for Identification of Sepsis Inducing Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Alon Singer, HelixBind, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to establish
the feasibility of a novel assay which would enable the culture-free
identification of sepsis inducing pathogens and their resistance traits. Sepsis
is a one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the US with over
210,000 annual mortalities. The key to treating sepsis properly is rapid and
accurate identification of the causative pathogen. Unfortunately, given the wide
range of potential pathogens which can induce sepsis, the ?gold-standard? today
for diagnosis remains culturing; which typically requires up to 3-5 days for
accurate identification leading to a significant delay in the initiation of a
targeted treatment protocol. The technical research will demonstrate the ability
of using synthetic DNA analogues in a specific manner which could provide a
method to circumvent the need to culture in order to properly identify the
causative pathogen. If successful, this assay would provide a significant
improvement to the current norm ? reducing the extremely high mortality rates as
well as reducing healthcare related costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to address a major
barrier to improving patient outcome in cases of sepsis ? the need to culture.
Over 700,000 patients will be diagnosed with sepsis this year, and roughly 30%
will not survive ? the need is apparent. The economic impact is likewise
exceedingly high, roughly $24B, due to the prolonged hospital stay. As the
primary determinant of patient outcome is the timely choice of the appropriate
therapy ? by reducing the time to pathogen identification to hours instead of
days, patient outcome will be drastically improved as well as a reduction in
hospital related costs due to a reduction in disease severity. The assay
proposed in the project has been designed to utilize instrumentation and
technical competencies already in place in the hospital lab. The combination of
improved patient outcome, a reduction in hospital related costs, and a product
design facilitating a straightforward adoption, promises significant and rapid
market penetration. There are no other methods available that offer the range of
capabilities, the simplicity of use, and the compatibility to test for multiple
pathogens and resistance genes like the proposed assay.