* 1315245
* SBIR Phase I:  High Temperature Atmospherically Stable Plasmonic Nanochain Solar Selective Coating for Concentrating Solar Power
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Troy McBride, Norwich Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2014
* USD 165,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will lower the
cost of parabolic trough concentrating solar power (CSP), which uses trough-
shaped mirrors to focus sunlight on tubes to harvest heat for generating
electricity. The tubes are coated with a dark substance, 'absorber', that
efficiently absorbs light and can withstand high temperatures. In present-day
commercial designs, the absorber tube is packaged inside a vacuum-holding glass
sheathe to form a 'receiver'. Standard receivers have drawbacks: (1) When gas
leaks into them, they fail. (2) The absorber pipe radiates heat in all
directions through the transparent sheathe, wasting energy. (3) The absorber
coatings are complex. Receiver designs that avoid these problems require novel
absorber coatings and cost-effective ways to apply those coatings during
manufacture. This project will improve a recently developed novel absorber
coating and demonstrate a simple, cost-effective method for applying it to
receiver tubes. Improvements include experimentally investigating why the
coating in its present form resists chemical degradation under realistic
operating conditions and adjusting its composition accordingly to further
increase its performance. The coating manufacturing and application processes
will be demonstrated at laboratory scale by building and performance-testing
actual receivers.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be achieved by
reducing the cost of parabolic trough CSP. Parabolic-trough CSP is being
developed rapidly in the US and other countries that seek to reduce pollution
and increase energy security, creating a growing global market for CSP
components. Receivers are an indispensable and costly part of parabolic trough
CSP. For example, a parabolic trough CSP plant large enough to produce 250
megawatts of electric power contains about 60,000 receiver tubes. This SBIR
project, by producing a lower-cost, vacuum-free receiver that uses a novel
absorptive coating, will reduce both the capital and maintenance costs of CSP.
The new design and materials will simplify receiver manufacture, improve
performance, and do away with failure-prone vacuums. Scientific understanding of
the properties of absorber coatings will be increased by experiments performed
under this project, and new receiver-manufacturing technology will be
demonstrated. Reducing the cost of energy from CSP will speed deployment of this
inexhaustible, 100% domestic source of power, speeding progress toward a
pollution-free, secure energy economy.