* 1315391
* SBIR Phase I:  Early Detection of Software and Hardware Flaws by Conformance Checking and Virtual Prototyping
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Kang Li, Virtual Device Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 127,972.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project is to
design and develop an automatic conformance checking solution that can quickly
detect inconsistencies between virtual devices and hardware prototypes. Computer
and consumer electronics manufacturers are facing increasingly complex hardware
designs, and lengthy, painstaking software and hardware integration processes.
To address tight time-to-market deadlines, many manufacturers develop software
drivers over virtual devices before hardware is available. However, to realize
the benefits of early software development, it is critical to ensure consistency
between the virtual and physical devices, so that software developed over the
virtual device will work on the physical device when it becomes available. This
project will study and design tools to help discover and report inconsistencies
to developers, with the goal of reducing testing and development effort, while
improving product quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to provide software tools to ensure the
effectiveness of early software development. Computer device manufacturers are
targeting fast-evolving segments, such as the mobile market, and face intense
competition. To remain competitive, manufacturers are eager to adopt new
technologies, such as virtual prototyping, to enable early software development.
Conformance checking helps detect the inconsistencies between virtual and
physical hardware, and thus helps cut product time-to-market. This project will
also benefit vendors that build virtual prototyping platforms by extending the
current feature set with conformance checking. The addition of these features
will enable the full power of early software development using virtual
prototyping, and will encourage more users to use their products.