* 1315631
* SBIR Phase I:  High Temperature Corrosion Protection of Copper by the Application of an Aluminum Based Diffusion Coating
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Neil Kidner, NEXTECH MATERIALS LTD
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will evaluate a
low cost ceramic coating process to protect copper and its alloys from high
temperature corrosion. The excellent thermal conductivity, workability, and
relative chemical inertness of copper and its alloys make them attractive
candidates for heat exchangers and electrical heating elements in water heating
appliances. Unfortunately, high-temperature oxidation and condensate corrosion
of copper heat exchangers limits their service life. To continue the use of
copper in these applications, chemically inert, high temperature coatings with
good thermal conductivity are required. The objective of this project is to
achieve a range of ceramic and cermet coatings with varying thermal conductivity
behavior through tailoring the composition and process variables of the
coating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is development of a disruptive, low cost ceramic coating process with
wide-ranging applicability. The technology is amenable to a consumer appliance
and automotive markets where corrosion protection is critical. These include
home appliances, transportation radiators and heater cores, as well high
temperature industrial brass and copper heat exchangers. If successful there are
some important societal impacts?the more efficient water heater designs should
lead to reduced materials consumption and greater diffusion of the high
efficiency heater models into the market. For automotive applications, improved
energy efficiency should result in reduced energy costs and reduced pollutants
from lower exhaust emissions.