* 1315621
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineered large-scale genomic deletions with a universal targeted cleavage system
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Rachel Haurwitz, Caribou Biosciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a technology for specifically removing large regions of genomic DNA from culture
cells. Genome editing technologies have transformed cell biology by enabling the
targeted knock-out or replacement of genomic loci. These edits permit the
introduction of disease-relevant mutations in cellular and animal models for
basic research and drug discovery applications. Current technologies rely on
custom enzymes to cleave specific genomic sites, and are therefore limited in
their ability to cleave multiple genomic sites in parallel. Cas9 is a recently
discovered bacterial protein that is an RNA-guided DNA endonuclease. The company
will test the ability of Cas9 to cleave mouse genomic DNA in two locations
simultaneously and excise the intervening sequence from the genome. Both short
and long genomic loci will be removed by targeting Cas9 to nearby and distant
loci, respectively.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
the ability to generate cellular and animal models of genetic diseases caused by
large-scale genomic deletions and rearrangements. Successful demonstration of
the ability to excise genomic loci in cultured cells will permit the development
of this technology for excising regions of mouse embryo genomic DNA and the
generation of new animal disease models. Large scale deletions can remove
introns, exons, intergenic regions, or even entire gene clusters, recapitulating
causative mutations of inherited disorders, a need poorly met by currently
available genome engineering technologies. The cellular and animal models
developed using this technology will further basic research and the
understanding of how particular genetic loci control biological pathways and
will facilitate the identification and development of new drug targets.