* 1315855
* SBIR Phase I:  Flat ceramic nanoparticles with two functionally different surfaces for self-generating coatings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Pavlo Rudenko, TriboTEX
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
development of ceramic nanosheets with structurally different sides
(sticky/slick), which will be used to form a self-generating tribological
coating for improved lubrication. This coating will be automatically created
during normal operation. The controlled self-assembly of nanostructures with
defined properties is one of the enabling promises of nanotechnology. The
creation of these low-friction tribological coatings has been previously
observed but requires further analysis and understanding for robustness and
reproducibility in commercial applications. Optimization of parameters, such as
size, shape, and surface dopants, is required for market application of the
nearly frictionless coatings to be formed using these powders. Follow-on
applications of these anisotropic nanostructures are envisioned in the areas of
catalyst supports, plastic fillers, and smart materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be a technology/product for improving the performance of already
existing/operating machinery. The enhanced knowledge resulting from the
completion of this research will further broaden and enhance the overall
scientific understanding of the applications of anisotropic layered
nanomaterials. Upon successful commercialization, various industrial and
commercial clients will benefit from increased component longevity and more
efficient operation of machinery, coupled with labor and energy savings. From a
societal perspective, this technology aims to save a considerable amount of
energy lost due to friction, while simultaneously reducing wear-related
material/component failures and associated costs. Other researchers have
predicted that a system-wide application of the proposed technology in existing
transportation systems will enable energy savings that exceeds the total energy
generated by all deployed wind, biomass, geothermal and photovoltaic sources
combined.