* 1315412
* SBIR Phase I:  Contemporary Studies of the Zombie Apocalypse: An Online Game to Teach Mathematical Thinking to Middle School Students
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Maria Droujkova, Triad Interactive Media
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation uses game-based learning to increase the mathematical knowledge,
mathematical thinking, and mathematical performance of middle school students.
The problems being addressed are that average test scores of U.S. middle school
students on international tests are low, and many students are unable to apply
math to everyday problems. The innovation, entitled Contemporary Studies of the
Zombie Apocalypse: An Online Game to Teach Mathematical Thinking to Middle
School Students, is a Web-based action-adventure, narrative-based, role-playing
game where the player defends against zombies in an effort to save the human
race. The distinguishing features of Contemporary Studies of the Zombie
Apocalypse are game design, computer-adapted differentiated instruction, and
high production value. Relying on Cognitive Load and Multimedia Learning
theories, the innovation scaffolds connections among situated, concrete math
metaphors and abstract, formal, academic mathematics. Other features include
scaffolding of instruction, instant feedback, video tutorials, Common Core
alignment, mobile accessibility, and a backend administrative dashboard for
viewing performance data. The game can be integrated into any math curriculum
and is textbook neutral, scalable, accessible online, and designed for repeat
playability. Phase I includes a prototype of three mathematical thinking mini-
games that will be tested with approximately 80 middle school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercialization impact of Contemporary
Studies of the Zombie Apocalypse: An Online Game to Teach Mathematical Thinking
to Middle School Students, lies in its unique integration of procedural and
conceptual mathematics with an eye to the development of math as a way of
thinking. There are currently no comparable math games in the market. Some games
focus on exercises and memorization of procedures, but never find out what
formal mathematics means. Others focus on solving situated puzzles without
abstracting or formalizing math in-game, so learners do not "package" that
knowledge to take it into other contexts. Contemporary Studies of the Zombie
Apocalypse addresses this void. It is a supplementary instructional activity,
available on both Web and mobile platforms, aligned with Common Core Standards,
featuring an easy-to-use dashboard for viewing and tracking performance. Its
scalable online design is conducive to distribution through multiple channels
and to competitive pricing structures. There are 11,927,000 middle schoolers and
literally millions of students exiting school without the ability to apply
mathematics knowledge and skills to real-world tasks. Contemporary Studies of
the Zombie Apocalypse can significantly improve student procedural and
conceptual understanding, leading toward better attitudes toward math and
ultimately to competence as a mathematical thinker.