* 1315656
* SBIR Phase I:  Three Dimensional Headphone Audio for Music, Gaming, Entertainment and Telepresence
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Adam O'Donovan, VisiSonics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will create immersive
three-dimensional (3D) sound for users engaged in gaming, listening to music or
watching cinema. Using their two ears, humans are able to localize a sound
source in a complex scene and infer the ambience. Unfortunately, when sound is
reproduced over speakers or headphones it is almost impossible for the listener
to perceive the sound location with any clarity or precision. This is because
the cues that the brain uses for inferring source location are lost. Over the
past decade the proposers, when at the University of Maryland, have studied the
problem of how it would be possible to recreate a 3D sound environment
virtually. The research, funded by NSF resulted in a fundamental understanding,
as well as demonstrations, efficient software and technology for the capture,
reproduction, recreation and rendering of 3D sound. This includes efficient
approximations for the room impulse response and the Head Related Transfer
Function. In the proposed Phase I R&amp;D, these technologies will be prepared
for commercial introduction, addressing those issues raised in customer
discovery ¨C maintaining audio quality through the signal processing chain,
incorporation into existing tools used by developers, and creation of low-
latency telepresence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be significant. Because of the smartphone/tablet
revolution, and the availability of movie, music, and gaming content on the
cloud, there are over a billion consumers who enjoy music, games, movies and
other media on their mobile devices. However, most users settle for lackluster
sound produced over headphones. Current headphone sound is simply unable to
produce the engaging sound experience that high©\end music systems, movie
theaters, or live events deliver. Success of the proposed project will allow
entertainment content creators to achieve unmatched realism in sound
presentation over headphones. Combined with our sound capture hardware,
immersive reproduction of live events such as concerts and sporting events can
be achieved. Our technology will allow companies to make headphone listening
more immersive and reach this growing consumer base. They will all be positively
impacted by the technology. Because of the large market, the intellectual
property, and the quality of our team, we anticipate that a large and successful
business can be built around this technology with SBIR funding. This company
will add to the nations¡¯ dominance in the fields of mobile technologies,
gaming, entertainment, and immersive simulation.