* 1315049
* SBIR Phase I:  Skills- and Assessments-Based Learning Environments
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,04/30/2014
* David Ducrest, IS3D LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 04/30/2014
* USD 153,500.00

The innovation in this project is the design and development of a novel Skills-
and Assessments-Based Learning Environment (SABLE) to meet the needs of
teachers, school districts and parents in helping high school students develop
problem-solving skills. Currently, US students' poor performance in STEM
disciplines is limiting their career options. The aim of SABLE is to provide
students the best possible opportunity to succeed in high school science courses
so that they may pursue rewarding, well-paid, careers in STEM fields. To that
end, SABLE will include educational software that: 1) relates science to the
real world; 2) engages students in STEM disciplines and 3) immerses them in
virtual worlds in which they can develop and hone problem-solving skills. SABLE
will include a variety of assessments of the students' skills as they progress,
which will help identify individual student's personal strengths and areas of
difficulty. By field-testing SABLE in a broad array of high schools, this
project will determine whether SABLE is a feasible way to meet the growing
demand that will face teachers as they move from content-based to skills-based
instruction.

The broader/commercial impact of this project is that SABLE will help students
develop the skills they need to solve problems regardless of the context. The
central thesis of the project is that: problem solving is a skill, skills can be
honed through practice, and the key to solving science problems is mastery of
the scientific practices that comprise the scientific method. SABLE will guide
students as they 1) acquire the requisite knowledge; 2) collect data; 3) analyze
and interpret data; 4) form and test a hypothesis; 5) refine the hypothesis, if
needed, according to the data; and 6) communicate their findings. SABLE is
designed to enable teachers to assess student achievement at each of these
steps, thereby allowing the teachers to identify and address areas that are
problematic for individual students. Coupled with the applicability of
scientific practices to solving all science-related problems, SABLE will help
students develop critical thinking skills, and thereby address the needs of
teachers, schools, parents and students.