* 1315902
* SBIR Phase I:  SiGeC Superlattices with Direct Bandgaps for Light Emission and Absorption at 1.55 Micronn
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Carlos Augusto, Quantum Semiconductor LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I will investigate
breakthrough concepts to overcome the limitations imposed by the fundamental
physical properties of silicon that prevent it from emitting and sensing light
in the infrared range of wavelengths used in telecommunications. These
limitations are the most important barrier to using light, instead of electrical
signals, to transmit information within a CMOS chip, and between CMOS chips.
Using optical, rather than electrical, interconnects will increase performance,
decrease power dissipation (heat generation), and reduce manufacturing costs.
The research objectives are the identification and demonstration of a new
silicon-based material, a superlattice incorporating Silicon, Germanium and
Carbon atoms, whose optoelectronic properties are comparable to those of III-V
semiconductors from which the LASERs and Photo-Detectors currently used in
optical communications, are made. The project will begin with theoretical
modeling and simulation of several superlattice compositions, in order to
identify the one with the most promising properties, which will then be
fabricated and characterized, both as a stand-alone film and by incorporation
into a basic photo-diode. It is anticipated that a new class of Si-Ge-C
superlattice materials will enable high-efficiency silicon-based devices for
light-emission and light-sensing in this range of
wavelengths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project will be in the area of Silicon Photonics, which is a core
technology with applications to several fields. The most important field is CMOS
manufacturing, where silicon photonics can help Moore's Law maintain its
trajectory, overcoming the barrier posed by the limitations of electrical
interconnects by replacing them with optical interconnects, within a chip and
from chip-to-chip. Optical interconnects will increase performance, improve
reliability, and lower power dissipation, while reducing manufacturing costs of
leading-edge CMOS technology. Other high-volume applications include fiber
optics communications for Fiber-To-The-Home (FTTH) by enabling more compact
equipment, capable of more functionality at lower cost, and the replacement of
legacy electrical connections for Ethernet, HDMI, DisplayPort, and USB, with
lower cost optical cables. By extending the functionality of CMOS to handle
light efficiently, both emission and absorption across a wide range of
wavelengths, new applications will open up for imaging technology and true
silicon photonics.