* 1315429
* SBIR Phase I:  PowERazor: an Innovative Electronic Packaging Technology for Manufacturing High-reliability, High-density Power Electronics Modules
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* David Berry, NBE Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at
demonstrating the feasibility of an electronic packaging technology for
manufacturing power electronics modules that are critical for electrical energy
processing in a wide range of systems, such as hybrid or electric vehicles,
renewable energy generators, and the power grid. Recent advances in power
semiconductor devices and substrate technology require packaging schemes which
optimize the performance of each component for further increases in reliability,
density, and high-temperature performance. The best route for meeting this need
is to explore three dimensional package architectures which have previously been
a barrier for manufacturing using solder techniques. This project will build on
the commercialization success of a nanomaterial technology for device
interconnection, to develop and implement an innovative three dimensional
package architecture which can be force cooled equally well from both sides. The
nanomaterial, which already boasts significant increases in thermal and
electrical conductivity, is known to provide high reliability and high
temperature joints for device interconnection. In addition, processing
requirements can be tailored to significantly simplify fabrication of
architectures which are difficult to create using existing solder and epoxy
connection schemes. Utilizing the processing benefits of the nanomaterial die
attachment, the specific technical objectives are: (1) development of a
manufacturable process with the nanomaterial for fabricating the planar power
modules; (2) testing of the modules under applied continuous current; and (3)
evaluation of the module reliability under temperature/power cycling tests and
(4) characterization of failure mechanisms. The double-side cooled planar power
module technology enabled by the nanomaterial would lead to a highly competitive
product in the market place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project would strengthen United States? manufacturing base in
the field of power electronics. Power electronics modules are the central
processing units for electrical energy conversion and are crucial to the
nation?s economy and security. Energy applications, specifically those that
provide independence from petroleum, require more efficient conversion of
electrical power, and demand for reliability and sustainability of the nation?s
power infrastructure requires an increasingly greater number of electrical
conversions. Currently, the market of power electronics modules is dominated by
products made in Europe and Asia. Successful commercialization of the technology
developed in this project would usher in a competitive US manufacturer of power
modules to the growing power electronics market. The success would further
strengthen commercialization effort of the nanomaterial product developed under
a NSF STTR program and directly translate to economic growth for Southwest
Virginia. Success of this program would also serve as a good educational and
business model for transferring fundamental knowledge developed under NSF?s
support into the commercial world. It would present students an ideal case study
to experience technological and economical impacts of their research activities.