* 1315201
* Collaborative Research:  Ocean Acidification:  Impacts of Evolution on the Response of Phytoplankton Populations to Rising CO2
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Michael Follows, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 05/31/2018
* USD 466,759.00

Intellectual Merit: Human activities are driving up atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations at an unprecedented rate, perturbing the ocean's carbonate
buffering system, lowering oceanic pH, and changing the concentration and
composition of dissolved inorganic carbon. Recent studies have shown that this
ocean acidification has many short-term effects on phytoplankton, including
changes in carbon fixation among others. These physiological changes could have
profound effects on phytoplankton metabolism and community structure, with
concomitant effects on Earth's carbon cycle and, hence, global climate. However,
extrapolation of present understanding to the field are complicated by the
possibility that natural populations might evolve in response to their changing
environments, leading to different outcomes than those predicted from short-term
studies. Indeed, evolution experiments demonstrate that microbes are often able
to rapidly adapt to changes in the environment, and that beneficial mutations
are capable of sweeping large populations on time scales relevant to predictions
of environmental dynamics in the coming decades. This project addresses two
major areas of uncertainty for phytoplankton populations with the following
questions: 1) What adaptive mutations to elevated CO2 are easily accessible to
extant species, how often do they arise, and how large are their effects on
fitness? 2) How will physical and ecological interactions affect the expansion
of those mutations into standing populations? This study will address these
questions by coupling experimental evolution with computational modeling of
ocean biogeochemical cycles. First, cultured unicellular phytoplankton,
representative of major functional groups (e.g. cyanobacteria, diatoms,
coccolithophores), will be evolved under simulated year 2100 CO2 concentrations.
From these experiments, estimates will be made of a) the rate of beneficial
mutations, b) the magnitude of fitness gains conferred by these mutations, and
c) secondary phenotypes (i.e., trade-offs) associated with these mutations,
assayed using both physiological and genetic approaches. Second, an existing
numerical model of the global ocean system will be modified to a) simulate the
effects of changing atmospheric CO2 concentrations on ocean chemistry, and b)
allow the introduction of CO2-specific adaptive mutants into the extant
populations of virtual phytoplankton. The model will be used to explore the
ecological and biogeochemical impacts of beneficial mutations in realistic
environmental situations (e.g. resource availability, predation, etc.).
Initially, the model will be applied to idealized sensitivity studies; then, as
experimental results become available, the implications of the specific
beneficial mutations observed in our experiments will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This interdisciplinary study
will provide novel, transformative understanding of the extent to which
evolutionary processes influence phytoplankton diversity, physiological ecology,
and carbon cycling in the near-future ocean. One of many important outcomes will
be the development and testing of nearly-neutral genetic markers useful for
competition studies in major phytoplankton functional groups, which has
applications well beyond the current proposal. An inherent component of the
proposed work is the integration of education and outreach to provide advanced
interdisciplinary training to undergraduate students, while involving both them
and the PIs in community outreach and education related to ocean acidification.
At MSU, undergraduate students will participate in bench work as well as
computer modeling, and will therefore gain interdisciplinary research
experience. Among other projects, these students will produce a simplified
version of the ocean modeling software that may be implemented as an "app" for
use with education and outreach programs. At least two additional undergraduates
will be recruited to work on the project at Columbia and MIT, with a focus on
broadening participation in STEM through hands-on training. Additionally, visits
with secondary education institutes will be arranged to talk about ocean
acidification and microbial "evolution in action." These visits will be
facilitated by instructional resources focused on ocean acidification,
microbiology, and evolution, which are available from two NSF STCs, BEACON (MSU)
and CMORE (MIT/Columbia).