* 1315796
* SBIR Phase I: Portable Education Laboratory
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Glenn Knierim, Infinity Physics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 179,666.00

The innovation for education is in the portable and interactive hardware that
can be placed into the hands of every student, from the classroom to the dorm-
room. This will enable personal and crucial connections linking theory to
application in science and engineering. The portable laboratory design provides
an integrated solution of experimental hardware and supporting software kits
involving lessons designed around leading forefronts of technology at a cost no
more than a typical university lab fee. Each kit is designed to offer multiple
educational experiences increasing in complexity through the progression of
learning. Internet technology continues to revolutionize the world by bringing
experiences to remote locations. Education is an obvious beneficiary as
distribution of written and illustrated knowledge can be readily transmitted to
desktop and mobile displays. However a critical part of learning involves
physical interaction which provides inspiration and solidifies understanding.
From primary school through universities, experiments and laboratory exercises
typically involve equipment that is too bulky and costly to facilitate
portability of education. The portable laboratory innovation satisfies an
identified need to develop a cost-effective, content-rich, integrative,
interactive, and portable family of educational tools that demonstrate real
world contexts, expose advanced and new technologies, and develop hands-on
skills required for future innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impact of this innovation should be an increase of graduates
in Science, Technology, and Math (STEM). There is no shortage of concern for the
state of STEM education in the U.S. today. Studies repeatedly identify need for
a significant increase in the number of successful graduates. A large obstacle
facing students discovering interest in STEM is enduring the daunting task of
learning the foundation of theoretical concepts to solve closed-ended problems.
Effective experimental interaction can provide invaluable motivation.
Furthermore, it can provide a framework for learning the theoretical concepts
and even introducing the challenge of solving open-ended real world problems.
Currently, this experiential exposure often requires hardware systems that are
not accessible for portable education. Currently, teachers, professors and self-
guided students are faced with an educational tool market with offerings most
often beyond budgets that can provide a personal experience. There is enormous
opportunity to meet educational demand by providing hardware kits that
demonstrate state-of-the-art technology while connecting students to the STEM
behind the design. The portable laboratory innovation meets this demand and in
doing so, provides a revolutionary approach to increasing success of STEM
education.