* 1315212
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost Reflectometer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Phil Couch, CP-Instruments LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,252.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will allow the
development of a new optoelectronic component, to allow improved installation,
maintenance and critical network monitoring. This new optical component is a key
building block in providing platform technology for new fiber optic sensors and
instrumentation at a dramatically lower cost. This novel technology will open
new markets not addressed by current instruments typically having much lower
resolution, and higher costs. Specifically, the new optoelectronic component
will be designed to produce new optical instruments that are both low-cost, and
high-resolution. In this development effort, a demonstration of the new optical
component will be built and optimized and characterized for several
telecommunications markets, such as installation and maintenance of fiber to
home, real-time monitoring of networks within data centers and other critical
infrastructure for our nation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project provides for new optical
communications testing equipment to enable maintenance of critical optical
networks promptly and inexpensively. This project will help to cost-effectively
ensure the availability, reliability and security of the optical networks on
which our nation increasingly depends. Specific commercial opportunities
include: energy generation and distribution, aerospace and other mobile
platforms, high speed computing high speed optical fiber data transmission to
support teraflop/s and higher computing speed, and hand held and integrated
fiber optic (FO) telecommunications health monitoring systems. This technology
supports the installation, testing, and operations of optical systems for these
markets. For the energy market, applications include low-cost high-resolution
sensing and communication systems for down-hole and processing facilities as
well as wind turbines sensing and communication of fiber optic networks on
airplanes, ships, and other mobile platforms providing for safer, more efficient
transportation systems of the future. In telecommunications, FO systems are
gaining market acceptance and are being installed in neighborhoods, office
buildings, fiber-to-the-home, local area networks, and wide area networks. This
optoelectronic component will be the building block for new optical
interrogation instruments providing customers with a FO testing solution option
at an affordable price.