* 1315023
* SBIR Phase I: Feasibility of Manufacture of an Enzyme for Delignification of Pulp and Biomass to Improve Sugar Yield
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Nancy Kravit, Tethys Research LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project helps unlock the
potential of forests to provide sustainable, carbon-neutral raw material for
much of the nation's energy and chemical needs. Current technology cannot
efficiently separate cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin (the major components
of wood as well as cellulosic biomass). Cellulose can be used to make paper,
lignin can be burned to provide power, and hemicellulose can be used via
fermentation to produce biofuels and platform chemicals. The major difficulty in
fractionating wood is breaking ether bonds between lignin and hemicellulose.
Research Objectives include: demonstration of novelty by comparison to known
enzymes that are active against xylan, design of a pilot scale manufacturing
process for the new microorganism and enzyme, determination of the enzyme's
polypeptide structure through zymography, and identification via protein
microsequencing. Anticipated results are: an enzyme that is available in pilot
scale quantities for testing and the data necessary to create a recombinant
enzyme suitable for manufacture on an industrial scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop a novel,
environmentally friendly production method for pulp products and to create new
feedstocks for biofuels and platform chemicals. In pulp mills, Tethys's enzyme
will allow previously wasted hemicellulose and hemicellulose-derived sugar to be
recovered. Hemicellulose can be added back to pulp to increase yield or be
converted, via existing fermentation technology, into building block chemicals
and biofuels. Additionally, the presence of Tethys's enzyme in the pulp will
loosen lignin, allowing better delignification with the use of less energy and
chemicals compared to the current state of the art. Important outcomes of this
research if successful, will be (i) wood, a renewable resource, will be more
effectively used to meet a significant portion of America's energy and platform
chemical needs; (ii) energy and industrial chemicals used in pulp and paper
mills and cellulosic biorefineries will be reduced, and the resulting effluents
improved; and (iii) America's mills and cellulosic biorefineries (and the rural
towns where they are located) will receive an economic boost from reduced costs
and increased revenues from higher yields.