* 1315302
* SBIR Phase I:  Making new standard in simulation of ion optical problems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Alexander Misharin, Masstech
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2014
* USD 146,847.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project is
focused on the development of a scalable high performance state of the art
computational software platform for simulation of the quasi-static ion optics
devices and motion dynamics of many (more than 1 million) charged particles in
those devices. While space charge effects due to presence of many ions is
currently a major factor limiting the mass accuracy and dynamic range in modern
mass spectrometry, there are no widely available software tools to assess this
problem. The proposed platform will provide tools for researches in academia and
industry to address this and many other problems. The platform will combine a
number of advanced features including: implementation of the state of the art
parallel processing computational methods such as a parallel Laplace's equation
solver, a parallel Poisson equation solver based on a parallel particle-in-cell
method and utilization of the parallel 3D fast Fourier transformation method,
utilization of the Green's Function method to take ion-electrode interactions
into account; support of the heterogeneous high performance computer hardware
(starting from a desktop computer equipped with graphics processing unit to
heterogeneous computer clusters, cloud computing platforms, and supercomputers).

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project can be achieved by use
of the key computational algorithms and tools that will be developed for
parallel particle-in-cell -based Poisson equation solver and parallel ion motion
simulations in the areas of computational biology, molecular simulations of
protein dynamics, molecular medicine, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations for
drug discovery, 3D molecular dynamics of protein folding (especially when
augmented with the information provided by the mass spectrometry-based methods
of protein analysis), MD for clusters analysis of bio-molecular systems,
supercomputer-level sampling for protein simulation on desktop computers using
graphics processing units, computational nanotechnology (e.g. molecular
electronics, charged plasma systems, bio-sensors, etc.). The proposed project is
capable of significantly increasing the productivity of the researchers and
engineers in the mass spectrometry instrumentation field and, by the virtue of
this advancement, to increase the pace of the developments in the other research
and application areas, ranging from fundamental physics to biotechnology and
medicine, for which mass spectrometry plays key enabling roles.