* 1315265
* SBIR Phase I:  Inquiry-Based, Ecology-Themed Game for Elementary School Students
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Kristine Callis-Duehl, Budding Biologist
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 153,500.00

The innovation proposed is to develop a video game for elementary school
teachers and students using inquiry-based learning to demonstrate
interdependencies in ecological systems. High-quality science teaching tools are
needed because the US is ranked 17th in science education among developed
nations (PISA 2009), which may be in part due to lack of teacher training in
science (Roehrig et al. 2011). The proposed video game will allow teachers,
regardless of science background, to create customizable microhabitats (i.e.,
islands) with different geographical features. Players will be prompted to use
observation and experimentation to determine the optimal combinations of
organisms that will thrive in their virtual world. The game will encourage
players to ask questions, experiment, analyze, and solve problems in an
interactive virtual environment. The aim of this project is to enhance
children's natural curiosity while teaching them scientific reasoning, and to
develop in them analytical process and thinking skills necessary for solving
multiple-variable real-world problems. The development of these skills will
ultimately promote interest in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) professions.

The broader/commercial impact is increasing student interest in STEM professions
by filling a market niche that is currently empty: ecology-themed video games
for elementary school students. In a technically competitive world, U.S.
educational systems must aggressively focus on teaching our youngest to
understand and use scientific thinking. Local teachers, children, and parents
will work with our programmers to have significant input into the game design.
It is crucial to consider the difficulties that elementary educators face when
teaching science, since teachers will take the lead in presenting this game to
their students in the classroom. Furthermore, the video game will offer a way
for schools that may not have ready access to outdoor areas (e.g., urban schools
who enroll a disproportionately large number of minority students
underrepresented in STEM professions) to conduct hands-on experimentation and to
design and test ecological experiments in a virtual environment. There are
currently no video games on the market that teach elementary school students
ecological concepts while training them to think like a scientist. This lack of
commercial competition, paired with a need for additional science resources in
schools, indicates a commercial market opportunity for this video game.