* 1315150
* SBIR Phase I:  Hyaluronan-Based Ocular Delivery of Antibiotics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Barbara Wirostko, Jade Therapeutics
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 153,642.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project assesses the feasibility
of using a novel synergistic drug-polymer ocular film product based on a
modified biopolymer hydrogel to deliver antibiotics directly, locally and
continuously to the ocular surface over an extended weekly period. This film
combines the pro-healing, anti-inflammatory effects hyaluronic acid with slow
release of an ophthalmic antibiotic. Topical ocular antibiotics require frequent
dosing (i.e., hourly for corneal ulcers), often resulting in improper
administration, causing suboptimal bioavailability to the eye and considerable
waste. This novel polymer film can be placed on the ocular surface topically to
deliver a well-known ophthalmic antibiotic. We propose to expand on known
benefits of topical hydrogels by delivering antibiotics to reduce bacterial
infections locally while simultaneously accelerating and improving healing.
Prototype films of hydrogel containing antibiotics will be produced and
evaluated for film degradation, anti-bacterial efficacy, and drug release.
Safety and tolerability of the antibiotic-containing films will be demonstrated
in a preclinical rabbit model. We anticipate being able to produce a well-
tolerated antibiotic-releasing film product prototype and demonstrate the
desired characteristics. Such a film would allow us to progress to a Phase II
SBIR to optimize a sterile and clinically useful commercial product.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is development of a new
ocular drug delivery product that will improve patient care by providing a more
efficient, effective, convenient, and consistent means of antibiotic delivery
directly to the ocular surface. Using a known polymer carrier with intrinsic
healing properties, this product will deliver continuous adequate doses locally,
thus eliminating the frequent topical (up to every hour) and/or systemic doses
of antibiotics for a wide range of infectious ophthalmic conditions. This
improves patient compliance and patient outcomes, while reducing health care
costs. Relevant eye diseases include active infections of the cornea and
conjunctiva, as well as prevention of potential infections associated with
various ocular surgeries and diseases. This topical extended release product
addresses important unmet medical needs in the military and in civilian
populations by providing healthcare provider-placed antibiotic product
administered acutely. The antibiotic-containing films produced and evaluated in
Phase I can ultimately lead to the development of a commercially viable ocular
care product to address these unmet needs. Further, by demonstrating release of
polybasic antibiotics, such a system could be expanded to deliver other
antimicrobials to treat ophthalmic fungal or viral infections, which represent
significant challenges in developing countries.