* 1315876
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel partial cellular reprogramming method for the production of ex vivo blood
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Cristopher Geiler, Advanced Life Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,480.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
advanced methods to temporarily reprogram hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that
will enable ex vivo production of blood in quantities suitable for transfusion.
A transfection-free method will be used that can be easily translated into
clinical use. Every two seconds someone in the U.S. needs blood and more than
38,000 blood donations are needed every day. In order for ex vivo blood
production to be clinically relevant, the expansion cell culture must be able to
produce red blood cells in the range contained in a unit of blood:
2.5x1012cells. There exists a fundamental obstacle in reaching this number of
cells. CD34+(HSCs) and erythroid progenitors are typically only capable of
short-term, or restricted ex vivo expansion. The main objective of this project
is to reprogram CD34+(HSCs) such that cellular mechanisms are activated to force
cellular proliferation. Despite research efforts from around the world, reaching
clinical significant quantities of blood in culture has not been previously
possible. The goal is to produce clinically relevant quantities of blood and
create a shift in clinical practice paradigms for the treatment of the anemic
patient as well as the blood banking industry.&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader
impacts of the proposed activity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be to create a
viable alternative to allogenic blood transfusion, and compete with traditional
blood banking and the use of recombinant erythropoietin (EPO). We expect that
successful development of this technique will have a high societal impact on
safety and availability of blood for transfusions as well as a reduction in
hemolytic transfusion reactions. Although the safety of transfusions has
improved markedly there is still a non-zero probability of getting HIV (1:1.8
Million), or Hepatitis C (1:1 Million). This work is expected to significantly
enhance the scientific and technological understanding of ex vivo production of
blood and provide a pathway to translation into clinical medicine. This project
will have a significant impact in the $20 billion global blood transfusion
market, as well as the EPO market, which is valued at about $53 Billion.