* 1315379
* SBIR Phase I:  Regenerable Antimicrobial Coatings Containing Zinc Oxide Binders for Hydrogen Peroxide Cleaning Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* William Toreki, Quick-Med Technologies, In
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop novel polymer coatings that bind hydrogen peroxide (HP), even after the
surface has dried, thus maintaining sanitized surfaces and preventing microbial
growth and the spread of disease. This allows the surface to maintain long-
lasting antimicrobial effects between cleanings. It is expected that these
coated surfaces will kill 99.999% of microbes that contact the surface. HP is
currently receiving renewed attention as a safe, environmentally-friendly, and
cost-effective antimicrobial, as evidenced by the recent introduction of several
commercially-available cleaning products based on HP. Healthcare facilities are
known to be breeding grounds for a variety of infectious diseases. The pathogens
that cause these diseases can reside in many places in the hospital environment
? not just in devices and equipment used in medical procedures, but also from
common surfaces such as bed rails, bathroom fixtures, hand rails, and computer
keyboards. Microbes living on these contaminated surfaces, which are touched by
multiple people, lead to increased spread of healthcare associated infections
(HAIs). It is estimated that 1 in 20 hospital patients will be infected with an
HAI as a direct result of the care they receive in the hospital.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project go beyond the medical
and hospital applications for which the coatings will be developed and the
potential for use in other areas are enormous, with broad utility in the
consumer, industrial, and institutional markets. Multiple people touching
everyday objects spread infection and disease. One dirty hand can infect
numerous surfaces. Rubbing one?s eye or eating a sandwich can become a vector
for infection. Even surfaces that are cleaned and sanitized frequently can
quickly become recontaminated after the applied disinfectant has evaporated.
Examples of places where such coatings would have great impact on public health
include bathroom fixtures in public restrooms; kitchen equipment and tables in
restaurants, schools and other institutions; home appliances; and seats,
armrests, railings, and tray tables for airlines, cruise ships, and other public
transportation. Such coatings could be easily implemented into existing
manufacturing processes, retrofitted to existing equipment, or even sold as
paints for DIY use. The commercial potential for these coatings is huge,
especially in consideration of the potential savings to the healthcare industry.
A 20% percent reduction in HAI?s translates into an annual savings of $7.2
million, demonstrating that money spent on preventative steps translates into
meaningful savings.