* 1315457
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhancing Nutritional Value of Underutilized Leafy Vegetables to Develop Innovative Baby Food Products
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Mary Wilson, Innovesca, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,987.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop innovative baby food products with optimized nutritional value. The
research objective is to establish optimized processing methods through
mechanics-based approaches to enhance nutrient bioavailability and palatability
of underutilized leafy vegetables. The intellectual merit of this proposal is
derived from our unique focus on applying "mechanics of materials" approaches to
food systems as a means to naturally optimize nutritional value, as opposed to
genetic modification, food fortification, or overprocessing methods. Using this
proprietary technology, the company will first develop a focused baby food
product with optimized nutritional value to help improve infant nutrition, and
then expand to develop a range of food products targeting different stages of
childhood development.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
to promote healthy development of infants and children, and to prevent childhood
obesity through the creation of high nutritional value food products for the US
market. The scientific innovation behind these food products in understanding
and optimizing nutrient absorption from foods through natural means could impact
food industry practices, and local agricultural development, farmer education,
and jobs in rural communities. The company will partner with regional US farmers
as a source of raw plant materials. In the US, baby food products are a large
market ($10 billion), with increasing demand for natural, organic products. In
developing nutritious food products from natural raw materials with minimal
processing, the company will have significant competitive advantages over other
food products.