* 1315465
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Heterostructure Doping for Optoelectronic Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Brian Hertog, Agnitron Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
development of a novel technique for improving the efficiency of ultraviolet
(UV) light emitting devices (LEDs). The UV LED fabrication process typically
includes deposition of thin semiconductor films onto substrates that can be
fabricated into devices. Traditionally, during the deposition process impurities
are added to the semiconductor films to obtain the desired electrical
properties. The introduction of the impurities, however, produces defects in the
semiconductor materials that can limit the efficiency of the devices. The
technique proposed in this project will modify the deposition process of the
semiconductor films in order to obtain the desired electrical properties without
the use of intentional impurities. This has the potential of producing much more
efficient light emitters. The proposed technique has the added advantage of
producing material whose electrical properties are less sensitive to
temperature, which can prove useful for many applications. The composition of
the semiconductor materials investigated in this project can be modified to
produce LEDs capable of emitting light from the ultraviolet to visible range. A
successful project will lead to an enabling technology for development of novel,
high efficiency LEDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts/commercial
potential of this project addresses the development of efficient light emitting
semiconductor devices. Fundamental physical properties studied in this effort
will enhance scientific and technological understanding of the nature of
semiconductors. These advances may yield a new paradigm for functionalizing
semiconductor materials for more efficient and higher performance optical and
electronic devices. Possible applications for this technological advance include
general room lighting, traffic lights, outdoor displays, automotive
applications, water treatment, sterilization, and ultrahigh density optical
storage systems. Moreover, the technique proposed in this work may lead to
improvement in the performance of other microelectronic devices such as
transistors, laser diodes, modulators and photodetectors. The proposed devices
will enable unique high power and extreme temperature operation as the approach
does not face the same limitations as currently used technology. Significant
commercialization potential exists for the proposed technology on the basis of
superior performing devices in the aforementioned categories.