* 1315766
* SBIR Phase I:  Manufacture of Novel Polymer-based SERS Substrates using a hybrid Nanosphere-Nanoimprint Lithographic Fabrication Technique
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Nathan Greeneltch, Enhanced Plasmonics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2013
* USD 145,520.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
challenge of reducing the cost of manufacturing Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy (SERS) substrates. SERS is a powerful analytical technique that is
not widely adopted in industry due to the high cost of commercially available
substrates. The metrics for quality SERS substrates include enhancement (the
increase in Raman signal due to the presence of the substrate), reproducibility
(the enhancement must be consistent across the surface of the substrate, and
between substrates), and robustness (the substrate must withstand the expected
abuse in a given working environment without compromising performance). In order
to reduce the cost of SERS substrates, this project will foster the development
of a new hybrid Nanosphere-Nanoimprint Lithography fabrication method for SERS
substrates. The key objectives of this project are to (1) reduce the material
cost per device to approximately 10% of the current price while (2)
simultaneously increasing the enhancement over traditional substrates and (3)
maintaining reproducibility and robustness.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in increasing the
market availability of cost-effective SERS-based chemical and biological
detection systems. SERS is an analytical technique that can be used to identify
the presence and concentration of a broad range of analytes and pathogens
including glucose, biomolecules, bacteria, biological and chemical warfare
agents, and explosives. The cost reduction expected from this project will
enable SERS-related devices to be sold to US military interests at
"approximately the cost of a bullet". Cost-efficient fabrication will promote
the growth and adoption of the SERS analytical method across many scientific
fields, and its effects will even stretch further than the above-mentioned
applications, making the product attractive to end users in many science and
biotechnology sectors. Inexpensive access to this emerging capability field will
also enable students at colleges and universities to include SERS methods as a
part of their coursework and research.