* 1315508
* SBIR Phase I:  Gas-Phase Two-Dimensional Electrophoresis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Anthony Midey, Excellims Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
prototype gas-phase two-dimensional electrophoresis (GP2DE) instrument for
analyzing protein structures in mixtures with less sample and higher throughput
compared to traditional two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DGE). The
instrument leverages the previously developed multi-dimensional ion mobility
spectrometry (MDIMS) method for separating gas-phase protein ions based on
molecular size and shape in both time and space with high-performance IMS.
Understanding proteins' functions will be crucial to achieving the advances
required for personalized medicine, which will be a strong driver of the
proteomics field both scientifically and economically. Consequently, designing
specialized therapies requires intricate knowledge of the complete protein
structure. GP2DE will provide a rapid tool for detecting differences in protein
structures using coupled ion mobility spectrometry analyses to give 2D gel
electrophoresis-type separations in seconds to minutes. Increasing the
throughput for analyses of protein structures addresses the inefficiencies in
the labor intensive 2DGE process to build the structure knowledge base more
rapidly. In particular, tools that can detect post-translational modifications
of proteins, such as glycosylation or phosphorylation, will be valuable to
proteomics. GP2DE can detect these structural changes easily because the
structural differences will result in different ion mobilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project,
if successful, will provide a flexible, general purpose biomolecule analysis
tool for researchers with limited budgets and/or facility space. This would be
particularly useful for undergraduate laboratories where the shortened learning
curve would allow for more productive research under typical time and resource
constraints. The proposed gas-phase two-dimensional electrophoresis (G2DPE)
evolves from advanced IMS technologies for structural size and shape analyses
that are geared to be user-friendly. The market for proteomics research products
has been projected to be several billion dollars in the next five years. GP2DE
reduces the need to perform many more time consuming 2DGE analyses that have
higher operating costs from labor and supplies, decreasing research costs and
adding to laboratory productivity. Therefore, having another powerful tool for
elucidating protein structural information will propel the rate of development
of the next-generation of biotherapies better tailored to individual
physiologies. The research conducted will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
scientific journals and at scientific conferences to foster the adoption and
advancement of multi-dimensional IMS methods for proteomics.