* 1315629
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Polycrystalline Laser Components Containing Gradients of Dopants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Todd Stefanik, NANOCEROX, INC..
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a method for the production of polycrystalline YAG laser gain media containing
gradients of dopant in either linear or radial directions within the part. Such
parts offer performance improvements for both output power and beam quality in
diode pumped laser systems manufactured by commercial laser vendors. No
commercial supplier of such components exists today. A technique based on
deposition of thin layers of doped and undoped YAG nanopowder slurries stacked
on top of one another to build up part thickness will be developed. Parts
containing continuous (not step-wise) dopant gradients over distances up to one
centimeter will be demonstrated, representing parts larger than those
demonstrated in literature to date. Primary Phase I objectives include
generation of uniform thickness layers to allow growth of uniform, thick parts,
drying of slurry layers to produce crack free green bodies, and demonstration of
high optical quality components containing prescribed doping profiles.
Successful completion of the development will establish the capability to supply
laser gain media containing dopant profiles to the commercial market, allowing
substantial improvement in commercial diode pumped lasers with minimal
modification of existing system architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project stems primarily from the laser
performance improvements that will be enabled by successful development of
graded doping profiles in YAG based laser gain media. Graded doping profiles
improve both maximum output power and beam quality of diode pumped solid state
lasers. Such lasers are used in applications including laser cutting and
welding, processing of electronics and photovoltaics, and laser sensing systems.
Improvements made to these systems enable efficient domestic manufacturing in a
cost competitive manner with respect to offshore manufacturing. Development of
cutting edge manufacturing technologies is therefore key to re-establishing the
US manufacturing base in the world market.