* 1315018
* SBIR Phase I:  A Compact, Low Cost and Handheld Sensor for the Detection and Quantifications of Organic Compound Contaminants in Drinking Water
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Douglas Adolphson, Alphasense, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
novel chemical sensor technology for inline water quality monitoring. Currently,
gas chromatography coupled mass spectroscopy is the most widely used technique
for water quality analysis; however, the method is costly, time consuming, and
can only be performed by well-trained personnel in a laboratory setting. To meet
the market need for a portable, low-cost, and easy-to-use water analysis
technology, the project will investigate a photonic sensor platform which
resolves the aforementioned challenges through: 1) the development of a compact
photonic sensor package consisting of an optical resonator sensor chip, a laser
source, and battery power for standalone operation and field deployment; 2) the
application of molecularly imprinted polymers as robust sensor coatings for
highly selective molecular detection in a non-laboratory setting; and 3) the use
of a pattern recognition algorithm to automatically detect and quantify
individual component concentrations in a mixture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a portable, low-cost
sensor product which meets the needs from the water quality monitoring market, a
growing sector with a compounded annual growth rate of 4.6%. The implementation
of chlorination disinfection systems has virtually eliminated waterborne
diseases in the United States. However, disinfection byproducts pose different
health risks, including reproductive endpoints, developmental defects, and
cancer. If successful, the proposed sensor technology will eliminate/minimize
the adverse human health effects caused by those chlorination disinfection
byproducts by providing real-time water quality information. According to a
recently released market research report, the global water analysis
instrumentation market is projected to be $1.86 billion by 2017 with the online
systems for water analysis instrumentation being predicted as the fastest
growing market segment. A major limiting factor that prevents a wide market
acceptance and penetration of existing online water monitoring devices is the
relatively high investments involved. The proposed sensor implements the online
water quality monitoring functions with mass-producible and inexpensive optical
sensor elements and reusable sensor coatings. Consequently, successful
demonstrations of the proposed sensor technology can facilitate a wider market
acceptance and penetration of the online water quality monitoring devices.