* 1315174
* SBIR Phase I:  Prototyping Reusable Dry Adhesives based on Scalable Fiber Spinning Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Barry Rosenbaum, Akron Ascent Innovations
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project presents novel
approaches to fabricating dry, removable, reusable adhesives on substrates using
scalable fiber spinning methodologies. The proposed work differs drastically
from other research programs to replicate bio inspired adhesive mechanisms,
which are based on the use of aligned carbon nanotubes, photolithography,
chemical etching, and time-consuming batch micro/nano molding processes. The new
research offers advantages of significantly lower costs and easier scale-up
using nozzle free nanofiber spinning processes, which will replace the more
expensive approaches such as micro/nano fabrication process. The research
incorporates interdisciplinary mechano-electro-rheology for improving
understanding of dry adhesives. Fiber spinning and collection techniques will be
engineered to improve product performance, reduce costs and improve scalability
of the spinning process. Introduction of nozzleless electrospinning polymer
blending and equal-channel angular pressing will combine processing stages such
as solution preparation, spinning and spin-finish in one production line,
significantly reducing processing time and costs. Prototype polymer adhesive
fabrics will be characterized tested to optimize performance based on customer
requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be significant improvements in dry, reusable
adhesive products for target markets already identified and studied. Improved
adhesive joining for composites in automotive applications would lead to weight
reduction by enabling replacement of metal body panels with lighter composites,
increasing fuel economy and saving energy. In consumer adhesives, the value
proposition for dry adhesives would improve product safety, reduce environmental
impact from messy liquids, and improve educational experiences for children. In
labels, an easily removable adhesive would eliminate residue glue, in turn
simplifying and increasing recyclability of packaging and reducing waste in
landfills. In addition, new adhesive products based on nanofiber spinning will
lead to new applications in markets not yet explored in biomedical, electronics,
robotics, tires and military segments.