* 1315443
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart Petri Dish with Built-in Imaging Capabilities for Cell Culture Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Phil Willems, ePetri Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2013
* USD 145,843.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
Smart Petri Dish, a lens-free subpixel resolution microscope, which will
automate cell culture monitoring from within the incubator in a low-cost, easy-
to-use system that provides high-resolution images over a wide field of view.
Current cell culture experiments require significant manual labor, making them
costly and inconvenient. To develop the Smart Petri Dish, we will design a
unique demountable image sensor cartridge with thermal control, develop a novel
multithread sparse convolution filtering software algorithm for subpixel
resolution image construction, enhance the spatial resolution of the lens-free
imaging method with a dense illumination array, and test the resulting prototype
Smart Petri Dish for its ability to reliably culture cells. It is anticipated
that this research will demonstrate the feasibility of a commercially viable
prototype system that can be further developed into a successful commercial
product in Phase II of the project.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
a system that will automate cell culture experiments and remove much of the
cumbersome manual labor. As a low-cost, compact diagnostic tool, it will enable
research and diagnosis in geographically dispersed regions where there is
limited access to centralized cell culture laboratories. And, in primary
education laboratories, it will introduce a large number of high school students
to cell culture experimental methods and techniques, thanks to its low cost and
simplicity of operation. Together, these impacts will enhance scientific and
technological understanding of cell growth, and bring new tools to research,
diagnosis, and education. The potential commercial value of the Smart Petri Dish
is $10 M per year in revenues by the third year of production, based upon
realistic projections of market size and potential market share.