* 1315582
* SBIR Phase I:  A  Coded Aperture Scheme for High Resolution X-Ray Tomography
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Jongmook Lim, EN'URGA INC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
evaluate the feasibility of utilizing a low-resolution X-Ray tomography system
in tandem with a coded aperture scheme to obtain highly resolved profiles of
deep holes. Three tasks are planned during the Phase I work: The first is to
design and integrate a transmission grating with a low resolution X-Ray
tomography system to obtain high-resolution X-ray radiographs at multiple view
angles. The second is to develop an algorithm to deconvolute these high-
resolution radiographs to provide spatially resolved local density information
at sub-micron scales. The third is to evaluate the system using an automotive
GDI injector. During the Phase I work, the feasibility of obtaining very high
resolution profiles of deep holes such as those in automotive injectors will be
completely demonstrated. During the Phase II, a prototype system that can be
used by automotive and aerospace industry will be developed and evaluated. The
intellectual merit of the proposed project is that it provides a sound and novel
approach for utilizing advanced state-of-the-art X-ray instrumentation in
conjunction with robust deconvolution methods for obtaining precise profile
measurements inside narrow deep holes.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is two-folds. The first
involves the estimation of fuel injector geometry in automotive injectors. New
Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards mandate much higher efficiency from
automotive engines than are currently possible. All automotive manufacturers are
actively pursuing Gasoline Direct Injection with precise control of the spray
shape and duration to achieve higher efficiency over a broad spectrum of
operating condition. One of the key instrumentation need within the industry is
a diagnostic to accurately map the profile of the injector holes. The proposed
system will be the first instrument that can provide this unmet need with
sufficient ease and accuracy for routine use by injector manufacturers. The
second application is in the aerospace industry. In the aerospace industry,
hundred percent testing of nozzles is mandatory. One of the issues facing the
industry is the need to accurately profile the geometry of the nozzle holes, so
as to ensure that relevant performance criteria for the nozzle can be met. The
commercial and societal benefit of the proposed project is that it will enable
industry to measure relevant information inside fuel injectors and nozzles,
enabling higher efficiency and reduced pollution emission.