* 1315447
* Materials physics of rapidly sheared faults and consequences for earthquake rupture dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* James Rice, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2019
* USD 399,996.00

Earthquakes on the well-established and highly slipped fault zones which host
major events seem to occur at overall levels of shearing stress which are
notably lower than "static friction" stress levels required to initiate slow
frictional sliding between the fault walls. If those static friction stresses
prevailed during earthquake slip, they would produce perceptible localized heat
outflows along faults and leave abundant signs of melting and re-solidification,
even at shallow crustal depths. Neither are generally found. Also, recent field
and lab observations show that the majority of deformation during rapid shear is
generally localized to a remarkably thin principal shear zone along the fault,
often less than a millimeter to a centimeter wide, with that feature forming
within a much broader, say, one to a hundred meters wide, zone of granulated and
damaged rock. Our aim in the planned study is to understand the materials and
thermal physics responsible for those features of fault zone response, and to
establish some of their consequences for the manner by which slip-ruptures
propagate along faults in major earthquakes. It is hoped that such basic
understanding of the physics of earthquakes may ultimately have payoffs in the
improved predictability of seismic phenomena and effects.

We have developed the concept that thermal heating of groundwater-saturated
fault gouge during shear leads to strong localization of strain into
realistically narrow zones. That focuses further heating and temperature rise,
but rather than leading directly to melting, weakening mechanisms are triggered
that sufficiently limit strength, and hence continued heating, so as to make
bulk melting of the fault zone rare, at least at shallow crustal depths. A
relatively universal form of weakening is that groundwater thermally expands
much more than its mineral host, causing the mineral constituents to push less
strongly against one another, and hence to have low frictional strength. A
variant of this process is that thermal decomposition of common fault
constituents such as carbonates and hydrated clays occurs, at temperatures far
below melting, and creates a highly pressurized volatile product phase (CO2 or
H2O, respectively) which similarly reduces strength. Further weakening
processes, of which the physical details are still unclear, relate to the
nanometer size range of the solid decomposition and wear products. We will model
how such weakening processes influence features of propagating earthquake
ruptures (e.g., crack vs. slip pulse, rupture velocity, stress drop, total
slip), how rupture relates to the fault mineralogy and depth, and how different
dynamic weakening processes might be identified in seismic observations.
Hypotheses to be tested are that thermal decomposition combined with variation
in fault mineralogy could explain how rupture stops at the base of the
seismogenic zone, and that thermal decomposition could provide a mechanism for
occasional extreme earthquakes on faults that generally experience smaller
events. We will model the material lying outside the narrow highly-deforming
fault core as an elastic or an elastic-brittle-plastic solid, and use our
analyses of the localized shearing processes within the deforming fault core as
the basis for imposing boundary conditions along the fault surfaces in the
larger analysis. The study should contribute towards a unified overall
understanding of seismic processes. It will have inputs from fine scale
materials physical/chemical theory, geologic fault core studies, rock mechanics
lab friction experiments, spontaneous rupture simulations, seismic observations
of the slip mode and extent of seismic ruptures, and large scale constraints, by
heat flow, topography support and related studies, of the stress regimes under
which major earthquakes occur.