* 1315213
* SBIR Phase I:  Compact and Power Efficient Integrated Voltage Tunable RF Inductors and Transformers with Wide Tunable Inductance Range
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Nian-xiang Sun, Winchester Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project proposes
to develop a new class of integrated voltage tunable RF inductors and
transformers, which are based on the voltage control of magnetism in
ferroelectric/magnetic composite materials. These integrated voltage tunable RF
inductors and transformers are compact and power efficient, having a wide
inductance tuning range, a significantly boosted operating frequency range at
several GHz and enhanced quality factor over conventional integrated magnetic
inductors. When combined with different commercially available varactor
technologies, these tunable inductors and transformers will considerably extend
the tunable frequency range of critical RF reconfigurable components and
circuits such as tunable impedance matching networks, tunable filters, tunable
power amplifiers, tunable low-noise amplifiers, and tunable phase shifters. Such
tunable inductors and transformers will lead to transformative ultra-wideband
reconfigurable communication systems that are of critical importance in today's
highly crowded and complex electromagnetic environment.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes the
development a new class of compact and power efficient voltage tunable inductors
and transformers, which will enable novel adaptive RF components such as tunable
impedance matching networks, tunable filters, tunable power amplifiers, tunable
low-noise amplifiers with significantly enhanced tuning frequency ranges, and
also create totally new markets for tunable RF components. Compared to
integrated RF magnetic inductors which typically show low quality factors at
GHz, the voltage tunable inductors and transformers will have significantly
enhanced quality factor and extended operating frequency in addition to being
efficiently tunable across a wide inductance range. These tunable RF inductors
and transformers can nicely complement other commercially available varactor
technologies and provide a significantly enhanced tuning frequency range for
circuits such as tunable impedance matching networks, antenna tuners, tunable
power amplifiers and tunable low noise amplifiers, which will enable new markets
for reconfigurable RF components, circuits and communication systems, and have
great impacts on different industries such as smart phones, laptops, tablets,
E-readers, etc.