* 1315667
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-High-Speed Z-Scanning Optics for Laser Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Christian Theriault, TAG Optics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 178,171.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to create an
ultra-high-speed variable focus optical element meeting the robust performance
needs associated with laser manufacturing. The ability to change the focal spot
location in laser processing is necessary to accommodate the rapid throughput
and complex materials shapes and structures generally encountered in industrial
manufacturing. However, the state-of-the-art remains slow, mechanically moving
lenses, which can lead to increased production times, reduced accuracy,
increased system complexity and overall increased cost. Instead, this work
proposes a paradigm-shifting approach to variable focus by developing a new type
of liquid lens that uses sound to shape and refocus light. In order to implement
this rapidly growing, high impact technology in the manufacturing arena, the key
challenge is to manage and reduce laser heating of the device which can lead to
undesirable optical effects. By using a combination of experimental tests and
numerical models we expect to determine the optimum design conditions that
minimize heating effects and maximize refractive power of the lens. With the
inclusion of passive and active cooling approaches we expect to enable lens
operation for production-level laser manufacturing across different power and
pulse duration scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will have significant repercussions in the laser
manufacturing industry, an increasingly important industry which is in many ways
responsible for the efficiency and economical cost of every day materials and
devices. Specifically, this project addresses a technological market need which
will reduce the manufacturing cycle, and streamline processes by providing
additional control of the laser beam in the z axis without effecting the x and y
axis resolution; thereby, improving the manufacturing yield by increasing the
precision, and speed of laser manufacturing systems. Improvements in
manufacturing yield are incredibly important to both societal and environmental
conditions as they lead to a reduction in waste, an increase in the quality of
the parts produced, and a reduction in manufacturing costs. Additionally this
proposal will increase scientific and technical understanding on how to applying
ultra-high speed z-scanning optical devices in high power lasers systems for
manufacturing operation. This will not only lead to the incorporation of such
devices in already existing systems but more importantly, enable new innovations
such as the creation of entirely new manufacturing approaches with increased
performance and capabilities.