* 1315672
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-Time Data Fusion for Water Supply Systems: Innovations for Online Automated Water Quality Model Estimation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Stuart Hooper, CitiLogics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The innovation will enable real-time decision support for large-scale water
infrastructure systems, through the fusion of operational data and
infrastructure-aware predictive models. These real-time software instruments
will leverage significant investments by drinking water utilities in Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems that support operational decisions
and Geographic Information Systems and infrastructure models that support
infrastructure planning; these investments should and can be leveraged to
support a wider scope of utility decision making. This SBIR Phase I proposal
focuses on the commercial technology associated with real-time predictions of
water quality evolution within water supply systems. Previous field scale
evaluations of network water quality models have suffered from idealized
reaction kinetics; short data collection periods; and significant parameter
uncertainty and variability. By fusing operational data and infrastructure-aware
predictive models, this study will, for the first time, develop a rigorous
assessment of the fidelity of complex network water quality models. The data
fusion software instruments inspired by this research will support the
transparent integration of operational decisions with real-time data and model
predictions and forecasts, leading to enhanced water quality benefits that, at
present, can only be anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial impact and
practical benefits of fusing real-time operational data with infrastructure-
aware predictive models will be enabled by the ability to simply and accurately
forecast distribution system hydraulics and water quality, in real-time. This
technology will allow operators to routinely engage in situational response
training, and conduct operational analyses to achieve practical water quality
management goals ? such as maintenance of minimum chlorine residuals or control
of disinfection byproducts. Engineers will apply their infrastructure knowledge
to these tasks in a collaborative fashion, while knowing their infrastructure
models are continuously updated through a persistent interpretation of the
operational record. Managers will review dashboards and automated reports
showing trends in unaccounted for water, energy usage, and water quality, and
integrate those with past and future asset management decisions. Successful
completion of Phases I and II of this project will test the value proposition
for real-time data fusion for water supply systems, specifically for real-time
network water quality prediction and forecasts. Real-time data fusion benefits
and associated workflows will be put to the test in actual operating
environments, supported by a new data fusion system that allows for efficient
utility workflows across the organization.