* 1315169
* SBIR Phase I:  Parking Assistant Software for Smart-phones and Car Navigation Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Channah Naiman, Pirouette Software Consulting
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will study the
feasibility of 1) crowd-sourcing smart-phones about street parking availability,
and 2) navigating a driver to an available parking slot. The innovation is the
Intelligent Parking Assistant (IPA), a software application that runs on smart
phones and car navigation systems, and guides a driver to a parking slot
similarly to a Car Navigation System (CNS) that guides her to the destination.
The IPA consists of two subsystems, a Parking Detector (PD) and a Parking
Navigator (PN). PD automatically estimates the average number of parking slots
on city blocks. It uses a novel method that builds a historical profile of
parking availability on each city block, and combines it with real-time
information from smart phones. In contrast, existing solutions that detect
parking availability either use specialized expensive sensors, or require manual
input. PN guides the driver through a path where she is most likely to compete
effectively for parking. PN uses a novel Gravity-based Parking Algorithm,
developed using game-theory to address the competitive aspect. The proposed
project will be successful if parking time reduction and energy consumption
reach specified targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project lies in reducing the time for finding parking in urban
areas. Parking is a major hassle in urban transportation. Studies conducted in
11 major cities reveal that the average time searching for curbside parking was
8.1 minutes and cruising for these parking slots accounted for 30% of the
traffic congestion in those cities. Each parking slot generates at least 1,825
vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per year. Thus, in a city like Chicago with over
35,000 curbside slots, cruising for parking generates 63 million VMT. This
wastes over 3.1 million gallons of gasoline and produces over 48,000 tons of CO2
emissions. The IPA reduces parking search by providing drivers with real-time
information and guidance through mobile, wirelessly connected computing devices
such as smart-phones. The IPA will be initially marketed as a phone app. The
parking availability data needed for bootstrapping the IPA usage will be
obtained from local municipalities. In its research and development the company
will focus on street-parking. The innovation stems from the NSF IGERT award
0549489.