* 1315050
* SBIR Phase I:  Osteoconduction Determination of Mineral Coated Silicon Dioxide Nanosprings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jamie Hass, MJ3 Industries
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 project addresses the failure of
osseointegration, the lack of bonding between an orthopedic device and bone.
Failure of the implant does occur with an unacceptably high rate (8-20%). The
main driver for revision surgery is aseptic loosening of the implant, which
occurs at a nanoscale. This can be very detrimental to the patient since the
revised implants have higher complication rates. The research objective is to
develop an orthopedic implant coating that mimics both the scaffolding and
mineral structure of healing woven bone. Coated nanosprings, a synthetic
collagen nanobiomaterial, mimics the scaffolding component of bone. This
proposal is directed at developing a mineral layer on the nanosprings to make
synthetic woven bone. Nanosprings can be grown on orthopedic devices. Metal
alloy coated nanosprings are well tolerated by the body and increase the bone
deposition rate, but the procedure is expensive. The mineral used for the
proposed coating is inexpensive but lacks the scaffolding effects needed for
bone integration. Combining these two synthetic biomaterials would provide the
necessary economical scaffolding to facilitate
osseointegration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project to the osteoconductive biomaterial market is vast. The
orthopedic market is a multi-billion dollar industry, which will increase as the
baby boomer population ages. This technology can be employed in both animal and
human devices, such as dental implants, prosthetics, and joint replacements. The
potential commercialization options are partnering with an existing orthopedic
device manufacturer for this add-on coating, or direct sales to the animal
market, and then to the human market as the FDA allows. The coated nanosprings
have the ability to greatly increase the rate and hardness of bone deposition.
It is hypothesized that this increase around implants can have a significant
clinical impact to improve the quality of patient?s lives as well as an
economical benefit. This new technology can provide employment for scientists in
both biologic and other hard science fields. The nanosprings are an ideal
foundation for osteoconductive research. This synthetic collagen allows
different coating material to be studied at a nanoscale level. Thus, providing
both materials and biologic insight to the osseointegration process.