* 1315562
* SBIR Phase I:  Cobond/Cofired Capacitor Based Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Safakcan Tuncdemir, Solid State Ceramics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 124,990.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
development of a Lead Zirconium Titanate (PZT) analog of multilayer ceramic
capacitor (MLCC) technology. Typically comprised of Barium Titanate materials,
MLCC devices are the most produced and used capacitors in electronic industry
with a produced quantity of approximately 1000 billion pieces per year. However,
as a piezoelectric material, Barium Titanate has been largely replaced by PZT.
However, PZT device applications have been constrained until now by both cost
and performance. In particular, although used extensively for mid-high voltages
that extend from laptop transformers to actuators, such technology struggles
with low voltage applications prohibiting it from key applications such as
electronics power supplies and adaptors. The aim is to emulate MLCC technology
with two fundamental distinctions more complex materials poling of final
multilayer devices and enabling such multilayer electroded ceramic production
that eliminates the onerous cost of capital equipment to manufacture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be that it directly enables application of PZT technology to a wide range
of very low/mid voltage (low to high impedance electrical load) power
electronics applications, much as has been accomplished for electronics with
MLCC technology. It will enable non-magnetic power electronics including
supplies, voltage sensors, isolators, and point-of-load inverters that both
drastically reduce electromagnetic interface (EMI) and radio frequency interface
(RFI) issues and lead to a far greener technology solution for emergent
electronics based consumer goods, such as light-emitting diode (LED) lighting
and low cost solar energy. The new technology is potentially smaller, lighter
weight and less cost to produce than magnetics-based products, which, at
present, is the only option for this enormous array of volume consumer products
and applications that include all mobile electronics, gaming consoles, wireless
communication, and indeed all control boards used in vehicular, aerospace and
domestic use.