* 1315626
* SBIR Phase I:  Wireless Instrumentation for Preclinical Research on Small Freely Behaving Animals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Ueiming Jow, Bionic Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 149,996.00

The innovation in this project involves design and develop of a fully functional
prototype of a bioinstrument, called "EnerCage," a wireless power (50mW) and
data (1Mbps) transmission system that can support bidirectional communication
with electronic devices that are attached to or implanted in small, freely
behaving animal subjects. The floor of the EnerCage consists of a modular array
of overlapping hexagonal-planar spiral coils (hex-PSCs) with optimized
geometries, capable of forming an experimental arena of arbitrary size and
shape. The hex-PSCs provide a focused magnetic field around the subject for
wireless power delivery regardless of its position in the cage. Power amplifiers
driving the hex-PSC array are equipped with a closed-loop power control
mechanism that compensates for animal movement and parasitic effects on the
coils. On the receiver side, a mobile unit equipped with efficient power
management circuitry delivers power and data to biosensors, actuators, and drug
delivery devices on or inside the animal body. A magnetic tracer embedded in the
mobile unit allows real time non-line-of-sight animal tracking in 3D. The
magnetic tracking is combined with optical tracking to indicate the subject's
behavior, position, and head orientation in both open and covered spaces. This
information is also used to activate the hex-PSC that is in the best position to
power the mobile unit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the EnerCage
system is its ability to facilitate new behavioral neuroscience experiments and
phenotyping on freely behaving small animal subjects. It can enhance our
understanding of neurological diseases such Alzheimer?s, epilepsy, and
Parkinson's as well as other illnesses, such as hypertension, obesity, and
cancer. Preclinical research involves collecting a variety of physiological
data, such as neural activity, body temperature, blood flow/pressure, chemical
concentrations, and physical/behavioral activity from small animal models, such
as rodents. Traditional experimental setups are small, tethered, secluded, and
unnatural, resulting in an impoverished environment that is different from the
species? natural habitat, thereby biasing the results, particularly in
behavioral experiments. The EnerCage system will create an enriched environment
by completely eliminating tethering and large payloads (e.g. battery-powered
wireless devices). It will enable experiments of any duration in arenas of any
size. It is suited for a wide range of preclinical research, from behavioral
neuroscience on rats to genetic engineering and phenotyping of knockout mice.
Moreover, the EnerCage allows high throughput experiments with multiple animal
subjects socially interacting in the same spacious environment with tunnels and
covered chambers. All of these advantages are of great interest to research
centers, hospitals, neuroscientists, and drug companies, and contribute to the
commercialization potential of the EnerCage.