* 1315043
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Learning and Retention of Health Science Concepts Through the Use of a Just-in-Time Teaching, Mobile Device Simulations
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Robert Keegan, WholeLogic, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a mobile
device healthcare simulation design that engages students in an active learning,
pre-class activity. Pre-class assignments are documented to improve student
learning but traditional reading meets with poor student compliance. The
increasing prevalence of student-owned tablets/smartphones creates a platform to
satisfy a demand for engaging, scientifically accurate, mobile simulations
distributed as pre-class activities. In Phase I, a tablet/smartphone mobile
simulation prototype will be developed to simulate a commercially available,
electronic fetal monitor used to teach perinatal monitoring. The Phase I mobile
simulation will be derived from previously developed simulation technology
documented to improve learning. The Phase I experiment will compare learning
outcomes among nursing students using the pre-class mobile simulation with those
exposed to traditional reading or no pre-class activity. A randomized,
controlled experiment will be conducted in a college of nursing to assess
learning. Access to the pre-class mobile simulation is expected to result in
improved learning outcomes compared with traditional techniques. The Phase II
effort should extend the accessibility and marketability of the concept by
developing mobile simulations for allied disciplines and validating that
enhanced learning outcomes occur among diverse topics and student populations.

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase I project is the development,
production, and marketing of engaging and scientifically accurate, mobile device
simulations that are designed to help students in the health sciences learn
difficult medical physiology concepts. Pre-class reading assignments and quizzes
can improve student learning, free up class time for active learning activities,
and enable instructors to customize their presentations according to student
need. Unfortunately, poor student compliance with pre-class reading and the
increased faculty time needed to review student assignments prior to a scheduled
lecture have combined to limit the use and benefits of pre-class learning. The
proposed mobile simulation technology delivers a dynamic and engaging,
clinically-focused, pre-class activity combined with a learning analytics method
that helps to quantify student knowledge. This technology will be marketed as
Android, iOS and Windows smartphone/tablet applications. Because the mobile
simulation can be easily adapted to any concept in the biosciences, a successful
SBIR effort in obstetrical nursing can be scaled-up to a library of applications
in a variety of health related bioscience disciplines including physiology
courses in colleges and universities, topic specific course content in colleges
of nursing, medicine, and respiratory care, and in general undergraduate and
high school biosciences courses.