* 1315774
* SBIR Phase I:  One Step Flash-Sintering of Multilayer Structures for SOFC Below 1000°C: a New Manufacturing Paradigm for Commercial Viability
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* John Francis, Lupine Laboratories LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
commercial potential of flash-sintering to enhance the manufacturability and
performance of Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFCs). The co-sintering of heterogeneous
multilayer ceramics remains a technical barrier to the commercialization of
SOFCs for two reasons: 1) the materials for the multilayer structure require
different processing temperatures, which can hinder optimum material selection,
and 2) batch style manufacturing techniques are expansive and have low
throughput. Flash-sintering can address both of these technical issues by
lowering the sintering temperatures and reducing the processing times. These
advances will in turn permit: a) the use of higher-performing low-temperature
cathode materials, b) single-step sintering, c) a change in the manufacturing
protocol from batch to continuous, d) significant reduction in manufacturing
energy consumption, and, e) the use of lower-cost tooling materials due to
reduced processing temperatures.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to significantly
enhance the commercial viability of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC) technology.
This will be done by improving manufacturing cost and performance of
intermediate-temperature SOFCs. Improved cost will in turn enable greater
proliferation of this environmentally-clean, high-efficiency power generation
system, and when deployed, the concomitant reduction of greenhouse gases. The
technique developed has broader impacts as a disruptive technology for the
entire field of heterogeneous ceramic interfaces (for example: ceramic gas
separation membranes, electrocatalysts, sensors, multilayer batteries, and
metal-ceramic composites) by enabling new material combinations to be co-
sintered. Finally, SOFCs are suitable for a wide range of fuels, including
natural gas, allowing them flexibility in the constantly changing energy market.
The size of SOFCs can range from a few kW to a few MW, suitable for all types of
applications from powering homes and small businesses, to large-scale energy
production.