* 1315437
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi-Core Sleep Convention Logic Processor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Jerry Frenkil, Nanowatt Design, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
challenge of designing ultra-low power circuits using new asynchronous design
techniques to dramatically reduce both dynamic power and leakage power. The
objectives of this project are to demonstrate improved power characteristics on
an industrial multi-core processor using Sleep Convention Logic (SCL), a type of
asynchronous logic that automatically puts circuits to sleep to reduce leakage
power. A 16 core processor will be implemented using SCL and compared to a
synchronous implementation, both in the same 65nm technology. Both
implementations will be based upon the same source design described in an
industry standard Hardware Description Language (HDL) and the resulting SCL
implementation will be compared against the synchronous implementation to
demonstrate functional equivalency. Both the SCL and synchronous implementations
will be characterized for dynamic and leakage power consumption, area, and
timing. It is anticipated that the SCL implementation will be somewhat larger in
area and have somewhat slower timing, but have significantly reduced dynamic and
leakage power. The characterization effort will quantify these comparisons. This
project is significant in that this will be the first comparison of SCL and
synchronous implementations of an industrial circuit in a nanometer fabrication
process.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to establish
asynchronous design methodologies based upon industry standards and to
empirically quantify the benefits of using SCL for ultra-low power circuits and
power sensitive applications. It is expected that SCL is especially well suited
to system on chip (SoC) designs that employ a multitude of identical cores.
Today, the number of cores used on SoCs is typically limited by total power
consumption; if the power consumption of each core can be reduced dramatically,
then the number of cores that can be placed on an SoC can be dramatically
increased. Larger numbers of cores result in increased bandwidth and energy
efficiency, thus enabling increased functionality especially in applications
relying upon advanced signal processing such as high-speed wireless
communications, remote sensing, embedded vision, and implantable medical
devices. Hearing aids are but one example of applications requiring large
amounts of signal processing at extremely low levels of power consumption.
Today, limited battery life is a major issue inhibiting both market acceptance
and personal convenience of advanced hearing aids. Results of this project will
provide a path to easing such limitations thereby opening up new opportunities
in personal communication and medical markets, among many others.