* 1315882
* SBIR Phase I:  A Smartphone Incentive System to Align Electricity Demand with Intermittent Supply
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Roderick Hinman, Ikehu Natural, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
address challenges that electric utilities face in maintaining stability of
their grids as more and more intermittent renewable energy generating systems
are added to them. Solar and wind are variable and thus complicate the process
of balancing energy generation with consumption. The objective of this project
is to show the viability of a software-based solution to assist with this
balance, reducing the need for expensive energy storage. This service will
provide real-time incentives to consumers via their smart phones to reduce or
increase electricity usage in response to a request. Another objective is to
demonstrate that machine-learning algorithms can help the service estimate
consumer response rate based upon environmental, locational, and personal
factors. The project will include a preliminary trial with residential
electricity consumers where they will be sent requests in response to simulated
conditions; some will be able to adjust loads from their smart phones.
Electricity usage and other data gathered from the trial will be used to train
and test the machine-learning estimators and to evaluate methods that validate
whether the consumer performed as promised.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to increase
utilities' ability to add renewable electricity generation to their grids while
minimizing the need for expensive compensating solutions like gas turbine
peaking plants or energy storage. It will also lower peak electricity demand,
further reducing the need for peaking plants and therefore reducing costs for
utilities and consumers. The end result will be less reliance on fossil fuel for
electricity generation, improving the nation's energy security and reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. A second impact will be to improve customers'
education and engagement with their energy consumption. As a result, consumers
may be more likely to purchase and install energy-efficient appliances and home
improvements, further reducing energy consumption. An increased technical
understanding of that relationship, particularly given the proliferation of
smartphones and related applications, will improve the ability to create
incentives to foster grid friendly energy consumption.