* 1315900
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Performance Cold Atom Gravimeter
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Miroslav Shverdin, AOSense, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,412.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop a detailed design and a comprehensive performance model for a highly
sensitive, stable, and accurate field deployable laser-cooled atom
interferometric gravimeter. In the laboratory, atom interferometric absolute
gravimeters have achieved both exceptional long term accuracy and very low bias
drift. The company will leverage proprietary technological advances developed
and experimentally validated under previous, to produce a highly compact, field-
deployable sensor for geodesy applications. The proposed very high performance
gravimeter will attain an order-of-magnitude improvement compared to the state-
of-the-art, at improved reliability, lower power consumption, smaller size and
weight, and ultimately reduced cost. A novel configuration of the proposed
sensor substantially suppresses well-known instrument sensitivity to high
frequency vibration noise, enabling low cost field deployment. The main aspects
of the Phase I effort include (1) evolving and customizing existing cold-atom
technology for the compact, high performance gravimeter application. (2)
Analyzing sensor performance via analytical models and Monte-Carlo simulations
for intended deployment. (3) Producing a detailed engineering design of the
complete system which will lead to rapid system build in Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will benefit seismology, geodesy, and environmental sciences. Highly sensitive
cold-atom gravimeters have tremendous commercialization potential for
geophysical applications, mineral exploration, and as an early-warning system
for earthquakes, tsunamis, or volcanic eruptions. The high installation and site
preparation costs currently preclude a wider deployment of existing seismic
sensors in a dense network. A denser sensor network of gravimeters and
seismographs will improve both U.S. and international seismic event monitoring,
prediction, and understanding capability. Highly sensitive gravimeters are
currently deployed to map the earth?s field anomaly for precision navigation,
monitoring earth?s tides for evidence of climate change and map out underground
water tables for resource management. The superior performance, low power
consumption, and small size and weight of the proposed gravimeter will both aid
existing missions and facilitate new ones. As the price of future units?
decreases to the cost of existing broadband seismometers, the proposed cold-atom
sensor will become a superior alternative to existing broadband seismometers.