* 1316473
* ASPECT: Advancing Science Performance with Emerging Computer Technologies
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Minogue, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 449,643.00

Advancing Science Performance with Emerging Computer Technologies (ASPECT)
combines Unity (a cross-platform game engine and integrated development
environment) with cutting-edge haptic technology to provide upper elementary
students with a new way of accessing core science content, reaching beyond what
is typically done in today's classrooms. Haptic feedback may engage embodied
knowledge that would otherwise lie untapped. This affordance becomes important
when one considers the invisible aspects that undergird many school science
concepts (e.g. buoyancy, magnetism, and intermolecular forces.) Haptic
interfaces provide learners access to invisible forces (often difficult or
impossible to create in real-world scenarios) and may help fill gaps in an
individual's chain of reasoning about abstract science content. The core
research question that undergirds this exploratory project is: How does the
addition of haptic feedback influence users' understandings of core, often
invisible, science content?

The work is conducted by a cross disciplinary team from North Carolina State
University, the Renaissance Computing Institute a local school system. The
projecct includes experts in education, computer science, and art and design.
The project uses an informant design approach; actively engaging children and
local expert STEM teachers in the development and testing of simulations to help
students learn about buoyancy, magnetism, and molecular forces emphasizing
crosscutting concepts like cause and effect, systems, and energy. The
simulations support student scientific inquiry with in-simulation cognitive
tools including the just-in-time presentation of ancillary background
information and a virtual science notebook planning tool. Evaluation and testing
includes focus groups with children and STEM teacher informants using low-tech
versions of the simulations to elicit feedback on artwork, character features,
storyboarded instructional sequences, and potential measures of performance and
learning. Usability testing generates data on task performance (including
success rate, completion time, and workload) user behavior, and user preference
and feeds the iterative development process. Preliminary estimates of the impact
are being made through a series of small-scale classroom-based pilot tests near
the end of the design cycle for each simulation. These pilot studies employ a
randomized pre-test-post-test control group research design with convenience
samples of 40-60 grade 3-5 students each year. Participants are split into four
groups (based on the haptic and visual rendering of the underlying forces being
taught): none (just basic rendering of the objects in the simulation with no
visual or haptic forces), visual rendering (including visualization of the
forces involved), haptic rendering of forces (with no visualization of forces),
and visual plus haptic rendering of forces. A mixed-methods approach is used to
garner both quantitative and qualitative data regarding subjects' conceptions of
the target content. Measures include open-ended questions, drawing tasks,
concept mapping, objective close-ended questions, and retrospective probing.

A main thrust ASPECT is to lay the groundwork for a more inclusive cognitive
model of how children integrate and use visual and haptic information in
multisensory learning environments. The immediate product of ASPECT's
exploratory work is the proof-of-concept that haptics can be successfully
integrated with the Unity platform to build simulations that enhance and deepen
upper elementary students' science learning. The study will also contribute to
the development of design guidelines for the haptic-augmentation of science
simulations that can be used by other researchers.