* 1316753
* Beyond the Standard Model:   Searching for New Physics in Cosmology and Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Neal Weiner, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Neal Weiner at New York
University.

The Standard Model is known to be an incomplete theory of nature. Most of the
matter of the universe (the "dark matter", solidly established by astronomical
and cosmological observations) consists of something undiscovered, and thus
there must exist new particles not in the Standard Model. Additionally, the
presence of the Higgs boson and the expected properties of a quantum field
theory together suggest that new particles and fields will be discovered at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC). However, because the properties of both of these
new sets of particles are unknown, a broad theoretical study is required in
order to evaluate what possible new particles might be discoverable with present
techniques and what new search strategies might be needed. As part of this
project, Professor Weiner intends to investigate a broad range of theoretical
scenarios, both top-down (motivated by new and existing theoretical scenarios)
and bottom-up (motivated by new signatures) as well as their experimental
implications for the LHC and for direct-detection experiments. Additionally,
Professor Weiner will pursue studies to understand the sensitivities of dark-
matter searches, with a focus on the sensitivities of the astrophysical
assumptions present in the existing analyses.

The broader impacts of this project will be wide ranging. Professor Weiner will
involve both students and postdocs in his research program, providing
opportunities to train future scientists. He will also continue his
participation in physics summer schools (as invited), such as the TASI, CLASHEP,
ICTP and Les Houches programs, to educate current PhD students on active
research topics. Finally, he will continue his efforts to engage the public
through public lectures as well as his outreach at the high-school level,
anchored by his continued participation with the Governor's School summer
program in North Carolina.