* 1316416
* Three-dimensional Subduction Models: Implications for Plate-Mantle Coupling and Length-scales of Seismic Anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Margarete Jadamec, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 58,706.00

The theory of plate tectonics predicts that the outer layer of the Earth is
comprised of lithospheric plates (0 - 250 km thick) that are in motion with
respect to one another (at rates on the order of 1 - 20 cm/yr), with the
majority of deformation concentrated at the plate boundaries. At the Earth's
surface, this deformation is commonly manifested in the form of increased and
localized seismicity, volcanism, and mountain building. The expression of plate
boundary zone deformation underneath the plates, in the Earth's mantle, however,
is not well understood. Geodynamic modeling is a valuable tool that can be used
to predict the Earth's viscous mantle response to and interaction with the
tectonic plates, as the mantle cannot be accessed directly. The proposed work
will use high-resolution, three-dimensional geodynamic modeling as a tool to
simulate how the Earth's viscous mantle responds to and interacts with the
tectonic plates at subduction zones, regions where one tectonic plate slides
beneath another and induces motion within the underlying viscous mantle.

Recent seismological observations of shear wave splitting indicate the portion
of the mantle wedged between the overriding plate and subducting plate, the
mantle wedge, is commonly characterized by seismic fast axes oriented oblique to
plate motion, indicative of a complex mantle flow field in many subduction
zones. However, far from the plate boundary, the seismic fast axes are commonly
oriented sub-parallel to plate motion, indicative of coupling between the plate
interior and underlying mantle flow field. A two-dimensional subduction regime
cannot explain the along strike and across strike variations in mantle flow
implied by the shear wave splitting, thus requiring a three-dimensional
framework. Previous three-dimensional numerical simulations of subduction zones
predict that trench-parallel flow can be driven by pressure gradients in the
mantle wedge and that toroidal flow can be generated around lateral slab edges
due to steepening of the subducting plate or rollback in the trench. In addition
models of small-scale convection within the mantle wedge predict complex mantle
flow and seismic anisotropy in the mantle wedge. However, what controls the
transition from complex mantle-overriding plate motion near the subduction zone
to aligned mantle-overriding plate motion in the plate interiors has not been
investigated. Furthermore, although recent work indicates the rheological flow
law governing deformation in the mantle may be instrumental in controlling the
magnitude and length-scales of the subduction induced viscosity reduction and
complex mantle flow field, this has not been quantified in three-dimensional
models of subduction. For this research, three-dimensional numerical models will
be constructed, run, and analyzed, to systematically test the controls on the
lateral extent of the slab driven viscosity reduction in the mantle wedge due a
strain-rate dependent viscosity. The results have implications for the length-
scales of complex seismic anisotropy observed in subduction zones and may place
constraints on the magnitude of coupling between the mantle and overriding
plate. Moreover, understanding how the rheology modulates the viscous flow of
the mantle has important implications for understanding the rates of tectonic
plate motion, the length-scales of plate boundary zone deformation, as well as
the three-dimensional transport of geochemical signatures within the volcanic
front.