* 1316700
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Daniel Thomas, Thomas                  Daniel         C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

-------- This action funds Daniel Thomas of the University of Oregon to conduct
a research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at the laboratory of Dr.
Yu-Ming Ju at Academia Sinica in Taipei, Taiwan. The project title is "Exploring
a New Dimension of Plant Health: Benign and Beneficial Fungi in Living Woody
Plants." The host scientist is Dr. Yu-Ming Ju.

This research investigates the diversity of wood-inhabiting fungal endophytes in
trees in the cloud forests of Taiwan. To do so, direct Polymerase Chain Reaction
methods are adapted for use on wood-inhabiting fungal endophytes using genetic
barcodes to estimate the species richness in wood of members of Xylariaceae. The
ecological links between termites and Xylaria endophytes in the cloud forest are
also being investigated, and preliminary experiments on methods of foliar
inoculation with Xylaria spores are being conducted. This work will increase our
knowledge of fungal endophytes, which are found in every plant ever sampled,
including all human food plants. Endophytes represent a fast-evolving, quickly
and widely dispersing network of micro-organisms that may act as a mitigating
influence on plants in the face of disturbance, pathogens, and extreme climate
variation. The effects of endophytes are vastly complex and one cannot assume
mutalisms; however, it is reasonable to hypothesize that plant health is
controlled in much the same way as human health: as the result of complex
microbial community interactions. The possible consequences for tropical
forestry and agriculture are significant.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the results of this research will be
disseminated at agricultural industry conferences and made available to
interested government land management and agricultural agencies both in the
United States, Taiwan, and to pertinent academic journals.