* 1316774
* A Regional Conference Series in Mathematical String Theory will be held in North Carolina at Duke University during September 1 and June 1 each year.
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* M. Ronen Plesser, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2016
* USD 12,000.00

Twice annually, regional meetings on mathematical string theory are held in
central North Carolina at Duke University. These meetings inexpensively fill a
critical need, by regularly bringing together isolated research groups to
collaborate and hear research talks, and also by training students and postdocs
both by exposing them to a wide array of ideas as well as giving them a forum in
which to themselves give talks, thereby substantially aiding both training and
research efforts. The location of these meetings allows for substantial impact,
as Duke is one of three major universities within a forty-minute drive of one
another, all of which have researchers working in related areas, and is
centrally located with regards to a number of other universities and related
researchers within driving distance. Duke's existing facilities will be used to
record lectures and post them on the web, allowing for even greater impact.
Efforts are being made to involve more underrepresented minorities and genders,
both as participants and as speakers. Partial funding for these meetings in the
form of participant support is awarded for the next three years. In addition,
funds may be used to provide travel support for speakers traveling from outside
the region. The support will enhance the quality of these meetings and their
contribution to regional collaborations. It will especially contribute to the
training of students and postdocs in the region who will be more readily able to
attend. The availability of travel support for outside speakers will make it
possible to attract outside visitors, including members of under-represented
minorities.