* 1316698
* The State of Indigenous Languages Conference
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Ofelia Zepeda, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 05/31/2014
* USD 19,652.00

The American Indian Language Development Institute (AILDI) will host a two-day
conference to address the current state of indigenous languages in the United
States and to particularly question what progress has or has not been made since
the passage of the Native American Language Act in 1990 and since the most
quoted public statistics citing the rapid loss of these languages published in
1995 by Michael Krauss. The two-day conference will bring together stakeholders
and scholars in the field of indigenous languages to discuss the current state
of these languages in the United States. AILDI believes that it is time to
reassess and to try to determine the following: 1) What was the effect of the
Native American Language Act on the state of indigenous languages? 2) Has it
brought about positive change? 3) Are there more current statistics on the
vitality of these languages? 3) Where are and who are the next generation of
speakers of indigenous languages? 4) What is the reality of 'best practices'?
Namely, what has been the impact of 'best practices' on the state of indigenous
languages? 5) Is there now such a thing as 'best practice' based on what we now
know? 6) What has been the effect on training language researchers (both Native
and non-Native) working on indigenous languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has
not been an assessment of the state of indigenous languages in the US since the
Native American Language Act in 1990. Since then many changes have taken place.
These changes have certainly impacted the landscape of Native American
languages; however, there has been little discussion as to what specific changes
have taken place, how these are being realized, how challenges are faced and how
solutions are shared. There is a great need for reassessment of the general
state of indigenous languages at this point in time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AILDI
sees the two-day conference as an opportunity to begin to address this problem.
After twenty years, there have been substantial changes in policy, both locally
and nationally, which impact the use and teaching of indigenous languages. This
two day conference will have sessions addressing the role of language
documentation and the impact on revitalization, the use of cutting edge
technology for pedagogical and archiving purposes as well as impact of the
providing skilled training for language immersion teachers for producing new
speakers in communities. In addition, the conference will provide opportunities
for participants to engage in discussions both orally and in writing about what
they view as significant mile markers in the status of Native American languages
as well as the challenges that remain.