* 1316507
* Filling Holes in the Holocene Geomagnetic Field - Tropical East Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Steven Lund, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal will carry out Holocene paleomagnetic field secular variation
(PSV) studies on five lakes from Tropical East Africa (Turkana, Malawi,
Tanganyika, Edward, Victoria). We will recover PSV records from at least two
sediment cores in each lake and develop a composite PSV directional record from
them. We will correlate the directional PSV records from all five lakes and date
the records with C14 dating. We will also attempt to reconstruct relative
paleointensity variability from each lake. Our preliminary data suggest we can
do this for at least one lake, Malawi. This work will permit us to develop a
regional group of PSV time series that will characterize field variability in a
region where almost nothing is known in high-resolution. A high-resolution
relative paleointensity record from Lake Malawi (10°S) would be the first such
Holocene record from the Southern Hemisphere. The study will analyze these
records and compare them with other global Holocene PSV data to assess geodynamo
dynamics. USC researchers have developed a new model of Holocene field
variability (PSVMOD2.0), based on a family of Global PSV time series for the
last 8000 years. PSVMOD2.0 now has 85 sites around the World, which yield 72
directional PSV time series and 35 paleointensity time series. However,
PSVMOD2.0 has no significant data from the African continent and no
paleointensity time series from the Southern Hemisphere. This study of African
lakes will add significantly to the quality of PSVMOD2.0. The African PSV data
will also be used to better assess the timing and regional pattern of Holocene
climate change in the studied lakes. PSV has previously been used very
effectively as a high-resolution correlation and dating tool in paleoclimate
studies. PSVMOD2.0 should become a community database used by a variety of
scientists to better understand PSV and geodynamo dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;We still
do not understand very well how our planetary magnetic field works (and largely
the way all planetary magnetic fields and stellar magnetic fields work) under
normal conditions. We know that these magnetic fields are generated by flow of
electrically conducting fluid below the planetary/stellar surfaces (dynamo
action), but current models of these processes (dynamo models) do not adequately
describe how these fields really operate (particularly the Earth's magnetic
field and our Sun's magnetic field). We need a more complete understanding of
how our magnetic field operates under normal conditions to better constrain
future dynamo models. The best (and only) way to do that is to reconstruct how
our field has varied over the last several thousand years. (Dating errors make
this analysis difficult to impossible in older times.) We currently have
measured variations in Earth's magnetic field over the last few thousand years
over less than half the Earth's surface. This project fills in a big hole in our
understanding the central African continent. Better understanding of how the
Earth's magnetic field operates normally (last few thousand years) will also
give us a better way to assess what the Earth's magnetic field is doing when it
'goes screwy'. These periods are called magnetic field excursions and reversals.