* 1316562
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Beatrix Dudzik, Dudzik                  Beatrix
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Beatrix Dudzik of the University of Tennessee to conduct a
research project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at the Kyushu University Museum located at Kyushu University in
Fukuoka, Japan. The project title is "Examining Cranial Variation in Japanese
Skeletal Samples Using Three Dimensional Data." The host scientist is Dr. Noriko
Seguchi.

Collection of metric skeletal data in countries where data is not well
represented within the academic literature is imperative for the advancement of
biological and forensic anthropology. Procurement and curation of this type of
information provides a means for both burgeoning and seasoned researchers to
address hypotheses that have both broad and focused implications for scientific
communities. This project explores cranial morphometrics by collecting three
dimensional landmark data which can be used to provide further insight into an
array of topics including how functional modules within the cranium are affected
by factors such as migration patterns and adaptation. Specifically, this study
examines morphological variation of the human cranium in Japanese populations
across a broad temporal span. This study is the first to record and analyze
three dimensional landmark data of the human skull from a large Japanese
skeletal sample that dates from the Yayoi period to the modern Edo period.
Analyses of the data collected investigate the hypothesis that morphological
patterns of a range of skeletal samples from various temporal depths can be used
to infer evolutionary patterns within East Asia.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the data collected for this study will be
added to the Forensic Databank of the Department of Anthropology at the
University of Tennessee, which is available to researchers and graduate students
at accredited national and international laboratories and universities to
promote skeletal research in the field of biological and forensic anthropology.
The prospect of adding a vast dataset of an underrepresented population to a
growing U.S database offers direct benefits for assisting biological and
forensic anthropologists in formulation of an accurate biological profile for
unidentified remains, ultimately aiding law enforcement in reducing missing
person's lists. In addition, building international relationships with
professionals in the field of biological anthropology and anatomy is invaluable
as it promotes research collaboration and adds to the broad ranging goal of
collecting biological data in all geographic regions of the world, which has
large implications for skeletal research conducted in the United States, as this
country is comprised of populations from around the world. Ultimately,
establishing academic rapport with international agencies provides foundations
for future opportunity for both American and international researchers to travel
and network in foreign countries with the common goal of education,
collaboration and global scientific advancement.