* 1316312
* Understanding Space Through Engineering Design
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Leona Schauble, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,499,998.00

Understanding Space Through Engineering Design investigates how engaging K-5
children from underrepresented populations in the design of packages, maps, and
mechanisms supports the development of spatial reasoning and spatial
mathematics. The prime conjecture is that engineering design makes spatial
mathematics more tangible and purposeful, and that systematic support for
spatial reasoning and mathematics, in turn, influences the nature of children's
designs and their understanding of how those designs work. The project,
therefore, serves as a test bed to explore the promises and challenges of an
integrated STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methods include
intensive close-up study of small groups of children designers led by
researchers, followed by larger-scale study of classroom implementations led by
elementary teachers. The purpose of the work with small groups of students
across grades is to enable the project investigators to learn about the
accessibility, challenge, and interest that engineering design holds for
youngsters and to inform subsequent steps in revising the instruction for
classroom tryouts. The classroom implementations provide data about how
engineering design supports mathematical growth and, in turn, how growth in
mathematical understanding guides subsequent engineering design. As children
design and share their designs, mathematical and engineering practices, such as
definition, conjecture, and troubleshooting, emerge in classroom conversation,
often when children compare variations in the artifacts that they create.
Researchers seek relationships between the emergence of these practices and
changes in students' learning; in this way, relations between doing and knowing
can be established. Forms of data include video recording of episodes of student
design and classroom conversations. In addition, researchers conduct interviews
with students to assess their understanding of how the artifacts they create
work. The interviews particularly emphasize the role that spatial mathematics
plays in students' explanations of device function and in their accounts of
design processes. The progress of the project, including curriculum development,
interview construction, and data analysis will be overseen by a five-member
advisory board that includes a evaluation specialist, a mathematician, a
mathematics educator, and a design expert.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
contribute to a beginning knowledge base about how integrated STEM education can
best be pursued, in particular, by exposing the possibilities and challenges
inherent in the proposed emphasis on engineering design. By working closely with
18 teachers and their 500 students, the project investigators aim to develop a
practical, yet powerful approach to iSTEM education, that is, a new study of
integrated science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Products include a
website featuring a suite of curriculum materials, case episodes of children
designing, and formative assessments of children's learning in contexts of
everyday classroom activity.