* 1316974
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Douglas Smith, Smith                   Douglas        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Douglas Smith of Michigan Technological University to conduct
a research project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at Beijing Institute of Technology in Beijing, China. The project
title is "Nanoparticle-based Fluorescent Sensors for Measurement of Acidic
Intracellular pH in Living Cells." The host scientist is Dr. Si-ping Pang.

Intracellular pH plays many critical roles in cell, enzyme and tissue
activities, including proliferation and apoptosis, ion transport, endocytosis,
and muscle contraction. Cellular dysfunction is often associated with abnormal
pH values in organelles (mitochondria, lysosomes, etc.). Monitoring pH changes
inside living cells is also important for studying cellular internalization
pathways, such as phagocytosis, endocytosis, and receptor ligand
internalization. The Fellow synthesized a series of new fluorescent sensors in
his home lab (Michigan Tech. Univ.). Several features of the sensors (absence of
cytotoxicity, high cell permeability, and long-lived intracellular fluorescence)
make the pH sensors superior candidates for examining intracellular pH
alterations in intact cells. Other commercially available pH sensors do not
exhibit these features. Accordingly, the sensors offer novel experimental
opportunities for live-imaging in intact cells over multiple time points
(hours), and thus add a new tool in understanding intracellular alterations in
normal and cancerous cell growth. The easily accessible terminal alkyne/ azido
"clickable" function groups of these sensors offer the possibility of rapidly
constructing sensor molecule libraries using "click" chemistry. This project
exploits this approach to prepare multiple nanoparticle-based fluorescent
sensors.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.