* 1316227
* Conference:  Southeast Enzyme Conference; to be held April 20, 2013 in Atlanta, GA
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Giovanni Gadda, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 02/28/2014
* USD 2,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how enzymes catalyze complex
reactions that are linked to dynamic motions in the cell requires insight from
many perspectives. The Southeast Enzyme Conference (SEC) (established in 2010)
is a forum for investigators in the field of enzymology to initiate scientific
discussions and set up valuable collaborations. The major objectives of the
conference are: 1) to provide an interactive venue to present, discuss, and
debate the latest topics in the field of enzymology; 2) to provide a setting for
young investigators to present their research and 3) to enhance diversity by
introducing students from underrepresented groups in the sciences to the field
of enzymology. The conference has already led to critical contacts between
researchers in the Southeast region. The scientific scope of the conference is
broad, and encompasses the relationship between enzyme structure and function,
the role of dynamics in catalysis, the mechanisms of biological oxidations, the
regulation and evolution of novel pathways, and the use of enzymes as
biocatalysts. The conference provides a unique forum for young investigators
early in their careers to present their research and meet other investigators in
the field of enzymology. Increasing student interest at all levels in the field
of enzymology is critical to maintain the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The Southeast Enzyme Conference (SEC) was initiated due to a
critical mass of enzymologists in the region. The Conference brings researchers
together with a similar interest in understanding the mechanistic and structural
properties of enzymes. The SEC provides a unique opportunity for scientific
exchange and collegial interactions among researchers working at the forefront
of all aspects of enzymology. The collegial, informal atmosphere of this one-day
event is highly effective in fostering the free exchange of ideas. Establishing
collaborations with colleagues, often within driving distance, promotes new
research directions for investigators. The speakers for the conference are
undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and junior faculty
with a very high proportion of speakers and discussion leaders being women and
members of underrepresented groups in science. The Southeast has a large number
of Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Researchers at HBCUs
working in the field of enzymology are personally contacted and encouraged to
attend the conference with their students. In addition to the oral
presentations, there are two poster sessions to increase scientific dialogue and
promote collaborations among investigators at all levels. The event allows
students, postdocs, and faculty members to interact, and provides important
networking opportunities and intellectual development.