* 1316222
* Elementary Particle Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2014,07/31/2017
* G. Peter Lepage, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,940,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Profs. Csaba Csaki, Yuval Grossman,
Toichiro Kinoshita, Peter Lepage, Liam McAllister and Maxim Perelstein at
Cornell University.

The investigators propose to study some of the most important and exciting
topics in a variety of fields within high-energy theory, including particle
physics in and beyond the Standard Model, collider physics, string theory, and
cosmology. Research on the Standard Model (SM) consists of investigations of
flavor and neutrino physics, lattice quantum chromodynamics (QCD), and precision
quantum electrodynamics (QED). Beyond the Standard Model, explorations of
diverse models of the TeV scale are proposed, together with studies of the new
collider physics techniques necessary for testing them. Investigations of
aspects of dark matter physics are also proposed. Within string theory the
primary focus is on understanding the effective theories arising in string
compactifications, and exploring the implications of string theory for
cosmology. Intellectual merit: The Cornell particle theory group carries out
state-of-the-art research in nearly every major area of modern particle theory.
The unifying theme of the group's research program is a distinctive focus on
theoretical problems that are relevant for present and future experiments,
including the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), the intensity frontier program, dark
matter searches, and cosmic microwave background experiments. The proposed
research is directed at maximizing the scientific impact of these experiments.
The most important recent development in particle physics is the historic
discovery of the Higgs(-like) boson, as part of the wealth of data produced by
the 2010-2012 runs of the LHC. Professors Csaki, Grossman and Perelstein will
focus their attention over the next five years on physics related to current and
future colliders. Csaki will explore unconventional supersymmetric models that
are still viable in light of the LHC data; alternative Higgs models, including a
Higgslike dilaton and the composite Higgs; and other TeV-scale models consistent
with LHC results. Grossman will explore the physics that is relevant to the
intensity frontier program in the near and more distant future. This includes
charm and beauty physics, charge-parity (CP) violation, and the study of
neutrino physics. Perelstein's research plans include using the new window on
TeV-scale physics provided by the 125 GeV boson to glean new information about
possible physics beyond the Standard Model; understanding the implications of
the direct LHC searches for new physics, focusing in particular on naturalness
issues; and proposing new LHC searches motivated by both theoretical and
experimental developments. In parallel, Perelstein proposes to continue to
contribute to theoretical interpretations of dark matter searches, where several
interesting hints of detection have already been reported, and much more data
will soon become available. Professor Lepage, as a leading member of the "High
Precision QCD" (HPQCD) lattice gauge theory collaboration, will continue the
pursuit of high-precision results for heavy quark physics from lattice gauge
theory, obtaining semileptonic D-meson form factors for charm physics; extending
b-quark results to the same precision (of order 1%) as the charm observables;
and determining the quark masses and the strong coupling constant to high
precision. Professor Kinoshita has devoted the past decade to a systematic
evaluation of the five-loop QED contribution to the anomalous magnetic moment
(g-2) of the electron. In the next few years, he proposes to improve the
numerical evaluation of his group's analytic results. Professor McAllister plans
to investigate the physics of the very early universe, using cosmological
observations of ultraviolet-sensitive quantities to shed light on theories of
quantum gravity. McAllister's primary focus will be understanding inflationary
dynamics in compactifications of string theory, but he also proposes to study
the vacuum structure of non-supersymmetric string compactifications.

Broader impact: The Cornell particle theory group puts a high priority on the
training of graduate students and postdocs, as well as on the wide dissemination
of recent research results to the general public. Over the past three years, the
group graduated twelve students, a majority of whom are now postdocs, while
eight of our former students who graduated over the past decade now have faculty
positions in the U.S. or abroad. Every member of the group is vigorously
pursuing all possibilities for outreach to the general public. Numerous public
talks, articles, colloquia, high school lectures and teacher conferences have
been produced in the past, and will continue to be organized in the future by
the group members.