* 1316047
* Ocean Acidification:  Collaborative Research:  Quantifying the potential for biogeochemical feedbacks to create 'refugia' from ocean acidification on tropical coral reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Todd Martz, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2018
* USD 751,301.00

Rising sea surface temperatures and ocean acidification (OA) may threaten the
ability of calcified organisms to build carbonate reefs, but it is unclear if
particular reefs have the capacity to tolerate global change. Current
understanding of the effects of OA on coral reefs originates from single-species
laboratory studies largely focused on scleractinian corals. Traditionally, these
experiments attempt to mimic static future conditions under the assumption that
coastal regimes are as constant as -- and will acidify at the same rate as --
open ocean surface waters. Predictions based on these oversimplified scenarios
are unrealistic because numerous benthic organisms, including calcifiers and
primary producers, significantly alter the bulk seawater carbonate chemistry
over a diurnal cycle. Further, the prevalence of recently appreciated extreme
diel fluctuations in pH across some reefs suggests that benthic species may be
acclimated to future carbonate conditions.

To look for potential OA refugia on reefs, a research team from the Scripps
Institute of Oceanography (University of California at San Diego) and the Lamont
Dougherty Earth Observatory (Columbia University) will undertake a unique
mechanistic study on Palmyra Atoll, a remote uninhabited island in the central
Pacific that lacks degradation from local human influence. They will explore the
strengths and controls of biogeochemical feedbacks from coral reef benthic
community assemblages to the seawater chemistry above and experimentally
determine how this natural fluctuation affects physiological responses of key
taxa to OA. Specifically they will: (1) tightly integrate a novel benthic flux
technique in situ that allows continuous, high-temporal resolution measurements
of net ecosystem metabolic rates (production and calcification) with an ongoing
high spatial resolution benthic community dynamics study to quantify feedbacks
of known species assemblages to observed natural spatiotemporal variability in
seawater carbonate chemistry; and (2) use small scale common garden CO2
enrichment experiments and productivity/respiration assays in the lab paired
with reciprocal transplant experiments in situ to empirically quantify the
effects of elevated and/or fluctuating pCO2 on growth, calcification and
photophysiology of common framework building organisms and their benthic
competitors. This should allow them to examine the coupled interactions between
OA and diverse benthic coral reef organisms in their natural environment in the
absence of other confounding human impacts.

BROADER IMPACTS. Ocean acidification is expected to affect a number of
ecosystem goods and services that human societies have come to depend on.
Specifically, the physical protection that coral reefs provide from coastal
erosion will be reduced, potentially exacerbating the effects of sea level rise,
and the effects of OA on fisheries and tourism are yet to be determined. One
central goal is to work with local communities and organizations to better
educate the public about how OA will affect people, societies and the natural
resources they use and to give individuals tools that can allow them to be part
of the solution. To that end, the research team has established strong
partnerships with a local non-profit public broadcasting service KPBS, San Diego
to develop novel products for OA communication and education. Further, they will
work with the Birch Aquarium at SIO to develop an exhibit that communicates the
results of the project. Finally, the project will directly train interns,
students and researchers and will promote diversity through a variety of
outreach activities including public lectures, training of aquarium docents and
the development of web-based educational materials.