* 1316452
* PARTICLE AND QUANTUM FIELD THEORY INVESTIGATIONS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Alberto Sirlin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 673,200.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors S. Dubovskiy, G. Dvali,
G. Gabadadze, M. Porrati and A. Sirlin at New York University.

This research project involves a number of interrelated topics aiming to answer
fundamental questions in theoretical physics. Chief among them: how can
experimentalists distinguish the signals of new physics in the Large Hadron
Collider era? What is the correct description of black holes in the yet-to-be-
completed theory of quantum gravity? More generally, what is indeed the correct
description of quantum gravity? How is it related to the description of all
other theories of elementary particles? What can happen if the quantum carrying
the gravitational force, the graviton, has a mass, instead of moving at the
speed of light? Can the graviton actually move faster than light? Is this
necessarily an unresolvable problem associated with a massive gravity theory?
How do fundamental particles of high spin interact with themselves and with
other, "normal" elementary particles? As part of this project, these researchers
will work towards solving these problems, both in parallel and in collaboration.

There are also significant broader impacts are germane to this project. All of
the senior investigators conduct their research in close collaboration with
graduate students and postdocs, thereby providing essential training to junior
physicists beginning research. They will also give public lectures on their
research results, as they did in the past, not only in the USA but also in
Germany, Georgia, Italy, etc. They have already developed new courses and
curricula based on their research results, and will continue to do so as part of
this project.