* 1316363
* SHF: Small: Bayesian Model Fusion: A Statistical Framework for Efficient Validation and Tuning of Complex Analog and Mixed Signal Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Xin Li, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,839.00

Adaptive self-healing is an emerging methodology to combat the deleterious
effects of nanoscale process variations, to maintain the aggressive scaling of
analog and mixed-signal (AMS) circuits. Nowadays, each tunable AMS circuit
becomes a large-scale, complex system that can adaptively vary over time. The
prohibitively high cost associated with pre-silicon validation and post-silicon
tuning of such a complex system is a growing problem as devices continue to
shrink and the relative magnitude of critical process fluctuations continues to
grow. Hence, there is an immediate need to develop new statistical methodologies
that minimize the validation and tuning cost of nanoscale AMS circuits for
future technology generations. This project develops a novel statistical
framework, referred to as Bayesian Model Fusion (BMF), that aims to minimize the
simulation and/or measurement cost for both pre-silicon validation and post-
silicon tuning of self-healing AMS circuits. The proposed BMF technique is
motivated by the fact that today's AMS design cycle typically spans multiple
stages (e.g., schematic design, layout design, first tape-out, second tape-out,
etc). The key idea is to reuse the simulation and/or measurement data collected
at an early stage to facilitate efficient validation and tuning of AMS circuits
with a minimal amount of data required at the late stage. It provides a
fundamental infrastructure that enables next-generation AMS design for future IC
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project offers a
radically new AMS design methodology based on Bayesian inference. It is expected
to yield significant performance improvement for advanced electrical circuits in
a broad range of applications, from consumer electronics to medical instruments.
Hence, successful development of the proposed BMF framework will have both
short-term and long-term impacts on the semiconductor industry. In addition, the
education activities integrated with this project offer a number of unique
training opportunities to both university students and industrial engineers. It
will substantially improve the education infrastructure and generate high-
quality researchers and practitioners in the field.