* 1316225
* Innovate to Mitigate: A Crowdsourced Carbon Challenge
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gillian Puttick, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2017
* USD 494,215.00

This project is designing and conducting a crowd-sourced open innovation
challenge to young people of ages 13-18 to mitigate levels of greenhouse gases.
The goal of the project is to explore the extent to which the challenge will
successfully attract, engage and motivate teen participants to conduct sustained
and meaningful scientific inquiry across science, technology and engineering
disciplines. Areas in which active cutting edge research on greenhouse gas
mitigation is currently taking place include, among others, biology
(photosynthesis, or biomimicry of photosynthesis to sequester carbon) and
chemistry (silicon chemistry for photovoltaics, carbon chemistry for
decarbonization of fossil fuels). Collaborating in teams of 2-5, participants
engage with the basic science in these areas, and become skilled at applying
scientific ideas, principles, and evidence to solve a design problem, while
taking into account possible unanticipated effects. They refine their solutions
based on scientific knowledge, student-generated sources of evidence,
prioritized criteria, and tradeoff considerations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
interactive project website describes specifications for the challenge and
provides rubrics to support rigor. It includes a library of relevant scientific
resources, and, for inspiration, links to popular articles describing current
cutting-edge scientific breakthroughs in mitigation. Graduate students recruited
for their current work on mitigation projects provide online mentoring. Social
networking tools are used to support teams and mentors in collaborative
scientific problem-solving. If teams need help while working on their
challenges, they are able to ask questions of a panel of expert scientists and
engineers who are available online. At the end of the challenge, teams present
and critique multimedia reports in a virtual conference, and the project
provides awards for excellence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of open innovation
challenges for education provides a vision of a transformative setting for deep
learning and creative innovation that at the same time addresses a problem of
critical importance to society. Researchers study how this learning environment
improves learning and engagement among participants. This approach transcends
the informal/formal boundaries that currently exist, both in scientific and
educational institutions, and findings are relevant to many areas of research
and design in both formal and informal settings. Emerging evidence suggests that
open innovation challenges are often successfully solved by participants who do
not exhibit the kinds of knowledge, skill or disciplinary background one might
expect. In addition, the greater the diversity of solvers is, the greater the
innovativeness of challenge solutions tends to be. Therefore, it is expected
that the free choice learning environment, the nature of the challenge, the
incentives, and the support for collaboration will inspire the success of
promising young participants from underserved student populations, as well as
resulting in innovative solutions to the challenge given the diversity of teams.