* 1316527
* Using Research-Based Formative Assessment to Improve Mathematics Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Janine Remillard, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 07/31/2017
* USD 3,019,036.00

Using Research-Based Formative Assessment to Improve Mathematics Teaching and
Learning builds on almost a decade of research and development by the Vermont
Mathematics Partnership's Ongoing Assessment Project (OGAP). The project
provides professional development and support for teachers of mathematics in
Grades 3-5 and assesses the impacts of the project through a rigorous cluster
randomized control trial. The project supports teachers to provide instruction
that helps all students reach ambitious academic goals in mathematics by: 1)
increasing teachers' knowledge of mathematics and of how students learn specific
mathematics content, and 2) providing teachers with specific tools and routines
for enacting formative assessment and adapting their instruction. The project
has three integrated components: 1) professional development and ongoing support
in 30 New York City public schools, 2) research on teachers' use of assessment
evidence in instruction, and 3) research on student and teacher outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Helping students deeply understand mathematical concepts
requires teachers to become skilled in formative assessment, particularly in the
ongoing analysis of evidence in student work when making instructional
decisions: moving beyond right and wrong answers into the more important
questions of how students think and reason mathematically, where their
misconceptions lie, and how they can be addressed instructionally. Yet research
shows that teachers struggle with the analytic aspects of formative assessment,
and little is known about how teachers use evidence from student work or
thinking to improve their instruction. The project addresses both of these
concerns by: 1) implementing a rigorous, research-driven approach to formative
assessment in 30 schools; and, 2) studying the effects of the intervention in
ways that clearly measure impact on teachers and students, including the link
between how teachers interpret student work and how they respond
instructionally. The creativity and originality of the project lie in its
synthesis of a vast body of knowledge about mathematics teaching and learning
into a clearly packaged and presented set of tools, routines, and strategies
which are directly usable in practice and can dramatically improve the quality
of mathematics instruction. The project is organized around the central goal of
improving teachers' formative assessment practice, with the research design
providing rigorous evidence of project impacts while simultaneously informing
the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be implemented in a highly
diverse school district serving a large number of students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in mathematics and the sciences. The formative
assessment system developed through this project will ultimately be made
available, through a website and multi-media booklets, to all teachers in New
York City public schools and across the country. The OGAP formative assessment
system will be tied to college and career readiness standards in mathematics
rather than a particular curriculum-although it addresses the same content as
the major mathematics curricula-which means the materials, knowledge, and
strategies will be usable across settings.