* 1316936
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Rory Walsh, Walsh                   Rory           C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Rory Walsh of University of Oregon to conduct a research
project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area during the summer
of 2013 at Chungbuk National University in Cheongju, Chungcheongbuk-do, Republic
of Korea. The project title is "Ancient State Formation in Korea: Ceramic
Production, Consumption, and Exchange in the Baekje Kingdom." The host scientist
is Dr. SEONG JeongYong.

Using previously excavated materials from the archaeological archives at
Chungbuk National University, this project investigates the role of pottery and
food systems in the formation of the Baekje kingdom. Baekje was the first state-
level society in the southwestern Korean peninsula, and served as a nexus of
trade and cultural exchange among contemporary peoples in mainland and insular
East Asia. This makes Baekje an excellent case study for economic and
agricultural processes in the development of complex political systems, with
ramifications for the worldwide study of state formation. Neutron Activation
Analysis helps determine geochemical sources for clays, revealing continuity and
change in systems of production, and chemical residue analysis identifies
patterns in food use for ritual or symbolic purposes, as well as everyday
subsistence. The archaeology of Korea presents a particularly vital and
productive venue for international collaboration. Korean studies, including art,
media, language, and history are currently enjoying a meteoric rise among
international students and scholars. While this has led many to describe Korea
as "emergent" on the world stage, the archaeology of Korea belies this label,
demonstrating the pivotal role of Peninsular societies in shaping the collective
culture of East Asia for at least the last three millennia. Archaeology provides
an essential perspective to the study of Korean culture, by allowing us to track
the uniqueness of Korean ways of life as well as to examine the curatorial role
played by Korea in transmitting various technological, social, and artistic
innovations across East Asia.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, Korean archaeology is underrepresented in
English language literature, although domestic research in South Korea is
impressively meticulous and thorough. The Fellow's research also advances
realignment of archaeological goals with the concerns of local communities. This
project deploys state-of-the-art analytical techniques with a collaborative
international sensibility, and will produce lasting, mutually beneficial
cooperation between the institutions and researchers involved.