* 1316215
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Carson Bruns, Bruns                   Carson         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Carson J. Bruns of Northwestern University to conduct a
research project in Math and Physical Sciences during the summer of 2013 at the
University of Tokyo in Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. The project title is
"Programming Simple Molecules to Self-Assemble into Well-Defined Nanoparticles
with Intricate Hierarchical Architectures." The host scientist is Professor
Makoto Fujita.

The 'bottom-up' strategies to nanotechnology, which carry the banners of self-
assembly, supramolecular chemistry, and molecular nanotechnology, are often
highly sensitive to experimental conditions or limited by serendipitous
discovery. Scientific breakthroughs in this field will be marked by research
that describes ways to self-assemble increasingly intricate nano-objects in a
more rational, predictable, robust, and well-defined manner. Toward this end,
the award supports the development of self-assembled metallo-organic molecular
nanoparticles known as M12L24 spheres (where M is a metal ion and L is an
organic ligand) to serve as a platform around which to orchestrate the
hierarchical self-assembly of more complex molecular architectures. This goal is
realized by installing functional groups on the ligands that have the capacity
for molecular recognition, which allow them to participate in multiple
compatible modes of self-assembly that span a spectrum of strengths and length
scales, and include the self-assembly of 'molecular machine' prototypes such as
mechanically interlocked molecules known as catenanes, rotaxanes, and
pseudorotaxanes.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow disseminates and enhances
scientific understanding to a broad audience by sharing the EAPSI experience at
international research conferences and at collaborating national laboratories in
both Japan and the United States. The Fellow will extend the benefits of this
international research experience to younger students by mentoring
undergraduates in related research at the host institution.