* 1316822
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Thomas Cox, Cox                     Thomas         S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Thomas S. Cox of South Dakota State University to conduct a
research project in Geoscience during the summer of 2013 at Polar Research
Institute of China in Shanghai, China. The project title is "Development of a
Melter-based Analytical Technique for an East Antarctic Ice Core." The host
scientist is Dr. Su Jiang.

China is currently gearing up for a deep ice core project in East Antarctica
(Dome A), as well as in the process of setting up an ice core analytical
laboratory. The Polar Research Institute of China (PRIC) is the leading group
involved in this deep ice core project, as well as charged with the construction
of the ice core research laboratory. The Fellow's project builds on a 10-year
collaborative relationship between the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
at South Dakota State University (SDSU) and PRIC to utilize an analytical
technique developed at SDSU that will likely contribute to the Dome A project.
The Fellow is assisting in the installation and testing of the instrumentation
required for the technique. The Fellow and researchers at PRIC are also
analyzing a shallow core (less than 20 meters) drilled in the vicinity of the
Dome A site to provide preliminary accumulation and chemical data for the deep
ice core project. The primary data being generated by this project will be those
of the detailed chemical analysis of a shallow ice core and the determination of
average annual accumulation in the region (Dome A, East Antarctica). The results
of this analysis will provide preliminary data for China's deep ice core project
at Dome A.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the data will be disseminated in scientific
journal publications and meeting presentations. The chemical and accumulation
data, along with metadata (e.g., instrumental technique used in measurement,
average annual accumulation determination procedures, guidance for usage) will
be submitted to and archived at national or international data centers such as
the National Snow and Ice Data Center.