* 1316766
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Stephanie Hargrove, Hargrove                Stephanie
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Stephanie Raven Ann Hargrove of University of Tennessee,
Knoxville to conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013
at Beijing Jiaotong University in Beijing, China. The project title is "Traffic
Enforcement in China using License Plate Recognition Technology." The host
scientist is Dr. Xuedong Yan.

China has been in constant growth for many years, including the rapid rise of
vehicle ownership, urban road development and construction of new roadways.
Though China is attempting to curb expansion by limiting vehicle ownership, this
rapid growth of China's transportation system and users requires rapid responses
to road safety problems including the implementation of programs, development of
technology and increase of manpower to respond. This research aims to examine
China's existing enforcement programs and optimize speed enforcement and urban
vehicle tracking using license plate recognition (LPR) technology. The overall
goal is to incorporate the findings of past research and advance the future use
of LPR technology as a highly-accurate and dependable enforcement tool world-
wide.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow will present the research findings
on the University of Tennessee campus and will continue mentoring undergraduates
and high school students in the importance of science, technology and
transportation.