* 1316553
* RUI: Groundwater teleconnections with interannual to multidecadal climate variability
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Paul Ferre, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 321,865.00

The potential effects of climate variability and change on water resources is a
well recognized and urgent concern from the local to global scale ? one that has
increasingly become a high priority for groundwater managers and policy makers.
The strategic importance of groundwater to global water and food security will
likely intensify under climate change as more frequent and intense climate
extremes increase variability in precipitation, soil moisture, and surface-water
availability. However, the reliable characterization and forecast of responses
in groundwater to climate change is complicated by the complex, heterogeneous
nature of global-scale atmospheric-ocean circulation systems that partially
control interannual to multidecadal climate variability and associated periodic
and reversible patterns in terrestrial hydrology. Natural climate variability on
these time scales influences precipitation distribution in space and time,
drought frequency and severity, snowmelt runoff, streamflow, and other
hydrologic processes that can profoundly affect surface-water resources. Some
studies have inferred teleconnections between global-scale atmospheric-ocean
forcings and groundwater. Yet, few have established strong evidence of causal
relation between interannual to multidecadal climate variability and recharge
rates and mechanisms ? many important process-level questions remain.

This project will fill this critical knowledge gap by testing the hypothesis
that transient recharge rates and corresponding groundwater-level fluctuations
respond to the complex, heterogeneous interactions of local-scale vadose zone
processes and properties and global-scale atmospheric-ocean circulation systems.
In particular, our research will quantifying the frequency, intensity, and phase
relation of nonstationary signals in long-term climatic and hydrologic time
series data from 15 of the most important U.S. Principal Aquifers, and correlate
the teleconnections to the 6 leading atmospheric-ocean circulation systems that
affect U.S. climate variability. We will evaluate constructive and destructive
interference of teleconnection signals in precipitation, and the filtering in
the vadose zone that dampens those signals, eventually producing an altered
recharge time series. We will use this insight to evaluate the relative
importance of the atmospheric-ocean circulation systems on transient recharge
rates under future climate change scenarios. The expected results will have a
broad impact because time-varying rates of recharge will improve local to
national-scale groundwater models and sustainability studies. The project
creates rich and engaging teaching, training, and learning experience for
undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups in STEM.
Additionally, we establish a model collaboration that enhances research and
education between students and faculty from non-Ph.D. and Ph.D. granting
institutions.