* 1316253
* Novel Directions in Inverse Scattering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Peter Monk, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* James Curry
* 12/31/2013
* USD 40,400.00

An international conference on Novel Directions in Inverse Scattering" will take
place at the University of Delaware, Newark, July 29 - August 2, 2013 The
organizing committee for this conference is F. Cakoni, University of Delaware
(chair), L. Borcea, Rice University, Houssem Haddar, Ecole Polytechnique,
France, Peter Monk, University of Delaware. For more information on the meeting
please visit http://www.cmap.polytechnique.fr/~colton/ This Conference will be a
gathering of international experts as well as junior researchers in the area of
inverse scattering theory with the focus being on novel techniques for solving
inverse scattering problems. On the basis of current research trends and the
wide spectrum of inverse scattering applications, we focus on the following
topics at the forefront of research in this area: non-iterative techniques to
determine the physical properties of complex penetrable targets (obstacles) with
anisotropy, attenuation, or internal length scales as well as the reconstruction
of surface- or line-like objects in a three- dimensional environment; cloaking;
imaging through complex background media with e.g. random or periodic
heterogeneities; multi-frequency and time-domain extensions of the existing
monochromatic solutions; adaptive sensing; thermo-acoustic and other multi-modal
imaging techniques. The conference will feature plenary talks given by
international experts on the aforementioned topics, invited minisymposium
speakers organized and contributed posters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inverse
problems typically occur when we wish to infer properties of objects from remote
measurements. The topics of the conference involve rapidly developing
mathematics at the frontiers on today's research in the area of inverse
problems. Applicability of these type of mathematics extends to many real life
applications including medical imaging, non-destructive testing, underground
imaging and oil exploration, cloaking an enhance visibility. The conference will
also bridge the gap between theoretical and more applied aspects of inverse
scattering problems. The exchange of ideas will be beneficial to both
theoretical and applied aspects of research in inverse scattering theory. This
gathering will also celebrate the scientific accomplishments of Professor David
Colton.