* 1316903
* Collaborative Research: Designing Assessments in Physical Science Across Three Dimensions
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Angela DeBarger, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 11/30/2018
* USD 870,798.00

This is a collaborative proposal among the University of Illinois at Chicago,
Michigan State University, and SRI International to develop, test, and analyze
sets of technology-supported diagnostic classroom assessments for middle school
(grades 6-8) physical science. Assessments are aligned with the performance
assessment and evidence-centered design methodologies suggested in the Framework
for K-12 Science Education (NRC, 2012). The study focuses on the development of
new measures of learning that take into account the interdependence of science
content and practice. Two disciplinary core ideas--Matter and its Interactions,
and Energy--and two scientific and engineering practices--Constructing
Explanations and Designing Solutions, and Developing and Using Models--are used
for this purpose.

The research questions are: (1) What are the characteristic features of science
assessments based upon systematic application of the Evidence-Centered Design
(ECD) assessment process?; (2) To what extent can assessment designs incorporate
critical core idea, crosscutting concept and science/engineering practice
dimensions in ways that both separate and integrate these dimensions as part of
the design architecture?; (3) What is the evidence that the multiple dimensions
of science learning (e.g., content, practices and crosscutting concepts) are
separable and recoverable in the performance of students who respond to these
assessments?; (4) How instructionally sensitive are these assessments? (i.e., Do
they show differential and appropriate sensitivity to students' opportunity to
learn science in ways consistent with the vision contained in the NRC
Framework?); (5) What forms of evidence can be provided for the validity of
these assessments using a multifaceted validity framework that takes into
account both the interpretive and evidentiary components of a validity argument
for these new assessments?; (6) What are the characteristics of assessments that
best serve the needs of classroom teachers relative to a formative assessment
process and in what ways do such assessments and scoring processes need to be
designed to support effective teacher implementation?; and (7) What are the
unique affordances and opportunities provided by technology in designing and
implementing assessments focused on merging content & practices performance
expectations?

Assessments are iteratively designed and administered in three school districts
and a laboratory school in Florida and one school district in Wisconsin using
the "Investigating and Questioning our World through Science and Technology"
curriculum. The three school districts in Florida have classrooms that are using
typical curriculum. The assessments will also be administered and tested with
students in these classrooms. To address the research questions, the project
conducts five major tasks: (1) development of assessment items using the ECD
process to document and guide coherence of items; (2) an alignment study to
review design patterns and task templates; (3) a cognitive analysis study to
empirically investigate the extent to which the items elicit the intended
guidelines; (4) three empirical studies, including (a) an early-stage testing
with teachers (n=6) and students (n=180) in Year 1, (b) a pilot testing in Year
2 with teachers (n=12) and students (n=360), and (c) a main study in Year 3 with
teachers (n=30) and students (n=900); and (5) a study to investigate the
formative use of the assessment items using teacher focus groups' feedback and
analysis of student performance data from previous studies.

Project outcomes are: (a) research-informed and field-tested assessment
prototypes that measure students' thinking around the two physical science core
ideas and the two scientific and engineering practices; (b) relevant data and
procedures used in the studies; and (c) a framework for the formative use of the
assessments, including guidelines, scoring rubrics, and criteria for assessment
design decisions.