* 1316829
* Comparative Analysis of a Critical Brain Structure: The Basal Ganglia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Mary Ann Raghanti, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,615.00

The neocortex has been both the theoretical and the experimental focal point of
evolutionary studies dedicated to identifying unique features of the human
brain; however, the neocortex is only one element of a neural network underlying
human intellectual abilities. It is directly connected to and dependent upon
other subcortical structures, especially the basal ganglia. Traditionally, the
basal ganglia were known to regulate motor functions. Recently, however, they
have been revealed to be active in advanced cognition, and their regulation of
prefrontal cortical activity demonstrates that they are as important as the
neocortex in processes such as language, learning, and memory. The goal of the
present research is to examine the role of the basal ganglia in human cognitive
development by comparing metabolic and modulatory components across a wide range
of primate species, including humans and our closest living relative, the
chimpanzee. The methods will combine advanced stereology with
immunohistochemistry in order to quantify neuron to glia ratios, neuromodulatory
neurons, and neuromodulator axons within key basal ganglia areas. This study
will provide new knowledge about these subcortical structures, including any
reorganization that may have occurred during human evolution. This will help
distinguish our basal ganglia from those of other primates, promote
understanding of how they changed during primate evolution, and how phylogenetic
differences may relate to cognitive processing. The research also may contribute
substantially to understanding the etiology of major neuropathologies, such as
Huntington's and Parkinson's diseases, by identifying how humans differ from
other species in the basal ganglia regions most affected by these diseases.
Histological sections and slides of many primate species will be generated,
archived, and made available to other researchers for additional comparative
studies. This work also will provide training for graduate and undergraduate
students, including those enrolled in the McNair Scholars Program, which
prepares individuals from under-represented groups for doctoral study.