* 1316241
* Developing Rich Media-based Materials for Practice-based Teacher Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2020
* Daniel Chazan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,634,873.00

The 4-year research and development project, Developing Rich Media-based
Materials for Practice-based Teacher Education, is premised on the notion that
recent technological developments have made it feasible to represent classroom
work in new ways. In addition to watching recorded videos of classroom
interactions or reading written cases, teacher educators and teachers can now
watch animations and image sequences, realized with cartoon characters, and made
to depict activities that happened, or could have happened, in a mathematics
classroom. Furthermore, teacher educators and teachers can react to such
animations or image sequences by making their own depictions of alternative
moves by students or teachers in classroom interaction. And all of that can take
place in an on-line, cloud-based environment that also supports discussion fora,
questionnaires, and the kinds of capabilities associated with learning
management systems. Such technologies offer important affordances to teacher
educators seeking to provide candidates with course-based experiences that
emphasize the development of practice-based skills. The focus of the project is
on mathematics teacher education. This joint project of the University of
Maryland Center for Mathematics Education and the University of Michigan will
produce 6 to 8 field-tested modules for use in different courses that are a part
of mathematics teacher preparation programs. The following two-pronged research
question will be resolved: What are the affordances and constraints of the
modules and the environment as supports for: (1) practice based teacher
education and (2) a shift toward blended teacher
education?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the following activities:
(1) a teacher education materials development component; (2) a related
evaluation component; and (3) two research components. The development phase
seeks to develop both the LessonSketch.org platform and six to eight mathematics
teacher education modules for use in preservice teacher education programs from
around the country. The modules will be written with practice-based teacher
education goals in mind and will use the capacities of the LessonSketch.org
platform as a vehicle for using rich-media artifacts of teaching with preservice
teacher candidates. LessonSketch Teacher Education Research and Development
Fellows will be chosen through a competitive application process. They will
develop their respective modules along with teams of colleagues that will be
recruited to form their inquiry group and pilot the module activities. The
evaluation activity will focus on the materials development aspect of the
project. Data will be collected by the LessonSketch platform, which includes
interviews with Fellows and their teams, perspectives of module writers,
descriptive statistics of module use, and feedback from both teacher educator
and preservice teacher end-users about the quality of their experiences. The
first research activity of the project is design research on the kinds of
technological infrastructure that are useful for practice-based teacher
education. The PIs will identify tools that teacher educators need and want
beyond the current capabilities for web-based support for use of rich media and
will produce prototype tools inside the LessonSketch environment to meet these
needs. The second research activity of the project will supplement the
evaluation activity by examining the implementation of two of the modules in
detail. This aspect of the research will examine the goals of the intended
curriculum, the proposed modes of media use, the fidelity of the implemented
curriculum, and learnings produced by preservice teachers. This research
activity will help the field understand the degree to which practice-based
teacher education that is mediated by an online access to rich media would be a
kind of practice that could be easily incorporated into existing teacher
education structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce 6 to 8
LessonSketch modules for use in teacher education classes. Each module will be
implemented in at least eight teacher education classes across the country,
which means that between 720 and 960 preservice teacher candidates will study
the materials. The project aims to shift the field toward practice-based teacher
education by supporting university programs to implement classroom-driven
activities that will produce mathematics teachers with strong capabilities to
teach mathematics effectively and meaningfully.