* 1316184
* Black Holes and Gauge/Gravity Duality
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Oleg Lunin, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2016
* USD 119,991.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Oleg Lunin at the
University at Albany (SUNY).

Two of the most important open problems in theoretical physics are a
construction of a consistent theory of quantum gravity and an analytical
understanding of the strong interaction. These subjects are unified in the
framework of gauge/gravity duality, which translates difficult problems in the
theory of strong interactions into simple questions in gravity and vice versa.
This research project will utilize the techniques of gauge/gravity duality to
get insights into quantum properties of black holes and into dynamics of
strongly-coupled gauge theories. The first part of the project will focus of
resolving the black hole information paradox by identifying the microscopic
states contributing to the entropy of various black holes and by studying their
dynamics. The second part of the project will focus on understanding dynamics of
strongly--coupled gauge theories by studying the dual description in terms of
classical geometries.

This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts.
Specifically, Professor Lunin will give lectures to high school students in the
Albany area to inspire the students to consider careers in STEM and to prepare
them for entering these quantitative fields. In addition, Professor Lunin will
organize annual physics competitions, which will help the students to sharpen
their problem-solving skills. He will also mentor graduate students and provide
career advice to undergraduates.