* 1316055
* Ocean Acidification: Understanding the Impact of CO2 and Temperature on the Physiological, Genetic, and Epigenetic Response of a Model Sea Anemone System with Different Symbionts
* BIO,EF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Adam Marsh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2019
* USD 781,543.00

The projected rise in carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere is considered a
primary threat to marine systems throughout the world due to both ocean
acidification and rising ocean temperatures. Coral reefs are very sensitive to
these projected changes in the earth's climate, with continued losses in growth
as well as disruption (also known as bleaching) in the symbiotic relationship
between the algae (Symbiodinium) living within a diversity of host animals,
including stony corals, soft corals and sea anemones. While much information has
been gleaned as to how acidification may affect stony corals, considerably less
is known about the interactive effects of acidification and temperature to other
symbiotic anthozoans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, this proposal will
investigate the long-term impacts of elevated CO2 and temperature on the model
sea anemone, Aiptasia pallida, while harboring four different genotypes of
Symbiodinium. The primary goals of this project are (1) to determine the
sensitivity and capacity for acclimation in molecular and physiological
processes while exposed to elevated CO2 and temperature, and (2) to assess the
degree to which acclimated adult animals may confer (or transfer) an imprinted
physiological characteristic to the next generation of asexual offspring. A
series of long-term experiments will be conducted with each animal/algal
combination (holobiont) in order to collect initial (3 month) stress markers and
genomic data and then follow animal response and asexual reproduction through
several generations for one year. The possibility for enhanced resilience or
acclimation will be measured by tracking the recovery of each holobiont,
followed by repeated exposure to elevated temperature while held in high CO2.
This project will tease apart fine scale mechanisms of stress, acclimation, or
amelioration that may vary as a function of algal genotype and host animal
response, and the degree to which environmental imprinting may pre-acclimate
propagules. Project results will provide information regarding how future
acidification and warming will affect cnidarian-algal symbioses, and the
fundamental profile of their flexibility in stress response processes across
organismal, metabolic, genomic and epigenetic scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to training one postdoctoral scholar and several graduate students,
this project will enhance scientific discovery and participation of
underrepresented groups through laboratory experiences offered to several
undergraduates from different universities. Public outreach efforts will include
a children's 'play'-educational exhibit, as well as several hands-on research
demonstrations incorporating elements of sea anemone biology and symbioses which
will be presented at the University of Delaware's annual "Coast Day" festival.
Research efforts will also contribute to the further development of the NSF-
EPSCoR infrastructure in the Delaware Biotechnology Center at the University of
Delaware.