* 1316585
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Sara Rowland, Rowland                 Sara           E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

This action funds Sara Elizabeth Rowland of the University of Maryland at the
Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology to conduct a research project
in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at the Korean Institute of
Ocean Science and Technology in Ansan, Korea. The project title is "Analysis of
Protein Folding in Thermophilic Hydrogen Producing Microbes." The host scientist
is Dr. Sung Gyun Kang.

Biohydrogen offers a clean alternative to the utilization of fossil fuels. The
proper folding of enzymes including carbon monoxide dehydrogenase and
hydrogenase is critical for efficient yield in select carboxydotrophic hydrogen
producing microbial systems. Molecular chaperones are proteins that assist in
the proper folding of other proteins including enzymes. This project
investigates the development of a more productive hydrogenogenic system by
introducing unique chaperones from specialized bacteria that use carbon monoxide
as an energy and carbon source into Thermococcus onnurineus strain NA1, a
carboxydotrophic hyperthermophilic hydrogen producing microbe.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow will share the EAPSI-facilitated
research experience with her home academic institution upon completion of the
program, potentially encouraging new international collaborations between
institutes.