* 1316354
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Laramie Jameson, Jameson                 Laramie        P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Laramie Paige Jameson of Texas Christian University to conduct
a research project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at Kyushu University in Fukuoka, Japan. The project title is
"Ionic Liquids in Micelles: Controlling the Conformation of Small Molecules."
The host scientist is Professor Noriho Kamiya.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is the advance of an
underdeveloped, yet potentially useful paradigm regarding the ability of ionic
liquids to control chemical, physical and structural properties of small
molecules by simply placing them structurally similar, yet distinct (in regard
to physical properties) solvents. Recent work suggests that adjusting the
aggregation state of ionic liquids can modulate the conformational equilibrium
of small molecules. The aggregation state of ionic liquids appears to depend on
the structure of the cationic and anionic counterparts. This project tests the
hypothesis that the aggregation state of ionic liquids can be altered by the
incorporation of ionic liquids into a confined environment (such as reverse
micelles). Thus, the research evaluates the ability of ionic liquids in reverse
micelles to modulate the conformation of small molecules and compares it to the
neat ionic liquids. It is anticipated that the results of the proposed research
might be applicable for the design of electronic devices, sensors, nanoreactors,
as well as novel membranes and drug delivery systems. Overall, this research is
likely to have impacts on the fields of ionic liquids and spectroscopy, as well
as synthetic and materials chemistry, and biotechnology.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goals to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the EAPSI experience will allow the Fellow to
become a more effective mentor to foreign visiting scientists during
postdoctoral years and in future positions as a Professor.