* 1316536
* A Nested Multi-Scale Hydrological Modeling Framework: Assessing Resilience and Vulnerability to Climate Change
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Amir AghaKouchak, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

In this proposal, a nested multi-scale terrestrial water budget model coupled
with a reservoir operation scheme is proposed for climate change impact
assessment. Most climate projections predict a warmer and drier climate for the
future that could affect both water availability and hydropower energy
production. On the other hand, reservoirs are among the main infrastructures
that provide resilience against droughts, and play a key role in water resource
management and energy production. However, current climate/hydrology projections
do not provide information on reservoir conditions under different climate
change scenarios. The proposed nested modeling concept includes a high
resolution river network and reservoir operation model nested within a gridded
global terrestrial water budget model. This project will use the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) daily bias adjusted climate projections
as input into the proposed model to analyze the impacts of climate change and
variability on reservoirs, dry spells, hydropower energy production, and system
resilience. The project will assess whether current reservoirs (system
resilience) are adequate to cope with climate change and variability.
Furthermore, the project will evaluate vulnerability to climate change and
variability under different Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous studies have stressed that water resources are
sensitive to climate change and thus, water resources management and planning
strategies should be adjusted accordingly. In particular, sensitivity of the
United States to water resources has been highlighted in several publications.
The main motivation for this proposal stems from the demand for more extensive
and reliable methods for analyzing large-scale changes to the water cycle under
climate change (see the United States Global Change Research Program (USGCRP)
2009 Report). The outcomes of this project will lead to a better understanding
of our resilience to climate change and variability. In addition to addressing
the project objectives, the proposed modeling framework provides the basis for
future studies on the impacts of land-use land cover and urban development on
the terrestrial water cycle.