* 1316398
* Language-Rich Inquiry Science with English Language Learners through Biotechnology (LISELL-B)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Allan Cohen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,757,204.00

This is a large-scale (4,000 students, 32 teachers, 5 classes per teacher per
year); cross-sectional (four grade levels); and longitudinal (three years) study
aimed at understanding and supporting the teaching of science and engineering
practices and academic language development of middle and high school students
(grades 7-10) with a special emphasis on English language learners (ELLs) and a
focus on biotechnology. It builds on and extends the pedagogical model,
professional development framework, and assessment instruments developed in a
prior NSF-funded exploratory project with middle school teachers. The model is
based on the research-supported notion that science and engineering practices
and academic language practices are synergistic and should be taught
simultaneously. It is framed around four key learning contexts: (a) a teacher
professional learning institute; (b) rounds of classroom observations; (c)
steps-to-college workshops for teachers, students, and families; and (d) teacher
scoring sessions to analyze students' responses to assessment
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The setting of this project consists of four
purposefully selected middle schools and four high schools (six treatment and
two control schools) in two Georgia school districts. The study employs a mixed-
methods approach to answer three research questions: (1) Does increased teacher
participation with the model and professional development over multiple years
enhance the teachers' effectiveness in promoting growth in their students'
understanding of scientific practices and use of academic language?; (2) Does
increased student participation with the model over multiple years enhance their
understanding of science practices and academic language?; and (3) Is science
instruction informed by the pedagogical model more effective than regular
instruction in promoting ELLs' understanding of science practices and academic
language at all grade levels? Data gathering strategies include: (a) student-
constructed response assessment of science and engineering practices; (b)
student-constructed response assessment of academic language use; (c) teacher
focus group interview protocol; (d) student-parent family interview protocol;
(e) classroom observation protocol; (f) teacher pedagogical content knowledge
assessment; and (g) teacher log of engagement with the pedagogical model.
Quantitative data analysis to answer the first research question includes
targeted sampling and longitudinal analysis of pretest and posttest scores.
Longitudinal analysis is used to answer the second research question as well;
whereas the third research question is addressed employing cross-sectional
analysis. Qualitative data analysis includes coding of transcripts, thematic
analysis, and pattern definition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes are: (a) a
research-based and field-tested prototype of a pedagogical model and
professional learning framework to support the teaching of science and
engineering practices to ELLs; (b) curriculum materials for middle and high
school science teachers, students, and parents; (c) a teacher professional
development handbook; and (d) a set of valid and reliable assessment instruments
usable in similar learning environments.