* 1316751
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Alyssa Pearson, Pearson                 Alyssa         A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Alyssa Ann Pearson of University of Wyoming to conduct a
research project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at Victoria University of Wellington in Wellington, New Zealand.
The project title is "Solar Conversion of Water to Fuels Using Photoactive
Metals." The host scientists are Dr. John Spencer and Dr. Justin Hodgkiss.

An ideal water-splitting system would involve a cell in which one metal catalyst
performs water splitting to produce oxygen, hydron (H+), and electrons. The
protons (H+) and electrons (e-) would move through a membrane to a second cell
in which the formation of hydrogen gas occurs via a second metal catalyst. The
hydrogen is then collected and can be used in a fuel cell or as a combustion
fuel while the oxygen is released into the atmosphere and is hence completely
green and renewable. This research incorporates a unique and important area of
chemistry, metal Arduengo-type carbene coordination. The approach is novel
because it incorporates a dual metal system that is coordinated to a fused
phenanthroline-imidazole ring system, with one metal coordinating to the carbene
moiety on the imidazole, while the other is integrated into the organic scaffold
on the N,N'-phenanthroline position. This enables hydrogen molecule formation,
by using one metal to perform the oxidation of water while the other metal
performs reduction thereby splitting water and producing a fuel. These new di-
metallic complexes have shown to exhibit light-sensitivity and will be used as
potential water oxidation and reduction catalysts.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, these activities enable future collaborations
between the University of Wyoming and Victoria University of Wellington. It also
encourages recruitment of Maori graduate students to study at the University of
Wyoming. Future graduate students from the University of Wyoming will be
encouraged to apply to the EASPI fellowship and be made more aware of
opportunities for international travel and research. The information gained in
this research experience will be disseminated through an oral presentation given
at the University of Wyoming upon completion of the EAPSI fellowship.