* 1316559
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Roo Vandegrift, Vandegrift              Roo
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Roo Vandegrift of the University of Oregon's Institute of
Ecology and Evolution to conduct a research project in Biology during the summer
of 2013 at Academia Sinica in Taipei, Taiwan. The project title is "Dispersal
Ecology of a Common Family of Leaf-Inhabiting Fungi (Xylariaceae)." The host
scientist is Dr. Yu-Ming Ju.

The role of xylariaceous fungi as endophytes remains unclear, as do many aspects
of their lifecycle, such as their means of dispersal. It has been proposed that
these may be linked: xylariaceous fungi could utilize the endophytic life stage
as a means to "forage" for an appropriate substrate, persisting longer in the
environment as an infected leaf than they could as a naked spore. This theory
has never been adequately tested. This project looks for evidence of dispersal
limitation in xylariaceous endophytes to test the hypothesis that the endophytic
life stage of Xylariaceae serves as a means of dispersal within the family. Dr.
Yu-Ming Ju has helped create a history of collaboration between East and West
centered around the study of this group of fungi. This is worth preserving in
new generations of mycologists and ecologists. Scientific collaboration across
geography and culture is one of the factors that continually pushes forward our
quest for knowledge. The importance of understanding biological diversity cannot
be understated. We are in the midst of a mass extinction event, and in many
cases species are lost whose significance is unknown. Understanding the ecology
of this group of fungus is crucial in a world with a rapidly changing climate,
accelerating tropical deforestation, and increasing trans-continental trade in
plants which may be harboring cryptic fungal partners. Understanding the roles
and relationships of fungal endophytes may allow us to ameliorate some of the
species loss due to climate change and deforestation.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, in addition to this utility for conservation
efforts, this project may also provide valuable information to foresters
attempting to control pathogens in timber lands.