* 1316286
* Collaborative Research:   Paleomagnetic Analysis of Speleothems and High Precision Dating of Geomagnetic Records
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Jeffrey Dorale, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2019
* USD 43,604.00

Records of past geomagnetic field behavior offer a window into the behavior of
the Earth's convecting outer core, and lead to a better understanding of
geodynamo processes that generate Earth?s magnetic field. This project aims to
develop a relatively untapped reservoir of paleomagnetic and rock magnetic
information, speleothems (e.g., stalagmites, and flowstone). Speleothems have
immense potential for archiving high quality, high resolution geomagnetic
records, and can be dated with supreme precision using radiometric techniques.
This research investigates the fundamental processes involved in natural
remanence acquisition in speleothems using rock magnetic and microscopic imaging
techniques, and establishes chronological constraints for geomagnetic field
behavior during specific periods in the last 130 ka.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research project is to construct high-resolution
records of geomagnetic field behavior and paleoclimate conditions using the iron
oxide mineral assemblages preserved within speleothems. We will address both the
mechanical transport and chemical precipitation of iron oxide minerals in
speleothems in order to better understand how and when speleothems acquire a
recording of the Earth's magnetic field. Recent instrumental progress provides
the sensitivity and sample handling capabilities needed to collect a rich
variety of magnetic measurements from speleothems, at an unprecedented spatial
resolution. The investigation of speleothem magnetization on a sub-millimeter
scale will advance the understanding of magnetic processes in speleothems,
ranging from changing dripwater conditions to episodic flooding that can be used
to produce regional paleohydrology records. Precisely dated, high fidelity
paleomagnetic records from speleothems will help better constrain time-
dependent, global geomagnetic field models. An additional benefit of having
detailed, high-precision chronologies of paleomagnetic variations is that the
chronological information can be transferred to existing deposits with
correlatable paleomagnetic records, but with less constrained age models (e.g.,
archaeological sites, and/or sediment cores). High resolution geomagnetic
fluctuations recovered from speleothems will contribute valuable information to
geodynamo models that focus on small-scale core flow dynamics. The environmental
magnetic records of speleothems will bridge the gap that exists between climatic
and environmental interpretations from traditional speleothem measurements such
as oxygen isotopes, and the environmental magnetic records of other depositional
environments.