* 1316407
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jerry Chen, Chen                    Jerry          S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Jerry Chen of San Diego State University to conduct a research
project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Academia Sinica in Taipei,
Taiwan. The project title is "What Makes a Neuron: Genetic Analysis of Essential
Nervous System Genes in a Primitive Marine Invertebrate." The host scientist is
Jr-Kai Yu in the Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology.

With Dr. Yu, the Fellow is using the marine invertebrate amphioxus to study the
conservation, expression and interaction of the proneural transcription factors
Pou4, NeuroD, MyTF and Ash, as well as the proneural microRNAs miR-9 and
miR-124. Collectively, these genes are essential to nervous system development
in humans, as several recent studies have shown that expression of these genes
can convert human stem cells into functional neurons, and dysfunction of these
genes results in various neurological diseases. Using DNA sequence alignment
tools along with in situ hybridization, this project is determining the
conservation and expression patterns of these genes in developing amphioxus
embryos. The Fellow is also performing experiments eliminating the expression of
each of these genes to determine how these genes interact with each other. Such
experiments cannot be done in humans, which is the motivation for doing this
work in amphioxus. And since the nervous system of amphioxus is similar to that
of human, such genetic analyses give us insight into the how the human nervous
system develops.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, upon return to the U.S., the Fellow will
present his research at local and national research conferences, and will also
become actively involved in promoting specific collaborations with the research
faculty and colleagues he meets in Taiwan.