* 1316362
* Melting of compressed iron-alloys by monitoring atomic dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jennifer Jackson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Seismological and cosmochemical observations indicate that the main constituent
in Earth's core is iron, which is thought to be alloyed with ~10 wt% nickel and
some light elements (e.g. S, Si, O, C, H). Earth's core consists of a solid
inner region surrounded by a liquid outer core. The melting temperature of iron
at high-pressure provides an important reference point for the temperature
distribution within Earth's core and affects a number of important geophysical
quantities related to this region: heat flow across the core-mantle boundary
(CMB), the temperature gradient within the thermal boundary layer above the CMB,
the phase relations, and expected seismic wave speeds of candidate phases. More
specifically, the melting point of iron at the boundary between the liquid outer
core and solid inner core provides an upper bound of the temperature at that
interface, because studies thus far indicate that all plausible outer core
liquids coexist with corresponding inner core alloy solids at or below the
melting point of pure iron. Previously, melting studies of iron at high-
pressures were performed by shock-compression, resistive- and laser-heating in
diamond anvil cells using visual observations or synchrotron x-ray diffraction,
and theoretical methods. However, the melting curve of iron with respect to its
alloys remains uncertain, especially at pressures above 70 GPa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has developed a novel metric for detecting the
solid-liquid phase boundary of iron-bearing materials at high-pressures using
57Fe synchrotron Mössbauer spectroscopy (SMS), also known as nuclear forward
scattering. Focused synchrotron radiation with 1 meV bandwidth passes through a
laser-heated 57Fe-bearing sample inside a diamond anvil cell. The characteristic
SMS time signature vanishes when melting occurs. This process is described by
the Lamb-Mössbauer factor, a quantity that is directly related to the mean-
square displacement of the iron atoms. Therefore, we measure the dynamics of the
atoms in the material, in contrast to a static diffraction measurement. As this
method monitors the dynamics of the atoms, the SMS technique provides a new and
independent means of melting point determination for materials under high-
pressure. We have successfully performed such melting investigations on pure
iron up to 82 GPa. Our data define a different melting trend compared with
previous studies, thus providing important rationale to proceed further with
this method on iron and iron-alloys at higher pressures. The melting experiments
will be conducted to pressures of at least 80 GPa for the alloys and higher than
80 GPa for pure iron, at sector 3-ID-B of the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne
National Laboratory. By constraining the relative melting curves of these iron-
alloys at high-PT conditions, we will provide a new constraint on the effect of
select light-element alloying to iron?s melting behavior. These outcomes will
represent a significant step towards understanding the melting of iron-rich
alloys at conditions of terrestrial-type planetary cores and thus provide
necessary temperature constraints of their respective interiors.