* 1316682
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Vu Nguyen, Nguyen                  Vu
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Vu Nguyen of the University of Colorado at Boulder to conduct
a research project in Geoscience during the summer of 2013 at National Central
University in Jhongli, Taiwan. The project title is "Impacts on the Upper
Atmosphere from Long Period Planetary Waves Generated from Below." The host
scientist is Dr. Loren Chang.

The research project investigates the ways in which planetary waves, global-
scale atmospheric oscillations generated in the lower/middle atmosphere, can
drive the variability of the upper atmosphere. It specifically focuses on the
16-day planetary wave and its effects on the upper atmosphere through nonlinear
interactions with atmospheric tides. The first phase of the project involves the
implementation of the 16-day planetary wave in an atmospheric general
circulation model developed by the National Center for Atmospheric Research.
Model results are utilized to identify the main mechanisms through which the
effects of the 16-day planetary wave are transmitted to the upper atmosphere.
The second phase of the project compares the model results to observations from
the Constellation Observing System for Meteorology Ionospheric and Climate
(COSMIC), a satellite mission funded jointly by Taiwan and the United States.
The results of the project will improve our understanding of the atmosphere as a
complete system and eventually be utilized to make better predictions for the
upper atmosphere, a region housing space technology that is critical to the
progress of science and the functioning of global society.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the research conducted will be presented at
an international conference during the stay in Taiwan to disseminate the
information to a broad, global audience. After arrival back in the United
States, the international experience gained under the EAPSI fellowship will be
shared with others in order to encourage future participation in the program and
to highlight the benefits of international endeavors.