* 1316567
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Chase Nelson, Nelson                  Chase          W
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Chase W. Nelson of the University of South Carolina-Columbia
to conduct a research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at the
Genomics Research Center of Academia Sinica in Taipei, Taiwan. The project title
is "The Genetic Basis of Gene Expression Divergence between Rice and Maize:
Uncovering the Evolutionary Origin of C4 Photosynthesis." The host scientist is
Dr. Wen-Hsiung Li.

This project undertakes a bioinformatics analysis of genomic and transcriptomic
next-generation sequencing data from rice (Oryza sativa, a model C3
photosynthesizing plant) and maize (Zea mays, a model C4 plant). Previous work
in the Li lab has revealed important gene expression differences between
mesophyll and bundle sheath cells of maize. These results are being expanded
through an evolutionary analysis of the genetic basis of gene expression
divergence between maize and rice leaves at early developmental stages. The
analysis examines developmental transcription factor (TF) genes to determine
whether gene expression differences mainly result from cis or trans effects.
Results address the hypothesis that TF genes exhibiting differential expression
between these species play important roles in the evolution of C4
photosynthesis, an important issue in plant physiology. By facilitating
international collaboration, this research will allow the tailoring of new
computational techniques to the various methods used in data generation.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow's project will achieve several
unique broader impacts. The cultural and scientific experiences gained in Taipei
will contribute to his role as the BioInvestigations Lab Coordinator at the
EdVenture Children's Museum in Columbia, SC where his duties include informal
science education and training staff in basic molecular biology techniques.
Results will be presented at both Academia Sinica and the University of South
Carolina, and also submitted for publication in a plant physiology journal.