* 1316539
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Sylvia Zamudio, Zamudio                 Sylvia
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Sylvia Zamudio of California State University, Northridge to
conduct a research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Sesoko Marine
Lab/ University of the Ryukyus in Motobu, Okinawa, Japan. The project title is
"The Adaptive Significance of Temperature-Induced Maternal Effects on the
Phenotype of Larvae from a Tropical Coral." The host scientist is Dr. Kazuhiro
Sakai.

This project seeks to elucidate the effect that the maternal thermal environment
of a scleractinian coral has on modulating the response of early life stages to
thermal stress. Maternal effects on the phenotype of offspring will be induced
by incubating maternal coral colonies at ambient and high temperatures that
reflect ecologically relevant thermal shifts projected under climate change
scenarios. The physiological response of offspring spawned from these colonies
will be evaluated under thermal stress to assess the potential of maternal
effects as a beneficial mechanism for offspring faced with environmental
stressors.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. This present study will contribute to a body of research
that works to characterize the impact that climate change will have on coral
reefs. Such research is essential for the implementation of informed management
strategies that attempt to preserve these ecosystems that have high economical
value to the countries that they surround through the provision of coastal
protection, fisheries, and ecotourism. This project contains broad applications
significant to climate change research, thermal biology, population ecology and
maternal effects studies. Personal emphasis is placed on the importance of
utilizing research opportunities, such as those provided through EAPSI, to
promote scientific knowledge through outreach and educational settings in order
to make primary research more accessible to the general public. Previous
research conducted in Taiwan will be integrated with this project in Japan as
part of a larger framework that seeks to build collaborations between
researchers in USA, Taiwan, Japan, and Hong Kong. These collaborations aim to
construct an integrated knowledge base that will elucidate the impact that
climate change will have on coral reefs on a global scale.