* 1316882
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Spyridon Pavlidis, Pavlidis                Spyridon
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Spyridon Pavlidis of the Georgia Institute of Technology to
conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the
National Chiao Tung University in Hsinchu, Taiwan. The project title is
"Stability Enhancement of Roll-to-Roll Printed InGaZnO Thin Film Transistors on
Flexible Plastic Substrates." The host scientist is Prof. Bing-Yue Tsui.

The intellectual merit of this work is to enhance the stability of indium
gallium zinc oxide (InGaZnO) thin film transistors (TFTs) on flexible, low-cost
plastic substrates using roll-to-roll manufacturing techniques so that they can
be deployed in TFT-based biochemical sensor arrays. Electrical stability is of
particular importance in a field-effect transistor (FET) chemical sensor since
intrinsic drift of the reference drain current can lead to false positives as
well as compromised limits of detection. In addition to optimizing the
fabrication steps, through the use of advanced bias techniques, such as bipolar
pulsed biasing, the mechanisms of bias stress and recovery are being explored in
detail, giving rise to a firmer grasp of the device physics at play. This, in
turn, helps suggest which bias schemes are suitable for deployment of such
devices as chemical sensors. Moreover, the issues of single device performance,
wide-area reproducibility and system integration are all being considered on a
large scale as a function of these advanced printing methods.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, to address the need for a highly-skilled
workforce in the U.S., the Fellow intends to study how primary, secondary and
higher educational institutions in Taiwan have contributed to shaping the
public's perception of engineering and have permitted the country to become an
international leader in the semiconductor and foundry industries. Lastly, with
the imminent introduction of InGaZnO TFT-based flexible displays to the market
in mind, the simultaneous development of biochemical sensors using the same
technology as a result of this EAPSI fellowship could lead to an exciting
marriage that profoundly changes the ways that humans interact with portable
devices, such as watches and mobile phones; thus giving way to the formation of
new enterprises and economic stimulation in the future.