* 1316918
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Lingyun Miao, Miao                    Lingyun
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Lingyun Miao of University of Rochester to conduct a research
project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at Swinburne University of
Technology in Melbourne. The project title is "Optical Delivery for Ultra-High
Density Magnetic Hard Drives." The host scientist is Associate Professor Paul
Stoddart.

Energy-assisted magnetic recording is one of the most promising future
technologies for nano-scale magnetic recording. It requires the use of a focused
laser beam to define magnetic recording feature, where high efficiency optical
coupling and delivery of highly focused optical beam at low cost are key
challenges. This research collaboration is designing nano-sized metallic
structures that greatly reduce the spot size of incident optical beam. Properly
engineered such structures can generate highly focused optical spot on the scale
of tens of nanometers, which facilitates magnetic recording density beyond one
terabyte per square inch.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Specifically, this project can not only advance the
research of ultra-high density magnetic recording, but also benefit the relevant
research societies due to its interdisciplinary nature.