* 1316375
* Collaborative Research: Testing the shock remanent magnetization hypothesis in the Slate Island impact structure
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 161,753.00

One powerful way we can learn about the ancient history of Earth and other
bodies in the solar system is through study of the magnetization of planetary
materials. Earth's internally-generated magnetic field is a defining
characteristic of our planet that shields us from dangerous solar particles.
When rocks form, they can record both the direction and strength of magnetic
fields as a magnetization that can be preserved for potentially billions of
years. Ongoing research in the Earth and planetary sciences seeks to understand
whether the magnetization of extraterrestrial materials (including lunar rocks
and meteorites) are the result of long-lived fields internally-generated by
planetary bodies, or transient magnetic fields generated by impacts. One of the
processes advanced as an explanation of sometimes enigmatic magnetizations
observed on planetary surfaces, as well as in lunar and meteorite samples, is
known as shock remanent magnetization. Meteorite impacts lead to high pressures
and the short duration shock can lead to the acquisition of new magnetization in
the presence of a magnetic field. This context provides strong motivation to
understand shock magnetization within impact basins on Earth both in relation to
its acquisition from Earth?s internally-generated field as well as potential
impact-generated fields.

The most suggestive evidence for the presence of naturally occurring shock
remanent magnetization (SRM) on Earth is from the ca. 30 km diameter Slate
Islands impact structure in northern Lake Superior where there is a pervasive
magnetic overprint. Advances in the understanding of SRM acquisition, in the
analytical and theoretical framework of thermochronometry and of the geology of
the Slate Islands impact structure and shock pressures recorded therein, make
this an excellent time to test the hypothesis that the secondary magnetization
within the Slate Islands is an SRM. We also seek to evaluate whether the
putative shock-induced remanence is consistent with resulting from the Earth's
geodynamo field or if it may record a transient impact-induced field. Stepped
heating thermochronometry combined with detailed characterization of natural
remanent magnetization and rock magnetic experiments on samples from high to low
shock levels across the structure will help us determine if the magnetic
overprint is the result of shock, or whether it could have originated as a
thermal overprint from impact-related heating. This project will provide early-
career training for a postdoctoral researcher and research experience for
several undergraduate students. An outreach component of this project will be to
generate content related to impact craters for ChronoZoom. ChronoZoom is a
dynamic interactive online database that allows for the visualization of Earth
history on all timescales (www.chronozoomproject.org).