* 1316082
* Collaborative Research:   FEM-based inverse methods to estimate nonlinear geometric source parameters of volcano deformation from geodetic data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kurt Katzenstein, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 320,807.00

The migration of magma within a volcano produces a deformation signature at the
Earth's surface. The location, shape, and pressurization of the magma chamber,
as well as the internal structure of the rocks surrounding the magma chamber,
control the specific deformation pattern that can be observed at the surface of
the volcano. Quantifying the characteristics of magma migration is important,
because the upward migration of magma is a precursor to volcanic eruptions. This
project will develop finite element models (FEMs), a type of numerical method,
to simulate volcanoes as a dynamic system that accounts for the interaction of
migrating magma within the complex internal structure of an active volcano.
These FEMs will be used in inverse methods that seek to quantify estimates and
uncertainties of a few characteristic parameters that describe magma migration
into, or out of, a magma chamber. These methods will be developed in the context
of two volcanoes (Okmok, Alaska, and Tungurahua, Ecuador) that will serve as
natural laboratories. Both of these active volcanoes have known internal
structures in the form of tomography models estimated using data from ground-
based seismic instruments, as well as surface deformation histories that were
recorded with geodetic data (e.g., GPS data and satellite radar imagery) over
the past decade. More specifically, this project will use FEM-based inverse
analyses of geodetic data to determine estimates and uncertainties for the
location, shape, and pressurization of magma chambers embedded in the complex
internal structures of these two active volcanoes. More generally, this project
will develop methods to integrate volcano geodesy and seismology, two
traditionally disparate geophysical fields of study. This integration is poised
to advance the fundamental understanding of active volcanoes.

This project comprises collaborative research among early-career and mid-career
faculty and graduate education at the South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology (SDSMT), an EPSCoR institution. SDSMT is a regional center for
science and engineering research and is ideally located to interface with a
substantial local Native American community. The proposed methods will provide
powerful numerical techniques to combine different types of information that are
customarily used independently from one another to assess volcano hazards. This
ability to simultaneously analyze different types of information will provide a
more complete picture of the internal processes for a given active volcano and
will likely lead to more reliable predictions of volcanic behavior. The methods
developed by this project will be designed to be generally amenable for other
analyses of volcano deformation and ultimately provide important societal
benefits of more reliable natural hazards assessments. Another impact of this
project is its direct relevance to studies of earthquake deformation, which are
driven by analogous configurations of deformation sources embedded in complex
structures associated with active faults. Thus, the techniques developed for
this project may be readily extended to studies of earthquake deformation and
may have important implications for future analyses of seismic and tsunami
hazards worldwide.