* 1316537
* Science as a Context for English Language Development: Exploring the Practical and Theoretical Implications for Teacher Professional Development
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Lynn Rankin, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 138,786.00

The Exploratorium?s Institute for Inquiry (IFI) has planned a 2-day conference
that will examine current strategies, issues and future challenges related to
teacher professional development regarding integrating inquiry-oriented science
instruction and English Language Development (ELD) for K-5 students. The
conference convenes 40 researchers and professional development practitioners
who examine theory and practice in inquiry-based science instruction and ELD,
focusing on three overall objectives:

1. Learn how inquiry-oriented science instruction can provide a good context for
learning English and science.

2. Address the conceptual challenges and perspectives that inquiry-oriented
science instruction and ELD present.

3. Articulate the issues that the challenges of inquiry science and ELD present
to professional development programs that support teachers in adapting their
knowledge and classroom practice to an integrated science/ELD approach.

The conference keynote, delivered by Guadalupe Valdés, addresses the language
demands and opportunities that are introduced in the science and engineering
practices described in the National Research Council?s Framework for K-12
Science Education and the NGSS. (The framework is based on a recent article co-
authored by Valdés.) Participants include practitioners and researchers in
science education, teacher education, professional development, language
acquisition, and bilingual education. The conference will combine presentations
providing overviews of current research and practice, combined with the use of
case studies and working sessions to arrive at overall recommendations for
directions for future research, professional development and practice.

Key conference outcomes include:

- A set of research questions. - A set of principles and guidelines for
professional development related to ELD and science. - Articles submitted to
journals and professional publications by conference organizers and participants
that will disseminate conference ideas, as well as conference presentations. -
Partnerships developed between practitioners and researchers. - Case studies
published on the IFI website. - Continuing dialogue via blogs, webinars, and the
IFI website.

Conference outcomes will be disseminated through research and professional
development journals, conference presentations, and the IFI website.