* 1316057
* Developing Critical Evaluation as a Scientific Habit of Mind: Instructional Scaffolds for Secondary Earth and Space Sciences
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Janelle Bailey, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 06/30/2018
* USD 484,566.00

This exploratory project develops and tests graphical scaffolds, called model-
evidence link (MEL) activities, which facilitate high school students'
coordination of connecting evidence with alternative explanations of particular
Earth and space sciences phenomena, as well as their collaborative argumentation
about these phenomena. At the same time, the project examines how high school
students use these tools to construct scientifically accurate conceptions about
major topics in Earth and space sciences and deepens their abilities to be
critically evaluative in the process of scientific inquiry. The project's
research questions are: (1) how does year-long instruction using MEL activities
change high school students' critical evaluation abilities; (2) how does use of
critical evaluation promote judgment reappraisals about Earth and space science
topics with large plausibility gaps; and (3) to what extent does promotion of
plausibility reappraisal lead to high school students' construction and
reconstruction of scientifically accurate conceptions about fundamental concepts
in Earth and space sciences? The project develops three MEL activities that
focus on important topics in Earth and space sciences. The topics will be
hydraulic fracturing, wetlands, and lunar origin. These MELs were selected
because they align with major topical units in Earth and space science (i.e.,
geology, water resources, and astronomy, respectively).

The project develops effective instructional tools (the MEL activities to
stimulate collaborative argumentation) designed to increase high school
students' critical evaluation abilities that that are central for fully engaging
in these scientific and engineering practices and constructing scientifically
accurate understanding. Science topics require students to effectively evaluate
connections with evidence and alternative explanations. The development of MEL
activities that cover major Earth and space sciences topics will assist teachers
in increasing their students' critical evaluation abilities. These tools are
developed in geographically diverse settings, including one school district with
a Hispanic majority, to gauge their effectiveness in helping all students.
Furthermore, the design-based research methods employed in the proposed study
are focused on developing tools that can be easily integrated into a variety of
science curricula to supplement and reinforce scientific and engineering
practices, rather than wholesale replacement. The ability to be critically
evaluative is essential for developing a society that characteristically
exhibits scientific habits of mind and is equipped to deal with future
challenges in a way that is beneficial to our nation.