* 1316550
* Next Generation Preschool Science: An Innovative Program to Facilitate Young Children's Learning of Science Practices and Concepts
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Philip Vahey, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,732,239.00

SRI is developing, iteratively refining and evaluating a science curriculum for
Pre-K classrooms with units on Plant Growth, How Things Move, and What Makes
Shadows. Working with EDC and WGBH, the project is integrating traditional
classroom resources (large and small group activities, hands-on activities,
read-alouds) with digital media (touch screen tablets, photos and short videos,
and games/simulations). The importance of this approach is that it facilitates
the implementation of quality science instruction in pre-schools by reducing the
resources and commitment needed. The project is also producing professional
development resources for teachers. Project evaluation is by the Concord
Evaluation Group. The products of the project are being distributed by PBS
Media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an Evidence Centered Design approach, the
project is doing a Phase I development and pilot study during the first two
years, followed by a Phase II field study in year 3, with 10 classrooms in
California and 10 in New York, half of which will be for comparison purposes.
Ten children from each classroom are being selected through a stratified
randomization process for a more detailed examination of student outcomes. There
are 8 research questions covering the three phases of the project; development,
implementation, and sustainability. Data collection on child learning is using
the project developed science assessment as well as a standardized assessment of
children?s science learning ?LENS on Science.? Evidence on teachers? confidence
is being collected with the Preschool Teachers Attitudes and Beliefs about
Science scale (P-TABS). In addition, the project is conducting interviews and
observations in the 10 classrooms where teachers are implementing the curriculum
units.