* 1316442
* RAPID:   Collaborative Research:   Post-Sandy Discourse about Energy Infrastructure and Security
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Jennie Stephens, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 02/28/2014
* USD 15,127.00

RAPID: Collaborative Research: Post-Sandy Discourse about Energy Infrastructure
and Security

Abstract

Superstorm Sandy highlighted the vulnerability of US energy systems. The storm
resulted in power outages to 8.6 million customers and gasoline shortages in New
York and New Jersey. Extending research already underway on the values that
inform Smart Grid development and use as well as barriers to implementation,
collaborators from four regions in the US will explore if and how Sandy will
influence political and policy discourse about energy infrastructure and
security and whether it does so in regions not directly impacted by the storm.
To address these research questions, this RAPID response grant, funded by the
Science, Technology & Society Program and the Energy for Sustainability Program,
will document discourse among energy sector actors and the media in four
different U.S. regions: New York and New Jersey (those areas hardest hit),
Massachusetts (a New England region which was less severely hit), Minnesota (a
Midwest region which was not directly affected), and Texas (a Gulf region which
is vulnerable to hurricanes but was not directly disrupted by Superstorm Sandy).
Documenting discursive shifts or stability in different regions in the aftermath
of an event like Superstorm Sandy will contribute to environmental communication
theory by refining our understanding of how natural disasters combine with
existing communication networks to influence political salience. This research
will also contribute to the socio-technical transitions literature by
illuminating the potential of natural disasters like Sandy to influence socio-
technical transitions toward sustainability. The researchers' results will
enable energy professionals, state and regional planners, policy analysts, non-
profits, and businesses to develop more effective strategies for transitioning
to more secure and sustainable energy systems.