* 1316223
* RCN Proposal: Macroecology of Infectious Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2021
* Robert Poulin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,451.00

Scientists from multiple disciplines, including wildlife biology, public health,
veterinary parasitology and biomedical sciences, have compiled a wealth of data
on the distribution and impacts of infectious diseases, with most studies
focused on particular locations or single host-pathogen interactions. This
wealth of data creates the opportunity to address a pressing need, namely to
explore the patterns and drivers of infectious disease emergence in humans and
natural ecosystems at global scales. This project will create a Research
Coordination Network to bring together internationally recognized experts from
ecology, conservation medicine, parasitology and computational sciences to
quantify and explore the drivers of global scale patterns of pathogen
biodiversity. Participants will work together to assemble data sets of
unprecedented size, including information about disease occurrence in host
species ranging from insects to humans. With help from experts in machine
learning (artificial intelligence) and geographic information systems (GIS),
they will work to build predictive models that can be used to understand the
changing distributions of infectious diseases and identify future hotspots of
novel disease emergence in humans and wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging
infectious diseases, especially those that jump from wildlife to livestock and
humans, threaten public health around the world. Using state of the art
computational methods, the RCN will be able to answer critical questions such
as: How and why do certain pathogens successfully move from one host species to
another? Are hotspots of pathogen biodiversity in wildlife the same areas as
hotspots of disease emergence in humans and livestock? To share its findings,
the RCN will develop educational products such as webcasts and workshops aimed
at educational levels from high school to post graduate, and will train students
from under-represented groups through a summer research program. The RCN will
also develop and maintain databases of global infectious disease biodiversity
and make these data freely available to the academic community and the general
public.