* 1316310
* Collaborative Research:  3D Dynamics of Buoyant Diapirs in Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Katherine Kelley, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2017
* USD 145,000.00

The exchange of heat and chemical species between the surface and interior of
the Earth are controlled by plate tectonics. Specifically, the Earth?s plates
are recycled back into the mantle at subduction zones, where one tectonic plate
is forced beneath another. During subduction some of the material from the
descending plate is returned to surface forming the Earth?s crust. Much of this
transport occurs via melting of the subducted material and subsequent volcanism
at the surface, however, buoyant material can also return to the surface via
solid-state flow in ?diapirs?. The goal of this project is to study the rise of
these buoyant diapirs using a combination of laboratory experiments and
numerical models. We will use these models to ascertain where and when diapirs
form and to determine the relationship between diapir characteristics
(volume/buoyancy) and ascent paths from the descending slab to the surface.
Because buoyant diapirs will have different chemical signatures than the melts
generated directly from the subducting plate, understanding the efficiency of
this process is critical for determining chemical evolution of the Earth. This
project will also support the education of a PhD student and a post-doctoral
research fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many previous studies have
investigated mantle flow driven by the subducting slab, relatively few have
focused on the ascent of buoyant material from the slab back to the surface. In
this project we will characterize the 3 stages of diapir evolution: formation
stage, rise stage, and arrival stage, and determine how each is influenced by
the plate-driven mantle wedge flow field. The laboratory experiments will be
used to model the pathways and interaction of ascending diapirs in three
dimensions as a function of specific aspects of the plate-driven flow field,
including slab rollback, along-strike variations in slab geometry (e.g., slab
edges, gaps, changes in dip), and deformation of the overriding plate. Diapirs
will be initiated assuming different buoyancy sources including a point source,
line source, and sheet of buoyant material on the surface of the down-going
slab. We expect that diapir ascent paths will be strongly influenced by diapir
volume (buoyancy) flux and the pattern of flow in the mantle wedge?potentially
resulting in large horizontal net transport of buoyant slab-derived material to
the surface. High-resolution numerical models will then be used to study melting
and melt-matrix interaction within the spectrum of ascending diapirs based upon
density contrast, diapir size, path shape and transit time. Such models are
important for characterizing chemical differentiation within diapirs. Combining
the laboratory experiments with the numerical models, we will be able to place
important new constraints on how chemical signals can be transported from the
slab to the surface in subduction zones.