* 1316549
* Emergence, transmission and evolution of Tasmanian devil facial tumor disease
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Andrew Storfer, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,250,000.00

Emerging infectious diseases (EIDs) are considered a grand challenge in the
environmental sciences for the 21st century because of their effects on human,
wildlife and agricultural health. Infectious diseases are now listed as the
sixth leading cause of species extinctions, and an EID has caused the
endangerment of the iconic Tasmanian devil. Across Tasmania, devil populations
are being decimated by an infectious cancer called Tasmanian devil facial tumor
disease. Although only a few infectious cancers are documented, this cancer
shares properties with human cancers. This study will investigate how
transmission is related to heterogeneity in contacts and genomic variation in
host and/and or tumor within populations. Genetic studies may reveal underlying
causes of devil facial tumor longevity, perhaps providing information on cancer
recurrence in humans. Further, extensive background research on devils,
including thousands of samples before and after die-offs, affords the rare
opportunity to study genomic interactions of an infectious agent and its host
across an entire species? range. These genomic studies will shed light on the
genetic basis of relative susceptibility of devils to the tumor, thereby
allowing managers to choose the best individuals for captive breeding programs.
In addition, knowledge of rates and direction of past tumor spread enables the
unique ability to predict the precise location of future infections. In turn,
devil contact network modeling and genomic studies of populations expected to
become infected will facilitate the testing of predictions regarding the course
of epidemics in new populations. This knowledge may help in developing responses
to future human epidemics.