* 1316683
* QuEST:  Quality Elementary Science Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Zandra de Araujo, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,853,190.00

The University of Missouri-Columbia is examining an innovative model of situated
Professional Development (PD) and the contribution of controlled teaching
experiences to teacher learning and, as a result, to student learning. The
project is carrying out intensive research about an existing special PD summer
institute (QuEST) that has been in existence for more than five years through a
state Improving Teacher Quality Grants program. The project will do the
following: (1) undertake more in-depth and targeted research to better
understand the efficacy of the PD model and impacts on student learning; (2)
develop and field test resources from the project that can produce broader
impacts; and (3) explore potential scale-up of the model for diverse audiences.
The overarching goals of the project are: (a) Implement a high-quality situated
PD model for K-6 teachers in science; (b) Conduct a comprehensive and rigorous
program of research to study the impacts of this model on teacher and student
learning; and (c) Disseminate project outcomes to a variety of stakeholders to
produce broader impacts. A comparison of two groups of teachers will be done.
Both groups will experience a content (physics) and pedagogy learning experience
during one week in the summer. During a second week, one group will experience
"controlled teaching" of elementary students, while the other group will not.
Teacher and student gains will be measured using a quantitative and qualitative,
mixed-methods design.