* 1316301
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Collection of Perishable Hurricane Sandy Data on Weather-Related Damage to Urban Power and Transit Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Carol Friedland, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) will collect perishable damage data
caused by Hurricane Sandy that made landfall on October 29, 2012. It was a very
large storm (almost 800 miles in diameter according to National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration) that affected large areas of coastlines of New York
(Long Island and New York Metropolitan area) and New Jersey. The storm was
judged to be Category 1 based on its wind speed. However, because of its size
and coinciding with high lunar tide, it generated high storm surge. The New York
Metropolitan area sustained severe damage to coastal structures due to surge and
wave actions. Most of the New York Metropolitan area lost electrical power and
the transportation system became inoperable because of flooding of tunnels and
loss of power. The project will collect data on weather, storm surge and floods,
power outage, transit stoppage, and interdependencies of infrastructures in New
York Metropolitan area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will identify, collect
and disseminate weather-related hazard and damage data induced by Hurricane
Sandy for power and transit infrastructure in New York Metropolitan area. The
weather data will include measurements of storm surge, flooding, rainfall and
wind speeds. The spatial extent of the data collection will be the transit
region of New York Metropolitan area and the service areas of the power delivery
systems responsible for the transit networks. The weather and damage data will
be geo-coded and timelines at regular intervals over the duration of
infrastructure recovery will be established. The research team will apply
various techniques for data collection including ground-based observations,
satellite data, and aerial and water-based survey maps. Interdependencies
between transit and power outages will be identified in the database. The
resulting database will enhance the research infrastructure of the engineering
and urban planning communities in the U.S.