* 1316985
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kenneth Brown, Brown                   Kenneth        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,310.00

This action funds Kenneth Brown of Virginia Tech to conduct a research project
in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the Japan Aerospace Exploration
Agency in Tokyo. The project title is "Development of a Novel, Porous-Walled
Wind Tunnel with Implications for Low Noise Wind Turbines, Aircraft, and Naval
Vessels." The host scientist is Dr. Kazuomi Yamamoto.

There are yet only two wind tunnels worldwide to employ the novel hybrid
anechoic test section, named as such because it integrates an aerodynamically
closed test section similar to those of traditional wind tunnels with an
acoustically open testing capability similar to that of open jet tunnels through
the use of thin, porous KevlarÂ® cloth walls. Due to the significant opportunity
for advances in aeroacoustics research that such a test section affords,
Virginia Tech's Stability Wind Tunnel has developed a high fidelity method to a
priori correct pressure data for lift interference and blockage that employs a
panel method simulation derived entirely from first principles and independently
measured physical properties. The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency's Low Speed
Wind Tunnel has also developed a correction method, but it derives from a
different basis than that established at the Stability Wind Tunnel. The current
research aims to join aerodynamic data from both wind tunnels to produce a
unified method for correcting pressure data in porous-walled, hybrid anechoic
test sections. Another impact of the research trip is the collaboration produced
between Virginia Tech Tech's Stability Wind Tunnel and the Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency, both of which organizations are on the forefront of
aerodynamics and aeroacoustics research. Given that these two tunnels are yet
the only two wind tunnels worldwide to employ the hybrid test section, this
research collaboration provides an opportunity to direct the course of
aeroacoustics research by establishing a unified aerodynamic correction method
for hybrid test sections. An accurate evaluation of the aerodynamic
characteristics of such test sections, when combined with the simultaneous
measurement of detailed acoustic data that such test sections afford, provides
unique opportunities in the development of wind turbine blades, high-speed
trains, aircraft, automobiles, submarines, and other new and old technologies.
In each of these fields, the balance between high performance aerodynamics and
low noise emission acoustics must be struck with precision. Incorporating these
two aspects of wind tunnel measurement into one test section has widespread
benefits and attracts research interest from leading world research
organizations such as NASA, DLR, and ONERA.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the results of the research will be
disseminated through both the Fellow's thesis and additional publications and
seminars by the Fellow. Through these means, it is feasible to think that hybrid
test sections may emerge as the next generation wind tunnel configuration,
broadening the research capability of the aeroacoustics community.