* 1316665
* Field Theory and Gravity from the Bottom-Up
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jared Kaplan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 119,997.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Jared Kaplan at Johns
Hopkins University.

During the last few decades, a velvet revolution has changed the way we think
about spacetime, gravity, and the fundamental laws of nature. The most crucial
breakthrough was the discovery of the AdS/CFT correspondence, which describes
gravity in d + 1 dimensions using a d-dimensional, "holographic" theory. The
purpose of this project is to understand the robust features of a correspondence
between gravitational theories in anti-de-Sitter (AdS) spacetimes and non-
gravitational theories with conformal symmetries, and to generalize this so-
called "AdS/CFT" correspondence to other spacetimes. This will make it possible
to understand the generic features of quantum gravity. Professor Kaplan will
also expand on a nascent program characterizing general holographic dualities in
terms of bulk effective field theories, and will study various possible
generalizations of the AdS/CFT correspondence to situations in which conformal
symmetry is broken.

This project also has several broader impacts. The proposed research will be an
excellent training ground for postdocs and graduate students, with its wide
variety of challenging problems that connect holography to phenomenology and
experiment. Both the theoretical and phenomenological side of high-energy
physics inspire others by addressing the simplest questions in profound and
beautiful ways, thereby drawing students into important STEM careers while
providing them with rigorous quantitative skills. Professor Kaplan will also be
actively engaged in teaching and mentoring at Johns Hopkins University. Finally,
Professor Kaplan will be involved in the Hopkins QuarkNet program, through which
he will connect Baltimore high-school teachers and students with cutting-edge
ideas in theoretical physics.