* 1316198
* RUI:   Ocean Acidification: Scope for Resilience to Ocean Acidification in Macroalgae
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Janet Kubler, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2017
* USD 690,641.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benthic macroalgae contribute to
intensely productive near shore ecosystems and little is known about the
potential effects of ocean acidification on non-calcifying macroalgae. Kübler
and Dudgeon will test hypotheses about two macroalgae, Ulva spp. and Plocamium
cartilagineum, which, for different reasons, are hypothesized to be more
productive and undergo ecological expansions under predicted changes in ocean
chemistry. They have designed laboratory culture-based experiments to quantify
the scope for response to ocean acidification in Plocamium, which relies solely
on diffusive uptake of CO2, and populations of Ulva spp., which have an
inducible concentrating mechanism (CCM). The investigators will culture these
algae in media equilibrated at 8 different pCO2 levels ranging from 380 to 940
ppm to address three key hypotheses. The first is that macroalgae (such as
Plocamium cartilagineum) that are not able to acquire inorganic carbon in
changed form will benefit, in terms of photosynthetic and growth rates, from
ocean acidification. There is little existing data to support this common
assumption. The second hypothesis is that enhanced growth of Ulva sp. under OA
will result from the energetic savings from down regulating the CCM, rather than
from enhanced photosynthesis per se. Their approach will detect existing genetic
variation for adaptive plasticity. The third key hypothesis to be addressed in
short-term culture experiments is that there will be a significant interaction
between ocean acidification and nitrogen limited growth of Ulva spp., which are
indicator species of eutrophication. Kübler and Dudgeon will be able to quantify
the individual effects of ocean acidification and nitrogenous nutrient addition
on Ulva spp. and also, the synergistic effects, which will inevitably apply in
many highly productive, shallow coastal areas. The three hypotheses being
addressed have been broadly identified as urgent needs in our growing
understanding of the impacts of ocean
acidification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project has
broader impacts in 2 major areas: the dissemination of biological knowledge to
applied science and nonscientists, and inspiring careers in science among
underrepresented minority students. The investigators are committed to
facilitating the transfer of biological information to nonscientists who can put
that information to practical use in human technologies. The lead PI is actively
involved with transfer of biological knowledge to professionals in engineering,
design and architecture, through her work with the Biomimicry 3.8. That is a
nonprofit organization dedicated to expanding the conscious emulation of
nature's genius through formal and informal education. The research results will
be made accessible to nonscientists through the AskNature.org database for
nonbiologist design professionals and through CSUN ScholarWorks-a database
management system. The results of this project will be relevant to resilience to
changing chemistry and evolvable designs. The research will also build on the
investigators existing collaborations with private sector partners. JEK with
will continue collaborations with The BID (Biologically Inspired Design)
Community on biological resilience and robustness in systems with the goal of
applying aspects of the knowledge gained here to systems of human technology,
and SRD will continue collaboration with K. Jones of Gene Identification
Services. CSUN is a certified minority serving and Hispanic serving, primarily
undergraduate, institution with an outstanding record of moving students into
careers in science. Kübler and Dudgeon will mentor 2 graduate students and 2-3
undergraduate students, from CSUN?s diverse student population, in macroalgal
physiology and ecology with the goal of addressing global and ecosystem level
issues. The PIs have a record of 100% of recruited MSc. students continuing to
Ph.D. programs. All of the PI?s graduate students are expected to do some
community service or educational outreach, usually to K-12 schools.