* 1316318
* The impact of intensive livestock production on the disease ecology of antibiotic resistant staphylococcus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Rachel Noble, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,857,920.00

This project will explore whether intensive livestock production practices
contribute to the evolution and increasing prevalence of multidrug-resistant
Staphylococcus, including methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).
Using field studies and genetic typing of Staphylococcus bacteria, principles
for the emergence and dissemination of livestock-associated MRSA will be
established, and models will be developed to explore transmission between food
animal production systems, the environment, workers and communities. This
project will build on existing partnerships with community groups in rural North
Carolina and establish protocols and databases important for advancement of
global scientific knowledge about MRSA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models developed
during this research will be useful to estimate the probability of transfer of
MRSA from a farm into surrounding ecosystems and communities based on
operational practices (e.g., antibiotic use, animal density, waste management
systems). Outputs from the models could also help identify the most effective
interventions to reduce transfer of MRSA into ecosystems and communities.
Ultimately, these results will help evaluate whether modern livestock production
systems affect the emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria, and will provide
important new insights into management practices that could impact the ecology
of MRSA and other antibiotic resistant bacteria.