* 1316702
* Forming Better STEM Career Trajectories: Sustaining and Scaling-Up CAP
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Barbara Schneider, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,831,945.00

This study investigates the sustainability of the Michigan State University
College Ambition Program (CAP) that has been developed with NSF ITEST funding
and has demonstrated promise in increasing the number of students who attend
postsecondary colleges or universities. The CAP is a whole school high school
intervention that promotes a college-going culture in which all students are
provided resources that encourage postsecondary attendance with a special
emphasis on STEM. CAP is an integrated program including tutoring and mentoring,
course counseling and advising, financial aid planning and assistance; and
college visits. The modifications for sustainability include moving the CAP
functions from the graduate students from the university and the faculty who
developed the intervention to high school teachers and preservice teachers.
Tutoring would be provided by peers rather than the undergraduate students in
previous studies.

The CAP research study is a within study experiment using student-level
estimates of program effects. In this study, students will be randomlly
encouraged to receive CAP services through the use of a targeted "nudge". The
nudge is in the spirit of an encouragement design where intention to treat does
not precisely coincide with actual treatment due to noncompliance, but the
assignment mechanism still provides for variation in the treatment. The nudge
experiment is modeled after comparable trials in health care research. The
experiment is a type of standard randomized block design, in which students are
assigned to treatments within blocks defined as schools. Students are encouraged
to use CAP services which include an app that helps them decide which college is
the best fit for them. Outcome measures include post secondary matriculation and
student motivation and career planning data.

This study is intended to examine the efficacy of the CAP program and has the
potential to inform practice, policy and research. It is difficult to study
whole school interventions, and this study is testing the methodology to detect
an effect of the CAP intervention by assigning students randomly to experimental
conditions within the intervention. The potential benefits of the study are
alternatives to the gold standard randomized controlled study where the school
is the unit of assignment and the unit of analysis. Successful findings support
the potential for rigorous studies to be conducted with fewer schools in the
sample than traditional power analyses indicate.