* 1316228
* Isotope Fractionation of Soil Water in Arid Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Juske Horita, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 256,845.00

The isotopic compositions of soil water in vadose zones have been extensively
utilized to study the land surface system in arid regions over a wide range of
spatial and temporal scales. However, fundamental understanding is lacking for
isotope fractionation associated with the phase transitions of soil water in dry
unsaturated zones. The long-held assumption that isotope fractionation
associated with the phase transition of 'tight' soil waters (capillary,
intraparticle pores, clay interlayers, and surface films) is identical to that
for bulk liquid water has never been seriously challenged and examined before.
If this assumption is incorrect, our current interpretation and modeling of the
isotopic compositions of soil water and vapor flux in arid regions could be
seriously flawed. The objective of this proposal is to test the hypothesis that
equilibrium isotope fractionation between adsorbed/pore condensed water within
soils and water vapor differs significantly from that for bulk liquid water-
water vapor system at the same temperature, due to complex hydrophilic
interactions between the soil surface and water molecules. A series of
laboratory experiments will be conducted to systematically and accurately
determine the adsorption-desorption isotherm of water and associated oxygen and
hydrogen isotope fractionation between adsorbed/condensed water and water vapor.
Simple engineered mesoporous materials and two clay minerals of layered
structures will be investigated. The goals of this proposal are to: (a) identify
physicochemical parameters of the soil-water system that control the isotope
fractionation between soil water and water vapor and (b) build a simple,
empirical model for predicting the isotope fractionation for more complex
minerals and their mixtures (soils).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The land surface
system in arid regions of terrestrial environments is located at a very critical
interface within land-atmosphere-vegetation continuum. Successful completion of
this project will change our current understanding of the isotopic behaviors of
soil water and vapor flux in arid environments. Other immediate, broader impacts
of expected outcomes from this project include refinements of the current
analytical techniques for the isotopic composition of soil water and better
understanding of the plant-water system in arid regions. New and improved views
of the desert soil system are also expected to lead to better understanding of
the energy-water system in arid regions, ranging from local to regional to
global scales, including land-surface parameterization of global models.