* 1316334
* Scaling up epizootic dynamics - Linking individual infection to spatial spread of a disease using Bayesian hierarchical approaches
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Bret Elderd, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,849,987.00

What determines how fast a disease spreads through a population may depend on
how fast the disease spreads inside an infected individual so that processes
within an individual are important for understanding disease transmission
between individuals. Often, disease data are collected at a single scale of
reference, such as within the individual, and other scales are ignored. This
research will develop statistical methods and models that bring together
information across scales ranging from the individual to the landscape. The
experimental data used to develop these models will focus on an easily
manipulated host-pathogen interaction between the fall armyworm and its lethal
pathogen, a baculovirus. The models of transmission dynamics derived from the
experimental data will quantify the extent that smaller scale processes affect
larger scale dynamics and whether or not ignoring scale
matters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general, the modeling framework developed can
be used to understand disease transmission, forecast transmission probability,
and outbreak severity for other diseases including human pathogens. From an
agricultural perspective, lethal baculoviruses represent a biological
insecticide. This research will aid in their use and development. Additionally,
this multidisciplinary project will involve a number of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. The research conducted will train the next generation
of statisticians, ecologists, and pathologists who will strengthen the ideas and
methodologies generated from working across these disciplines.