* 1316748
* Problems in Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Robert Sugar, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,320,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors David Gross, Joseph
Polchinski, Mark Srednicki, Robert Sugar, and Anthony Zee at the University of
California at Santa Barbara.

This award will support research aimed at understanding the basic building
blocks of matter and the fundamental laws underlying nature by a variety of
approaches: theoretical, computational, and by building models of the properties
of elementary particles. Gross and Polchinski are largely focused on the
construction of a unified theory of gravity and the particle interactions, based
on string theory and related ideas. Particular approaches are the study of the
quantum mechanical properties of black holes, the emergence of space-time from a
more fundamental theory, and the understanding of higher symmetries that appear
in these theories. Sugar studies the properties of the strong nuclear
interaction using large-scale computation, directed at testing the existing
Standard Model of particle properties and the search for new physics. Srednicki
and Zee study models of known and new particles, including neutrinos,
supersymmetric particles, and dark matter. These are all areas where a host of
experiments will continue to report new results, from the LHC and Fermilab to a
variety of deep-mine and space-based observations. The members of the group are
broad in their interests and work on other areas as well, including
nonequilibrium dynamics, quantum chaos and its connections with mathematics and
physics, new methods and applications in quantum field theory (the basic
mathematical framework for quantum physics), and the understanding of the
cosmological constant, which drives the accelerating expansion of the universe.

The training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows is a major activity
of this grant. The broad range of research topics covered by this award, and the
strong scientific base at UCSB and the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics,
provide an excellent environment for the education of young scientists. The PIs
are also active in communicating science to the public, through lectures,
writings, and interactions with the scientific press and the media, and several
have written widely used textbooks. Part of the effort in lattice gauge theory
is aimed at developing large-scale computational infrastructure for the entire
U.S. lattice gauge theory community. The approach being taken has broad
possibilities for application to computationally-intensive problems in many
areas of science and engineering.