* 1316645
* MOSART HSLS: Misconceptions Oriented Standards-Based Assessment Resource for Teachers of High School Life Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Philip Sadler, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,849,831.00

Researchers in the Harvard Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics are developing
and validating an assessment instrument that addresses the life sciences for
students and teachers in grades 9 through 12 based on the Misconception Oriented
Standards-based Assessment Resource for Teachers (MOSART). The project is
developing 400 new test items that are based on core content domains for life
science and are aligning these items with the previous National Science
Education Standards to provide a connection to the earlier MOSART assessments.
The project is also developing and validating two test instruments that address
the cross cutting concepts of energy and matter for grades K-12, with a specific
focus on flows, cycles and conservation. The new assessments will be made
available to other researchers and practitioner through the project website and
their on-line assessment system.

The assessment development is based on the process used in prior work that has
produced the other MOSART instruments, including design efforts of assessment
specialists, teachers, and learning scientists. Pilot items are tested through
crowd-sourcing with online adult test takers. Classic test theory techniques,
item response theory and Bayesian techniques model the student responses.
Outcomes consist of item parameters, test and sub-test characteristics, and
predictive linkages among items. A stratified, nationally representative sample
of 250 high school biology teachers field test the items with classrooms of
students. Descriptive statistics are generated to establish the state of student
knowledge, pre-and post-test performance by item and by standard, and teacher
knowledge, including the fraction of items for which teachers have correctly
identified the most popular wrong answer. Descriptive analyses are followed by
hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) of students within classrooms to examine the
relationships between student and teacher knowledge. The dependent variables in
HLM are student gain scores. Independent variables include teachers' knowledge,
and student performance on grade K-8 assessments.

The MOSART instruments have been a strong line of assessment tools that are
based on a model of cognition with a strong research base in misconceptions in
science education. That research base is only slowly being augmented with a more
coherent framework on learning progressions in STEM education, and the MOSART
instruments will have the potential for extensive use for the foreseeable
future. The grades 9-12 life science instrument based on coupling core ideas
with science and engineering practices addresses the gaps in the current MOSART
system of assessments. Given the rich literature on misconceptions in life
science and the ubiquity of life science as a course at the high school level,
the instrument promises to be as useful as the one for K-8 developed with MSP
RETA funding. The new instruments on cross-cutting concepts provides a much
needed set of assessments for researchers and practitioners, particularly
teacher professional development providers. The transition to coupling core
content and sciences practices with both the life sciences and the cross-cutting
concepts is an opportunity to expand and update the suite of instruments.