* 1316617
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Robert Shrock, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,605,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Maria C. Gonzalez-Garcia,
Christopher P. Herzog, Leonardo Rastelli, Martin Rocek, Robert Shrock, Warren
Siegel and George Sterman at Stony Brook University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
research activities span a wide range of topics in theoretical physics, largely
based on quantum field theory and string theory. Recent years have seen a
renaissance of engagement between theory and experiment in particle physics,
with new and exciting data from the Large Hadron Collider, from neutrino
observatories and from cosmic ray satellites. These new sources of information
about our universe enable theorists to test long-standing ideas against evolving
data, and to develop new theoretical methods to guide experiment. At the same
time, novel applications of quantum field and string theory have been developed
in and beyond particle physics, opening unexpected avenues of research into
nuclear physics, condensed matter physics, and quantum information, sometimes
with applications in pure mathematics. As active participants in these historic
developments, the senior personnel of this award will continue and develop their
work in high energy collider physics, neutrino and astroparticle physics,
applications of gauge-gravity duality, extensions of the Standard Model,
electroweak symmetry breaking, leptogenesis, superstrings, the geometry of
supersymmetric gauge theories, and the theory of the strong interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By advancing our knowledge of the laws of nature and by
contributing to a better understanding of the physical universe, this research
has significant broader impacts and implications for our world view. Indeed,
many of the topics under study by the senior participants are frequently
discussed in the media, such as the discovery of the Higgs boson, the role of
neutrinos in the Universe, string theory and the quark-gluon plasma. The
research outlined in this proposal will also serve in the training of graduate
students and mentoring of postdoctoral fellows. The faculty on this proposal
conduct their research with graduate students, and share their experience and
expertise with undergraduates and community members, in and beyond the
classroom.