* 1316141
* Ocean Acidification:   Century Scale Impacts to Ecosystem Structure and Function of Aleutian Kelp Forests
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Robert Steneck, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2018
* USD 574,617.00

Marine calcifying organisms are most at risk to rapid ocean acidification (OA)
in cold-water ecosystems. The investigators propose to determine if a globally
unique and widespread calcareous alga in Alaska?s Aleutian archipelago,
Clathromorphum nereostratum, is threatened with extinction due to the combined
effects of OA and food web alterations. C. nereostratum is a slow growing
coralline alga that can live to at least 2000 years. It accretes massive
?bioherms? that dominate the regions? rocky substrate both under kelp forests
and deforested sea urchin barrens. It develops growth bands (similar to tree
rings) in its calcareous skeleton, which effectively record its annual
calcification rate over centuries. Pilot data suggest the skeletal density of C.
nereostratum began to decline precipitously in the 1990?s in some parts of the
Aleutian archipelago. The investigators now propose to use high-resolution
microscopy and microCT imaging to examine how the growth and skeletal density of
C. nereostratum has changed in the past 300 years (i.e., since the industrial
revolution) across the western Aleutians. They will compare their records of
algal skeletal densities and their variation through time with reconstructions
of past climate to infer causes of change. In addition, the investigators will
examine whether the alga?s defense against grazing by sea urchins is compromised
by ongoing ocean acidification. The investigators will survey the extent of C.
nereostratum bioerosion occurring at 10 sites spanning the western Aleutians,
both inside and outside of kelp forests. At each site they will compare these
patterns to observed and monitored ecosystem trophic structure and recent C.
nereostratum calcification rates. Field observations will be combined with
laboratory experiments to determine if it is a decline in the alga?s skeletal
density (due to recent OA and warming), an increase in grazing intensity (due to
recent trophic-level dysfunction), or their interactive effects that are likely
responsible for bioerosion patterns inside vs. outside of forests. By sampling
C. nereostratum inside and outside of forests, they will determine if kelp
forests locally increase pH via photosynthesis, and thus buffer the effects of
OA on coralline calcification. The combination of field observations with
laboratory controlled experiments, manipulating CO2 and temperature, will help
elucidate drivers of calcification and project how these species interactions
will likely change in the near future. The project will provide the first in
situ example of how ongoing ocean acidification is affecting the physiology of
long-lived, carbonate producing organisms in the subarctic North Pacific. It
will also be one of the first studies to document whether OA, ocean warming, and
food web changes to ecological processes are interacting in complex ways to
reshape the outcome of species interactions in nature. The project will support
a postdoctoral investigator, and involve graduate and undergraduate students in
the field work. The project will support research by a Native American
undergraduate student and include outreach to coastal tribes and other members
of the public.