* 1316660
* Promoting Students' Spatial Thinking in Upper Elementary Grades using Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Alycia Hund, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 449,879.00

This project explores the potential for enhancing students' interest and ability
in STEM disciplines by broadening fourth grade students' understanding and
interest in the spatial perspectives inherent in geography and other science
disciplines. The study incorporates the latest developments in the use of
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) within the classroom. The project tests a
set of hypotheses that posit that the use of GIS in the classroom results in a
measureable improvement in students' spatial reasoning and motivation. Geography
teachers in elementary schools are trained to use GIS software to create digital
maps specific to the subject matter and projects on which their students work.
Students then work in small collaborative groups and engage in open discussions
designed to enhance the development and use of their spatial and multi-step
causal reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GIS has been used in middle and high
school settings. This project introduces GIS to upper elementary grades
particularly to allow students an early opportunity to be involved in meaningful
data and map-driven activities to promote their spatial skills. The proposal
team predicts that the traditional gap between girls and boys in spatial skills
will shrink with training thus will be strongly pronounced in the experimental
relative to control groups. The project documents the effectiveness of
instructional practices that are likely to enhance multistep reasoning, systems
thinking, conceptual and spatial understanding, and motivation for learning
while learning to work with maps to solve problems involving geography and
ecological awareness. The project develops instructional methods that
incorporate innovative tools for promoting problem solving to address real-life
issues in this increasingly technology-driven era. The innovative tool is open-
source and designed for professionals, but it can be modified to be child-
friendly. Classroom activities are integrated with science and social studies
curricula and content standards. Teachers are expected to find the curriculum
attractive and easy to implement.