* 1316969
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kevin Klubek, Klubek                  Kevin          P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Kevin P. Klubek of the University of Rochester to conduct a
research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the Institute of
Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University in Suzhou,
Jiangsu, China. The project title is "Blue Emitters for Organic Light-Emitting
Diodes." The host scientist is Professor Liang-Sheng Liao.

Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) are a new technology being developed for
display (replacing liquid crystal and plasma technologies) and solid state
lighting applications (replacing incandescent and fluorescent lighting). OLEDs
contain several layers of organic (carbon based materials) thin films sandwiched
between two electrodes. When a battery is connected to the electrodes, a current
passes into the organic materials and one of the layers emits light. Depending
on molecular structure, the organic materials can emit red, green or blue light,
and all three colors are needed for most applications. While OLEDs have an
ability to achieve high brightness with low power consumption, blue emitting
OLEDs have a significantly shorter lifetime (time for the initial brightness to
decrease by 50%) than red or green emitting OLEDs. The research shown in this
work compares various blue emitting materials in an effort to understand how
molecular structure impacts device performance, notably that of device lifetime.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the research effort between Soochow
University and the University of Rochester (UR) will lay the foundation for
forging a strong ongoing relationship as these universities have many shared
interests that extend beyond the OLED field. One of the key goals is to widely
distribute the scientific and technological understanding that is achieved by
publishing in peer reviewed journals and presenting at conferences. Furthermore,
the Fellow will give a presentation outlining his research to the host
university and a comparable presentation on the collaboration with the Tang lab
and his stay in China on return to his home institution. Both presentations will
promote the importance and benefits of the NSF EAPSI fellowship.