* 1316629
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Michael Page, Page                    Michael        E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Michael Edward Page of Florida International University to
conduct an interdisciplinary research project at the intersection of
Geosciences, Engineering, and Physical Sciences during the summer of 2013 at
Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. The project title is "High Pressure
Synthesis of Phases Appropriate for Earth's Interior." The host scientist is Dr.
Eiji Ohtani.

This project aims to expand the available knowledge of geophysical materials
appropriate for the core of earth and other terrestrial planets. High pressure
combined with high temperature in situ analyses reveals much about mantle
materials, including but not limited to compressibility and sound velocity, and
will help predict seismic events. This project tests available thermodynamic
database predictions over a wide range of compositions, and physical conditions
from crust to core. Between thermodynamics databases, not all calorimetric data
agree at the physical conditions present in the center of the earth, and this
project aims to obtain a match between the calorimetric data sets and
experimental values. This research transcends the fields of physics, chemistry,
and the geosciences, and has significance towards the understanding of
earthquake pressure wave velocities. It will be conducted in the heart of a
region, Sendai, still reeling from the threefold effects of natural devastation
due to earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear radiation contamination. Thermodynamic
relations require that the physical data we obtain through our experiments
attest to the relationships that ought to exist between thermochemistry and
thermophysics. An internal consistency in such data gives us the confidence to
model the planetary interiors and surfaces and lets us compare the profile with
data obtained independently through our planetary missions. Because of the broad
utilization of thermodynamics by many scientific disciplines, thermodynamic data
of many sorts are crucial to scientific progress.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow plans to participate in the
current ongoing project on creating a thermodynamic and geophysical
superdatabase on solids and fluids, which can be used with computational methods
to help planetary scientists understand the various processes in the earth and
terrestrial planets.