* 1316427
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Keats Conley, Conley                  Keats          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Keats Conley of University of Oregon to conduct a research
project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Hiroshima University in
Hiroshima Prefecture, Japan. The project title is "Behavior and Survival of Moon
Jellyfish (Aurelia aurita) Larvae Under Various Environmental Conditions." The
host scientist is Dr. Shin-ichi Uye.

Moon jellyfish (Aurelia aurita) mature in June-August in Hiroshima Bay and
release free-swimming larvae called "planulae." This study investigates the
behavior and survival, or physioecology, of planulae under various environmental
conditions (temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, light). Planulae are also
eaten by common filter feeding organisms, such as oysters, mussels, and
tunicates. This research measures the feeding rates on the planulae by these
organisms. Since larvae generally have very high mortality rates, environmental
factors such as these can have large impacts on survival, subsequently affecting
adult jellyfish abundance. This work carries social and economic significance
because some regions have experienced increasingly frequent and severe jellyfish
blooms, which present a grave threat to some fishing industries, aquaculture
farms, tourism and coastal industry. In Japan, blooms of moon jellyfish have
imposed significant costs on fisheries by clogging and bursting fishing nets. In
the U.S., the notorious "slime bank" of the Bering Sea is seasonally unfishable
because of jellyfish abundance; blooms, therefore, present a global economic
threat, not just a national one.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, results from this EAPSI research
collaboration on jellyfish larval response to different environmental parameters
may ultimately be used to help predict variations in populations, conveying
societal benefits by helping various industries to manage the socioeconomic
damages imposed by jellyfish. The EAPSI host researcher is a member of a
national counter-jellyfish project (STOPJELLY), leading the development of new
technology to predict and control jellyfish outbreaks; through this
collaboration, the EAPSI fellow is acquiring exposure to such technologies,
which may ultimately have applications for coastal management and policy. This
project also helps enhance the average citizen?s scientific understanding of
jellyfish by using the Newport Aquarium, which attracts over 40,000 students
each year, as a site for a public display on the significance of research
findings.