* 1316037
* Collaborative Research: The Comparative Genetics of Wing Pattern Diversity in Mimetic Butterflies
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Marcus Kronforst, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 10/31/2013
* USD 250,832.00

Elucidating the genetic basis of adaptations in natural populations is central
to understanding the origins of biological diversity. One issue of particular
importance is whether changes in the same genes underlie the independent
evolution of similar adaptations in different species. Butterflies display a
massive array of wing patterns, but much of this diversity appears to be a
result of variations on a conserved developmental ground plan. This
collaborative project will characterize the genetic basis of color patterning
across Heliconius, Limenitis, and Papilio butterflies using a novel strategy
that combines traditional experimental crosses with modern advances in genomics.
This approach will allow the researchers to identify the specific genes
responsible for wing patterning in each species and directly test the hypothesis
that a core set of genes controls wing patterning across all butterflies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wing pattern diversity is widespread across the entire
butterfly phylogeny, providing an unparalleled opportunity to explore the
genetics and evolution of adaptation, patterning, parallelism, and convergence
across a group that has been evolving and radiating for 100 million years. This
project will significantly expand the current understanding of how chance and
constraint interact to generate biological diversity by examining, in an
integrated and comprehensive way, how diverse lineages generate similar
morphologies in response to similar selective pressures. This project will also
have a variety of important broader impacts related to the training of post-
doctoral researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students, as well as
scientific outreach aimed at elementary, middle, and high school students.