* 1316104
* Locomotor Behavior and Limb Bone Structure in Gorilla
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Christopher Ruff, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 68,420.00

Recent fossil discoveries have provided increasing evidence that early human
ancestors engaged in a variety of forms of locomotion, combining some type of
terrestrial bipedal walking with varying degrees of arboreal behavior. It has
been difficult to interpret these differences, however, in part because we have
very limited modern analogies to compare with the fossil forms. The goal of the
present study is to determine how differences in locomotor behavior in modern
gorillas are related to differences in skeletal characteristics, in order to
better reconstruct the locomotion of early humans from their fossil remains.

Gorillas constitute a group of closely related species and subspecies that have
recently diversified, both genetically and ecologically. Eastern mountain
gorillas inhabit high altitude environments that encourage very little arboreal
climbing behavior, while western lowland gorillas inhabit rainforest
environments where climbing is a common activity. There also is a geographically
intermediate group of gorillas that inhabits both high and low elevations and
that shows a mixture of locomotor behaviors. Using museum specimens from varying
gorilla populations, limb bone structural properties will be determined using
computed tomography and other measurements, and compared between the different
groups. It is hypothesized that limb bone strength proportions will more closely
reflect differences in locomotor behavior than will other skeletal
characteristics. Growth studies of western lowland and mountain gorillas also
will be carried out and compared, using juvenile skeletal material from the same
populations. It is known from behavioral studies that mountain gorillas undergo
a change in locomotor behavior during growth, becoming less arboreal as they
become older, while this is less true for western lowland gorillas. It is
hypothesized that limb bone strength proportions in the two groups will be more
similar in infancy and diverge thereafter.

This project will add significantly to our understanding of genetic and
environmental effects on skeletal morphology and growth. It involves an
international collaboration between the PI and researchers in Belgium and
Finland, and provides training for two graduate students. The data generated by
the study also will promote understanding of living gorilla ecology and
population history, which will aid in conservation efforts for these Endangered
species.