* 1316446
* NECO:   A Graph-Based Approach to Traffic Monitoring  and Application Classification
* CSE,CNS
* 12/31/2012,08/31/2013
* Michalis Faloutsos, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2013
* USD 18,835.00

NECO: A Graph-Based Approach to Traffic Monitoring and Application
Classification&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NETS NECO proposal
0832069&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michalis Faloutsos (UCR) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental problem that motivates this work is the need to detect and classify
emerging and undesired applications in a network, such as a large ISP, or an
enterprise network. The undesired applications can refer to Peer-To-Peer (P2P)
protocols, which can dominate network resources, but also include malware such
as intrusions and worms. This proposal addresses the following tightly related
problems in this area of research: (a) monitoring and visualizing network
traffic, (b) identifying applications, and (c) detecting
anomalies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring the traffic and detecting unwanted
applications is far from trivial. The authors of controversial applications
often obfuscate their traffic to make them very hard to detect by using
encryption or ever-changing behavior. Thus, there is a need for an approach that
has the following properties: (a) it is easy to use with few and intuitive
parameters, (b) it can operate even when packet payload is unavailable, and (c)
it does not rely on a priori knowledge of the application specification, such as
port numbers. Despite the significant number of previous efforts, most previous
work fails to meet one of these three constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal follows a more fundamental behavioral approach, where the detector
looks for behavior patterns of the application that are both intrinsic to the
application and distinct from other traffic. By identifying intrinsic behaviors,
it becomes difficult for application writers to disguise their applications
without defeating the very purpose of the application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
key contribution of this proposal is that it demonstrates the power of a
behavioral or graph-based approach to network monitoring. Specifically, the
proposal fully explores the use of Traffic Dispersion Graphs or TDGs, which
capture the communication pattern in a network, namely, who talks to whom. TDGs
capture the ``social" interaction of the network as a whole, which leads to a
directed graph; each node is an IP address, and each edge represents an
interaction between two nodes. The proposal shows that there is a wealth of
information embedded in a TDG, which the other monitoring and application
classification methods simply cannot capture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This proposal will make enterprise and ISP networks more reliable and
safer by providing the basis for a new generation of monitoring and security
tools. Service disruptions and malware cost billions of dollars per year to any
industry with significant IT infrastructure. At the same time, the Internet has
become the battleground of multimillion dollar wars: between industries (content
providers versus ISPs on network neutrality) and between the entertainment
industry and users (the peer-to-peer saga). The proposal will provide the tools
(e.g. application classification) that will play an important role in deciding
the future of the network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational Goals: The PI will
develop a cross-disciplinary educational program by bringing together
networking, security, graph-mining, and social networks research. In addition,
the PIs will develop programs to: (a) encourage the early involvement of both
undergraduate and graduate students in research and teaching, and (b) increase
the participation of minorities in higher education in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;