* 1316202
* Testing a Professional Development Model for High School Science Reform and the Relationship of Key Variables to Student Achievement
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Joseph Taylor, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2017
* USD 494,803.00

This project conducted by the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study(BSCS) tests
the efficacy of an intensive, three year professional development program, the
BSCS National Academy for Curriculum Leadership (NACL) on student science
achievement in the state of Washington. The goal of the NACL is to develop the
capacity of district-based secondary science leadership teams to sustain the
implementation of research-based science instructional materials that promote
improvement in teaching and learning. This study examines the influence of the
program on student achievement after the schools and districts have had
sufficient time for the effects to take hold. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
uses existing data gathered from two cohorts of Washington-based NACL teams and
archived student achievement data from Washington State?s Office of the
Superintendent of Public Instruction (OSPI). Additional data are collected NACL-
participating districts and personnel through surveys and interviews. The
project compares student achievement between the 27 districts that participated
in the NACL, and a minimum of 27 carefully matched, non-NACL districts using
propensity-scoring methodology. Districts have experienced different dosages of
the NACL, and the project examines the differential effects of being involved in
the NACL over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study provides an
opportunity for multiple stakeholders including NSF, other corporate foundations
that have funded the development and implementation of the NACL, BSCS, and
participating school districts to determine the extent to which professional
development promotes the improvement student science achievement results. The
broader impact of the research is testing the extent to which basic elements of
teacher professional development models correlate with student achievement and
to do so in a way that could be replicated by others in similar contexts. The
proposed work would inform educators about the research-based approaches to
professional development that has evidence of efficacy. Moreover, by determining
the time-scales by which professional development programs might be shown to
influence student achievement, the findings provide new information to
policymakers and researchers regarding the amount of time that could be required
to see a positive impact from new educational policies and programs.