* 1316036
* Collaborative Research: Chemical and Biological Characterizations of Phosphonate and Polyphosphate Dynamics in Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Sonya Dyhrman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2016
* USD 358,059.00

Phosphorus (P) is a recognized essential nutrient for marine primary production
and its inorganic chemistry has been well studied. However, the dissolved
organic phosphorus pool (DOP) has been little studied even given its importance
as a phosphorus source to microorganisms. This project will identify biogenic
sources of P compounds to DOP using controlled culture studies focused on
phosphonate and polyphosphate. These compound classes exert important controls
over P cycling, carbon fixation and community structure and export from the
upper ocean, and long-term sequestration. The study will employ innovative
methods, including molecular tools and novel chemical analyses, to examine
specific phosphonate and polyphosphate compound production by key phytoplankton
taxa under different environmental conditions. Four hypotheses are driving the
proposed research and focus the study on the primary research questions. The
study will improve our understanding of the production of specific P compounds,
and provide insight into the bioavailability of DOP and the influence of P on
biological production.

The project will train three graduate students and there is a substantial
outreach component associated with the study. The PIs will integrate education
and outreach to K-12 communities using Whyville, an online virtual world geared
specifically to 8-14 year old children. During this study, the investigators
will expand the use of Whyville as a science learning tool through interactions
with at-risk children as part of ScienceQuest, an after school program at a
housing shelter, and through intensive summer short courses to school teachers.