* 1316727
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Alison Tseng, Phillips                Alison         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,299.00

This action funds Alison Marie Tseng of the University of Pittsburgh to conduct
a research project in the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences area during
the summer of 2013 at National Taiwan Normal University in Taipei. The project
title is "The Effect of Being Immersed in a First or Second Language Environment
on Bilingual Translation." The host scientist is Dr. Jun Ren Lee.

Previous research has demonstrated that translation ambiguity, the availability
of multiple translations, is relatively common and affects adult second language
learning and adult bilingual processing. Previous research on translation
ambiguity has primarily focused on European languages. However, the United
States Census 2010 showed that, between 2000 and 2010, the Asian population
increased more than other populations. Further, within the Asian population, the
largest population was the Chinese population. Given this, it is imperative to
include non-European languages in general, and Mandarin in particular, in the
research on translation ambiguity. This project collects English-Mandarin
translation norms in Taiwan, allowing a direct comparison between translation
norms collected in the United States and in Taiwan. This research answers the
questions of: (1) whether translation ambiguity is relatively common between
English and Mandarin; (2) whether the correlations between translation ambiguity
and word-level characteristics such as concreteness and frequency hold when the
two languages do not share an orthography; and (3) how language environment
affects the translations that are provided. Further, this research examines the
types of errors that are made across a range of proficiencies, allowing for a
characterization of the types of errors that bilinguals make in the progression
from novice to expert.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the results of the proposed research could be
used to understand how bilinguals resolve translation ambiguity in their day-to-
day communication, and how to reduce errors caused by translation ambiguity.
Bilinguals must resolve this ambiguity regularly in their day-to-day
communication to avoid errors in communication.