* 1316871
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Aubree Webb, Webb                    Aubree         M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,247.00

This action funds Aubree Webb of The Pennsylvania State University to conduct a
research project in the Education and Human Resource area during the summer of
2013 at the Computer Network Information Center (CNIC) of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences in Beijing, China. The project title is "Virtual Inquiry Projects in
Science Classrooms: Do Grizzly Bears and 3-D Avatars Impact Students' Inquiry
Skills?." The host scientist is Xiao Yun, Professor and Director of the
Internet-based Science Communication Center at the Computer Network Information
Center in the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

Incorporating technology into the classroom is an important goal of science
educators. While there are increasing numbers of studies in this area, there are
not many with cross-cultural measures. Studying the cross-cultural outcomes of
authentic web-based inquiry has the potential to contribute much to the field of
science education. The purpose of this project is to advance the collaboration
between the Computer Network Information Center of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Texas A&M University, and the Pennsylvania State University. This
project introduces a project called Bear Cam and adapts the ongoing Virtual
Ecological Inquiry project for a cross-cultural study. Bear Cam is a web-based
inquiry database with images of bears. Virtual Ecological Inquiry is an
immersive inquiry where students operate an avatar around the virtual Wolong
Nature Reserve. In each project, students complete an inquiry project and
produce a final report meeting current science standards in obtaining,
evaluating, and communicating data.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this study can inform software developers and
teachers about the best way to reach students in highly diverse settings.
Virtual and web-based inquiry also has the added benefit of increasing student
interaction with other students from geographically diverse locations, an
important experience in an increasingly global world. If the web-based inquiry
projects increase student interest and learning outcomes in ecology across
various learning settings and with diverse student populations, the next step is
for the researcher to scale up and develop the technology for easy access into
ecology classrooms and informal science education settings in the United States
and across the world. One goal of the entire collaboration is to motivate more
students from a range of backgrounds, especially those underrepresented in
science, to pursue a career in one of the STEM fields. The Fellow will share
results with those interested in science and technology by presenting at
international and international conferences and university-level research
seminars and publishing in related journals.