* 1316919
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Clarence Collins, Collins                 Clarence       O
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Clarence Collins of University of Miami to conduct a research
project in Geosciences during the summer of 2013 at the University of Tokyo in
Kashiwa-shi, Japan. The project title is "Study of Extreme Waves in the
Pacific." The host scientist is Dr. Takuji Waseda.

The generation mechanism of extreme waves has been elusive up until recent
studies began shedding some light on these mysterious phenomena. Research
efforts have attempted to tackle the problem from different angles, examples of
which include laboratory measurements, spectral wave modeling, and phase
resolved numerical simulations. However, there remains a significant lack in
field observations, especially with information describing the directional wave
spectrum. This project provide thorough analysis of high quality field data in
order to address this gap in current extreme wave science and to advance the
understanding of extreme wave generation in hitherto unexpected ways.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, a webpage will be developed with a detailed
introduction to extreme waves which will be updated with findings over the
course of the EAPSI project. This page will be aimed at a general audience, but
also include advanced information which could become a resource for interested
students. Extreme waves cause damage to vessels and pose a danger to the people
on these ships, and a better understanding of the extreme waves may be applied
to save lives and prevent financial loss.