* 1316758
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Identity Beyond the Colonial Core: Spanish Colonialism and Ceramic Technology of the Dismal River Aspect Culture (1675-1725 CE)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Margaret Beck, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 21,830.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Margaret Beck, Sarah Trabert will analyze ceramics
from Dismal River aspect sites in Colorado and Wyoming and submit ceramic sherds
from Nebraska and Kansas for sourcing analyses. The Dismal River aspect dates to
A.D. 1675-1725 and these people lived at an important crossroads between the
Great Plains and the U.S. Southwest, where goods, technology, social practices,
and people moved between Native American societies. Dismal River aspect groups
also lived during a time of economic, political, and social instability
following the European colonization of the Americas. It is well known that
Native Americans in direct contact with Europeans experienced epidemic diseases,
political and economic disruption, forced social change, and demographic
expansion and collapse. What is less understood is how far the wave of these
effects spread beyond the borders of European controlled colonies. To escape
Spanish oppression, Puebloan people from Northern New Mexico moved out of their
homelands and brought their own social practices and worldviews with them when
they interacted with Great Plains peoples such as Dismal River aspect groups.
The analysis of Dismal River aspect culinary technology and resource acquisition
will reveal if and how Spanish colonization led to changes in ceramic production
and foodways on the Great Plains. Thus, this research will contribute new and
important knowledge on the indirect impact that colonization has on material
culture and social identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the
worldwide effects of colonialism beyond the core colonized areas, the regional
impact of Spanish colonialism in North America, methods of defining social
identity archaeologically during the protohistoric and early historic periods,
and details of Dismal River aspect foodways and adaptations. It also emphasizes
the importance of the protohistoric period for studying the emergence of new
social identities produced by Spanish activity and Puebloan population movement
out of the Southwest. The archaeological record during this volatile period,
although quite complicated and ephemeral, can inform researchers and descendant
groups alike as to how Native peoples accepted, adapted to, and resisted the
profound social, political, and economic changes associated with the
colonization of the North American continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects
of Spanish colonialism on Native American groups outside of the core area of
contact is an understudied part of Native North American history. Information
regarding the social identity and ancestry of Dismal River aspect groups may be
of interest to descendent communities today who are striving to regain access to
land and a voice in how Dismal River aspect mortuary remains are handled.
&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will be disseminated in a series of
publications and will be available in detail through a digital archive for
archaeological records, allowing scholars access to the final interpretations
and raw data. These results will be shared with the public institutions where
the collections are housed and with the individual state historical societies so
that the information can be disseminated to the public through displays of
Dismal River aspect material culture. Sharing ideas with museums, historical
societies, local archaeologists, descendent groups, and the public will ensure
that more is known about the emergence of new and resilient social identities
among Native American groups, and how these people resisted colonial dominance
and cultural extinction during the protohistoric period.