* 1316921
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Justin Wilcox, Wilcox                  Justin         J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Justin Wilcox of the University of Notre Dame to conduct a
research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Duke-NUS Medical school
in Singapore. The project title is "Exploring the Role of Parasitic Worms in
Enzoic Disease Transmission." The host scientists are Dr. Gavin Smith and Dr.
Ian Mendenhall.

Parasitic worms (i.e. helminthes) are known to increase the pathology and
transmission of several important diseases (including HIV infection,
Tuberculosis, Hepatitis C) through modulation of host immunity during
simultaneous coinfection. However, the commonality of such interactions between
helminthes and micropathogens is not well known due to uncertainties regarding
the mechanisms of immune modulation by parasitic worms. To address this
shortcoming, this project is exploring the importance of different types of
helminth infection to microparasite immunity in a wild population of long-tailed
macaques living in close association with humans in Singapore. Through the
comparative assessment of immunomodulatory abilities of different helminthes,
the results may ultimately allow for new insights into the control of infectious
disease, and the use of helminthes in the treatment of autoimmune disease.
Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. This study will be directly relevant to the management of
non-human primate populations by identifying their capacity to act as a
reservoir for important human pathogens, and factors that increase or decrease
this reservoir potential. The findings are being presented to the Department of
Biological Sciences at the University of Notre Dame, and prepared for
publication in a peer reviewed journal.