* 1316133
* Ocean Acidification:  Influence of Ocean Acidification on Biotic Controls of DMS Emissions
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Stephen Archer, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,305,456.00

To date, investigations into the biogeochemical consequences of predicted
increases in pCO2 and reduced pH in the oceans (ocean acidification, OA) over
the next century have largely focused on the production and fate of carbon.
Considerably less is known about how OA will influence other biogeochemical
cycles or the exchange of reactive trace gases between ocean and atmosphere.
Variations in trace gas exchange will alter atmospheric chemistry, including
aerosol formation and growth, and potentially feedback on climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at the Bigelow Laboratory
for Ocean Sciences will study the influence of OA on the biological processes
that govern the concentrations and hence emission, of dimethyl sulfide (DMS) in
the surface oceans. The team will study OA effects on the DMS-cycle in three
natural-water mesocosm experiments designed to encompass natural community
responses to predicted changes in pCO2 of varying degrees. They will exploit the
opportunity to participate in a major experiment in sub-tropical oceanic waters
involving the deployment of nine large scale (~60 m3) free floating, pelagic
mesocosms, as part of the German-funded BIOACID Program. Two replicate
experiments conducted using the new mesocosm facilities at Bigelow will further
expand the environmental range of DMS-OA studies. Through a combination of
standard analytical approaches, recently developed cutting-edge tracer
approaches to determine process rates, as well as the underlying organism
diversity and genetic response of microbes involved with biogenic sulfur
cycling, they will determine how altered pH influences key biological pathways
governing DMS concentrations and the organisms responsible during the
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The information generated
will be used to inform on-going development of global ocean-atmosphere coupled
models, able to examine the influence of ocean acidification on climate change.
The information will also be used to further develop physiology-based
mechanistic approaches to biogeochemical ecosystem models. A Postdoctoral
Research Scientist will be trained in the experimental approaches, will gain
modeling experience by working with European scientists, and will develop
international and US collaborations, with a common aim to increase our
understanding of ocean acidification on ecosystem function. Four undergraduates,
two interns and two REU-students, will gain valuable experience by participating
in the Bigelow experiments. An additional undergraduate with a mathematical
background will be mentored in and participate in the interpretation and
modeling aspects. Extensive outreach to K-12 students and teachers as well as
the general public will be pursued as part of established Bigelow programs in
which all PIs will participate (BLOOM, Cafe Scientifique). Joint programs with
Colby College (Changing Oceans semester) and Island Institute will reach
undergraduates and Maine island K-8 schools, respectively.