* 1316647
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Ian Johnston, Johnston                Ian
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Ian Johnston of Boston University to conduct a research
project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Kyoto University's Institute for
Chemical Research in Kyoto. The project title is "Developing Latent Genotypes
for Genome-Wide Association Studies." The host scientist is Professor Hiroshi
Mamitsuka.

This research project rigorously vets a new technique for genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) that combines a Bayesian statistical model with a
novel concept of a "latent genotype" in an attempt to: formally address rare
variants and linkage disequilibrium in GWAS data; and to exploit the underlying
structure of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to then identify
associations between SNPs and genes and diseases. The latent genotypes are
obtained by transforming the original genotypes in such a way so as to correct
for the strong correlation present in the data. In order to justify the use of
the latent genotypes in GWAS, an additional goal of the project is to conduct a
comparative analysis of current Bayesian and non-Bayesian methods using the
original genotypes versus the latent genotypes. The product of this research
project is an extensive comparative analysis that first investigates the
usefulness of the latent genotypes and then investigates the usefulness of the
novel Bayesian statistical model for GWAS, as well as software that implements
the proposed model.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the software to be produced by this research
project can be used by industry professionals as well as in teaching examples.
In particular, the cross-fertilization of ideas between statisticians and
geneticists would be especially fruitful in establishing groundwork for future
mutual projects as well as for the networks of communication that are ultimately
necessary to achieve the overall goals of genetic studies.