* 1316886
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kenneth Yancey, Yancey                  Kenneth        G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Kenneth Gene Yancey of Cornell University to conduct a
research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at The National
University of Singapore in Singapore. The project title is "Simultaneous
Detection of Cancer and TB using DNA-based Nanobarcodes in a Portable Device for
In-home Diagnostics." The host scientist is Dr. Jackie Ying.

Every year, the World Health Organization reports that 1 in 4 people in the
United States will die of cancer and that one third of the world population has
tuberculosis (TB). Early detection reduces the incidence and fatal potential of
cancer and highly transmittable diseases like TB. To address this, we are
developing tree-like DNA nanobarcodes which use a unique ratio of fluorescent
tags to detect multiple disease simultaneously. Already these barcodes are
demonstrating multiplexed attomole detection using the specificity of DNA
hybridization and the sensitivity of fluorescence. In the course of this EAPSI
project, this system is being improved by applying it to real DNA samples and
integrating it in a microfluidic device for the detection of disease anywhere in
the world.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this EAPSI project is not only potentially
developing better methods for the DNA-based detection of new diseases, but also
promoting outreach to students of all ages and disciplines. Several
undergraduate students are involved with this project and results will be
disseminate using a series of Youtube videos and apps designed to engage the
community. The host location is ideal for accomplishing EAPSI's goal of
fostering international exposure of U.S. graduate students due to the NUS'
highly collaborative environment consisting of numerous academic, industrial and
clinical collaborations.