* 1316271
* NRI: Small: Interleaved Continuum-Rigid Manipulation - Enabling High-Performance and Inherent-Safety in Minimally-Invasive Surgical Procedures
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Michael Zinn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 495,154.00

This project investigates a fundamentally new robotic manipulation approach for
minimally-invasive surgical procedures. The approach combines flexible, actively
actuated continuum segments with small, rigid-link joints -- retaining the
safety advantages of flexible continuum manipulators while achieving the
performance advantages of traditional rigid manipulators. The combination of
performance and inherent safety is an essential element in the emerging area of
co-robotic surgical applications. The overall approach is referred to as
interleaved continuum-rigid manipulation. While interleaved continuum-rigid
manipulation offers an attractive, intuitive approach, its apparent simplicity
belies the obstacles which must be overcome prior to successful realization.
This project will address these obstacles though a coordinated effort in design,
modeling, and control. The design effort will seek to address the significant
technical challenges of the interleaved manipulation approach including rigid-
link joint actuation challenges and rigid-link joint to flexible segment drive-
train coupling. The modeling investigation will establish a toolset from which
the underlying behaviors of the interleaved manipulation approach can be
understood. The controls investigation will seek to develop control strategies
appropriate for the hybrid flexible-rigid system envisioned. Evaluation will
include performance and safety-metric evaluation as well as bench top clinical
evaluation, focusing on the execution of simulated clinical tasks.

If successful, the results of the research will lead to improvements in
manipulation capability for use in highly technical and safety critical
minimally-invasive co-robotic surgical procedures. Specifically, interleaved
continuum-rigid manipulation will enable levels of performance required for
cooperative manipulation tasks in emerging co-robotic surgical techniques while
maintaining safety. New classes of interventional techniques for neurological,
cardiac, and other high risk procedures will be possible, resulting in improved
outcomes and reduced morbidity. In addition, the extension to larger scale
manipulators could have significant impact in other co-robotic application areas
including search and rescue robotics, light-manufacturing, and home and
healthcare assistive robotics. To facilitate wide dissemination of the project
results, major findings will be published in both conference and peer-reviewed
journals. Additionally, detailed results, including design and analysis data,
will be made available online. Finally, the project will have a strong training
focus by providing an integrated research and educational environment for
graduate and undergraduate student researchers - including those in
underrepresented groups through established University fellowship programs.