* 1316348
* Extracting Seismic Core Phases with Array Interferometry
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Victor Tsai, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 296,012.00

Methods that make use of seismic interferometry and ambient noise energy have
proven to be extremely useful in imaging shallow Earth structure. Since
application of such ambient noise techniques is not limited to where earthquakes
occur, if the techniques could be applied to the deep Earth then we would
drastically increase our ability to sample the deep Earth. While most studies
using ambient seismic noise have failed to retrieve deep body-wave phases, new
work of ours suggests that cross correlating body-wave coda emitted by large
earthquakes combined with appropriate stacking of array data allows extraction
of seismic phases that reflect off the Earth's core and that travel through the
Earth's inner core. Currently, however, we do not fully understand why the
technique works or what the limitations are. We will develop this ambient-
noise/earthquake-coda core-imaging technique more fully, including understanding
the basis for the method, improving the process, and applying it to interesting
datasets. Promising areas of application include imaging inner core anisotropy,
core mantle boundary topography, and deep mantle structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental purpose of this work is to develop a new
method of imaging the deep Earth that relies on low-amplitude but coherent waves
that are part of Earth's ambient noise field. Successful application of the
imaging method will provide detailed constraints on how the Earth's core has
evolved, on the composition of the deep Earth, and on Earth processes in
general. Our line of research will also enable us to assess the full potential
of this technique to advance current imaging capabilities in the Earth sciences,
but also medical imaging, and oil and gas exploration. Finally, since a crucial
aspect of the method is its reliance on waves that take unusual paths, including
being scattered and multiply reflected by Earth structure, understanding the
method will provide new insight into the heterogeneity of Earth structure and
other aspects of the Earth that cause unusual wave propagation.