* 1316736
* Improving Formative Assessment Practices: Using Learning Trajectories to Develop Resources that Support Teacher Instructional Practice and Student Learning in CMP2
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Susan Goldman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,979,777.00

The overarching goal of this project is to develop innovative instructional
resources and professional development to support middle grades teachers in
meeting the challenges set by college- and career-ready standards for students'
learning of algebra. This 4-year project includes three major components: (1)
development and empirical testing of learning trajectories for linear functions
and linear equations, (2) collaborations with teachers of Connected Mathematics
Project 2 (CMP2) to create and test a set of instructional resources focused on
formative assessment processes, and (3) iterative refinement of a professional
development model for engaging teachers with the instructional resources in ways
that optimize students' learning of algebra. The professional development
activities provide opportunities for teachers to develop specialized content
knowledge of learning trajectories for linear functions and equations in
algebra, processes for interpreting students' performances with respect to those
trajectories and providing feedback and additional instructional activities
based on "where" the student is with respect to the overall learning trajectory.
Such changes in teacher knowledge and practice are anticipated to produce
improved student learning outcomes for key concepts and procedures in algebra.
One of the major stumbling blocks to teachers' implementation of effective
formative assessment practice is the sheer volume and management of the
information needed to monitor and interpret student performance. The project
addresses this impediment by employing the ASSISTments platform, a web-based
online system for delivering mathematics problem sets and capable of adapting
problem presentation to student performance in real time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on learning trajectories in mathematics has
mostly centered on concepts at the primary school level. While research at this
level has been prolific and informative in multiple aspects of mathematics
education, there are major knowledge gaps in our understanding of learning
trajectories in several domains of mathematics, specifically in algebra. Indeed,
there is a growing need for new research and development projects to fill these
critical knowledge gaps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two
critical areas in mathematics: students' understanding of linear functions and
linear equations, and students' ability to use them to solve problems.
Empirically validated learning trajectories will support curriculum development
in these areas. In addition, this project contributes to the research base to
improve the curriculum standards by providing empirical evidence for
hypothesized trajectories for selected content standards for middle school
students. Finally, the use of CMP2 augmented by the online management system
increases the probability of widespread impact of the professional development
model targeted at teachers' formative assessment practices. Although we are
using a specific curriculum program, the treatment of linear functions and
equations topics in CMP is consistent with other functions-based curricula in
the U.S. Thus, the work done in the context of this project will be useful in
examining learning trajectories and formative assessment in other instructional
programs.