* 1316571
* Investigating Simulations of Teaching Practice: Assessing Readiness to Teach Elementary Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Meghan Shaughnessy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 09/30/2016
* USD 449,829.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI argues cogently that assessment of pre-
service teacher preparedness to teach is based on a flawed model. The goal then
is to use a simulation model from other professional arenas: the training of
doctors, nurses, etc., to offer new insights and control for the many variables
that come to play when conducting evaluations in practice. These might include
classroom context, the difficulty of the mathematics being deployed, etc. To do
this the PI will develop three assessments that vary in the simulation scenario.
In the context of developing and validating these assessments, the PI will
examine:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What do we learn about the nature of pre-
service teachers skills at eliciting and interpreting students thinking and
their mathematical knowledge for teaching (MKT) in use through assessments that
simulate teaching practice? How does their performance correspond with eliciting
and interpreting students mathematical thinking in classroom
contexts?&lt;br/&gt;2. How does the nature of pre-service teachers skills at
eliciting and interpreting students thinking and mathematical knowledge vary in
relation to different simulation scenarios? Are some simulation scenarios easier
than other simulation scenarios?&lt;br/&gt;3. What are the challenges of
designing alternative versions of a particular simulation assessment?