* 1316983
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Nicholas Nuar, Nuar                    Nicholas       C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,300.00

This action funds Nicholas Nuar of The University of Pittsburgh Department of
Bioengineering to conduct a research project in Biology during the summer of
2013 at Peking University in Beijing, China. The project title is "Biosensor
Development Using Membrane Protein Receptors." The host scientist is Dr. Can
Xie.

Membrane receptors are proteins embedded in the cellular membrane that mediate
the communication between the cell and its environment. It is therefore
intuitive to use membrane receptors for biosensor development for technological
applications in a biomimetic approach. The principle is general so that such a
technology platform can be extended to potentially be able to detect and assay
thousands of biologically relevant compounds. This project extends the system to
a plant membrane receptor, the ethylene receptor, studied by Prof. Can Xie in
China. Ethylene (C2H4) is an important plant growth substance that is used
industrially to induce ripening in stored plant products. Its receptor is not
homologous to the insulin receptor and its transmembrane structure is quite
different, and kinase activity is either histidine or serine/threonine specific.
This study investigates a plant ethylene receptor, NTHK1. Unique among
identified plant hormone receptors, the ethylene receptors are transmembrane
receptors just like hormone receptors, such as EGFR in animals. This activity
studies the expression, purification, and assay setup necessary to continue
investigating the protein in collaboration with Dr. Xie. The ultimate goal of
the Fellow's PhD project is to harness understanding of these highly tuned
receptor kinase systems to make an extensible platform for novel biosensing
capabilities. This project will have an impact on the speed, accuracy, and
number of readily analyzable chemical species. Broader impacts of an EAPSI
fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand research experience outside
the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science policy, and scientific
infrastructure of the respective location; and an orientation to the society,
culture and language. These activities meet the NSF goal to educate for
international collaborations early in the career of its scientists, engineers,
and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific workforce.
Furthermore, the Fellow will strengthen a collaboration between the Klein-
Seetharaman lab and the Xie laboratories. High impact, low cost solutions to
laboratory instrumentation are ultimate downstream aims from the program of
research.