* 1316033
* String Theory and Quantum Field Theory:  From the Planck Scale to the Hubble Scale
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Vadim Kaplunovsky, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 660,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Steven Weinberg, Willy
Fischler, and Jacques Distler at the University of Texas at
Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work done by this group of professors ranges
from physics at the most fundamental level to computations relevant to current
observations in particle physics and cosmology. As part of this research
project, these professors intend to pursue their quest for a deeper
understanding of the various challenges confronting theoretical physics, ranging
from attaining a fundamental understanding of its intricacies when combining
quantum mechanics and gravity including cosmology to the phenomenology of
particle physics. Making progress in these areas will require a many-pronged
approach, using insight gained from existing concepts like holography to
developing a deeper mathematical understanding including new tools in field
theory and string theory. Professor Weinberg will pursue new approaches to
quantum measurement theory and investigate alternative regularization schemes
for cosmological perturbation theory. Professor Fischler will continue his work
on Holographic Space Time, AdS/CFT and exploring alternative theories of dark
matter. Finally, Professor Distler will continue his work on Gaiotto Duality and
on the theory of orientifolds, while pursuing new ideas on heterotic string
compactification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These three faculty members also have a
strong track record of making physics accessible to a wider audience through
popular lectures and through various other media including Press, Radio, TV and
the Internet. These activities are envisioned to continue in conjunction with
the current research project. These activities also include the development of
Web technologies and the authoring of graduate textbooks in physics.