* 1316040
* Ocean Acidification:   Seasonal and Ontogenetic Effects of Ocean Acidication on Pteropods in the Gulf of Maine
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Gareth Lawson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2017
* USD 492,720.00

Dissolution of excess anthropogenic CO2 into the ocean is causing the marine
environment to decrease in pH. This "ocean acidification" is predicted to
threaten a broad variety of marine organisms, particularly calcifying animals
such as the thecosome (i.e., shelled) pteropods. These pelagic gastropods form
an aragonite shell, are prey for a number of commercially important fish, and
are significant contributors to carbon biogeochemistry. Their ecosystem
importance, abundance, and sensitivity to dissolution position them as an
important group for investigating the impacts of acidification. Our
understanding of the effect of high CO2 on pteropods and the pelagic ecosystem,
however, is limited primarily to short-term studies of adult calcification and
respiration response in the polar ecosystems. There have been no seasonal
studies of sensitivity and our understanding of the effect of CO2 on pteropod
early life stages is limited. Limacina retroversa is a particularly abundant
thecosome pteropod in the North Atlantic, where it is prey for a number of
fisheries species and other top predators. This species is also the most common
pteropod in the Gulf of Maine (GoM) where it is present year round. L.
retroversa thus offers the prospect of a useful model pteropod species, given
both its ecological importance and its abundance in readily accessible waters.
The investigators will conduct a series of short cruises to sample L. retroversa
on a seasonal basis from local waters of the GoM near Cape Cod. The carbonate
chemistry of the GoM fluctuates seasonally, proving them with the opportunity to
assess the response of wild caught pteropods to natural changes in CO2. By
characterizing the carbonate chemistry of the water column and measuring the
metabolic rate, shell quality, and gene expression of pteropods throughout the
year, the researchers will achieve a time series of pteropod sensitivity to CO2.
Subsequently, using experimental manipulations the investigators will explore
the effect of seasonal acclimation on pteropod response to short- and medium-
term exposure to enhanced CO2. Pteropods frequently lay eggs in captivity, and
at WHOI there is institutional expertise in maintaining these individuals in the
laboratory. Building on these strengths, the researchers will also study the
effect of CO2 on embryonic and larval development in L. retroversa. These
earliest life-stages of marine calcifiers are thought to be especially sensitive
since initial shell precipitation and the highly energetic processes of growth
and development are impeded by CO2 exposure. They will also document mortality,
shell production, abnormality, and developmental rate of clutches of pteropod
embryos exposed to increased CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Thecosome pteropods are an abundant group of calcifying zooplankters that have
been chronically understudied, particularly in temperate regions. Due to its
accessibility and ecological importance, L. retroversa can be developed as a
valuable model, interesting both as the dominant pteropod in the commercially-
important GoM region and also an abundant pteropod in the temperate waters of
the North Atlantic. The goal of this research is to augment our knowledge of the
distribution of L. retroversa, to attain an understanding of their seasonal
sensitivity to natural variability in CO2, and to see how this exposure impacts
responses to both short- and medium-term CO2 exposure. Using powerful
transcriptomic technologies, the research will transform our understanding of
this group by investigating the molecular mechanisms of response in L.
retroversa to both seasonality and varying durations and intensities of
acidification, contextualized by ecosystem- and organism-level metrics.
Furthermore the study &lt;br/&gt;will examine the effect of CO2 on the eggs of
pteropods for the first time, providing insight into their sensitivity to an
acidifying &lt;br/&gt;environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Ocean
acidification is increasingly appreciated as an urgent societal concern.
Thecosomes are important in biogeochemical cycles and as key prey for a variety
of commercial fish and as such, the improved understanding we seek of pteropod
ecology will have important implications for our understanding of the effects of
ocean acidification on marine resources. The project will integrate research
with education in a number of ways, including the training of undergraduate
students as well as serving as a seminal experience in the career development of
postdoc (and co-PI) Dr. Maas. Furthermore, taking advantage of the aesthetic
appeal of these charismatic microfauna, the researchers will pair with
journalists, artists, and photographers to continue to develop images and
exhibitions aimed at increasing public awareness of the impacts of ocean
acidification.