* 1316232
* Fostering Pedagogical Argumentation: Pedagogical Reasoning With and About Student Science Ideas
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Melissa Braaten, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2018
* USD 447,706.00

Effective and ambitious teaching in science requires that teachers listen and
respond to student ideas. But research shows that doing so in the classroom can
be logistically, socially, and intellectually challenging for both expert and
novice teachers. Listening to student ideas requires teachers to anticipate and
interpret multiple lines of thinking that may be expressed ambiguously and
simultaneously. Responding to student thinking, both in-the-moment and in future
instruction, presents further challenges because teachers must balance their
choices with other instructional priorities. Unfortunately, little work has been
done to date in supporting these challenging practices in those who are learning
to teach, pre-service teachers (PSTs). In order to address this gap, researchers
in this Exploratory project will introduce a new approach to teacher education:
pedagogical argumentation. Pedagogical argumentation creates a supportive
environment in which the PSTs learn and refine these practices of listening and
responding by using student ideas as evidence to construct and defend potential
pedagogical decisions.

Over three years researchers from the University of Wisconsin-Madison will use
an iterative approach to design activities and supports that foster pedagogical
argumentation for use in undergraduate teacher education courses. This project
will examine: 1) whether and how PSTs engage in pedagogical argumentation and 2)
whether and how this engagement impacts how they listen and respond to student
ideas. Working with both elementary and secondary PSTs, researchers will probe
and explore their changing listening and responding practices by: collecting
records of pedagogical argumentation (both video and written) as it occurs in
the science teaching methods courses; conducting interviews about PSTs
understanding of student ideas; and documenting PSTs teaching experiences in
their school placements.

The science teacher education community writ large is in need of systematic
approaches to teacher education that better support PSTs in learning ambitious
teaching practices such as listening and responding to student ideas. The
proposed study addresses this need and, in doing so, will support both immediate
PSTs in engaging in this work as well as the broader teacher education community
as it struggles with these same challenges. Moreover, the novel practice of
pedagogical argumentation advances the fields theoretical understanding of the
problem space for supporting these challenges by combining insight from two
extensive programs of research in teaching and learning: 1) teacher reasoning
about student ideas, and 2) argumentation about science content. As such, the
practice of pedagogical argumentation has the potential to transform how teacher
educators approach pre-service education.