* 1316548
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Michael Zuba, Zuba                    Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Michael Zuba of the University of Connecticut to conduct a
research project in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering area
during the summer of 2013 at National Sun Yat-sen University in Kaohsiung City,
Taiwan. The project title is "An Advanced Channel Model for Improved Underwater
Acoustic Network Simulations." The host scientist is Dr. T.C. Yang.

The intellectual merit of this fellowship is in developing an advanced
underwater acoustic communication framework for integration into an open-source
network simulation tool. The framework is validated against the results of real-
world ocean environments using sea tests. This work studies the effects of the
physical environment, such as wind, noise (anthropogenic and natural), sea floor
sediment types, the geometry of the network and the acoustic channel effects,
such as multi-path, attenuation and different modulation schemes, on acoustic
communication performance. This research advances the knowledge and
understanding of underwater acoustics and networking by providing an accurate
communication module for simulation. New applications such as energy harvesting
using wave motion and microbial fuel cells, lifetime assessment of water based
civil structures and harbor and port surveillance will become more feasible,
impacting and increasing our nation?s energy and infrastructure capabilities.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the collaborative research will be
disseminated through scholarly conferences and integrated into an open source
simulation tool that will be made freely available to other researchers. This
work will allow other researchers to validate new networking algorithms and
physical layer improvements in underwater acoustics and networking, which lags
behind terrestrial communication research.