* 1316432
* Collaborative Research:  Groundwater-surface water interactions in tropical alpine catchments and their influence on sources and stability of water supply during glacial recession
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Bryan Mark, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 06/30/2018
* USD 269,880.00

Alpine watersheds and the ice and snow they contain are one of the most
important sources of fresh water in the world, and mountain regions that are
dominated by glaciers are especially sensitive to climate change. Melting
glaciers in the semi-arid tropics currently provide a large component of annual
runoff and buffer highly seasonal precipitation regimes, but ongoing glacier
recession is predicted to make alpine runoff smaller in volume and more
temporally variable, stressing water resources. Previous research suggests that
groundwater aquifers in proglacial catchments are an important storage reservoir
during dry seasons, and will likely play a dominant role in streamflow
generation under future non-glacierized conditions. Despite their importance,
little is known about fundamental hydrogeologic processes governing the
interaction of surface water and groundwater in proglacial catchments. The
investigators on this grant will study the interactions between surface water
and groundwater reservoirs in proglacial meadow landforms in the Andes of Peru,
estimate their storage volumes, and quantify contributions to streamflow. The
research plan integrates a creative combination of field methods to directly
quantify groundwater-surface water interactions (GWSWI) in remote, data-poor
glacierized catchments and describe the relative hydrologic influence of
groundwater storage and melting glaciers. The objectives of the proposed project
are to: (1) measure gains and losses of water between stream channel reaches and
groundwater stored in proglacial meadows, moraines, talus slopes, and alluvial
fans in wet and dry seasons; (2) measure and map subsurface structures,
properties, and water content of meadow aquifers and estimate storage volumes;
and (3) determine the impact of GWSWI on surface water chemistry and on
hydrochemical mixing models used to estimate glacial
melt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses unknown aspects of
proglacial watershed hydrology, and the results will expand the current state of
knowledge about groundwater storage and its interaction with surface water
resources in tropical glacierized catchments and alpine watersheds. Conclusions
from this study could transform alpine hydrologic modeling, which typically
ignores or simplifies groundwater storage. The results of the proposed research
will be broadly relevant to hydrologists, glaciologists, and physical and human
geographers, as well as to water resource managers, development planners,
agricultural engineers, municipalities and local governments, indigenous
communities, and industrial sectors (hydroelectric and mining). Tropical
glacierized mountain ranges are undergoing rapid environmental and demographic
shifts and are especially susceptible to climate change and water stress, and
this project will contribute to the understanding and prediction of water
resources vital to human livelihoods. Education and outreach programs will
enhance long-term connections with local community groups, local governments,
and Peruvian researchers, and this effort will continue to engage the broader
community of water users in the Andes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-
funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and the International Science and Engineering
Programs.