* 1316996
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Chen-Ping Yu, Yu                      Chen-Ping
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Chen-Ping Yu of Stony Brook University to conduct a research
project in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering area during the
summer of 2013 at Perception and Attention Lab of National Taiwan University in
Taipei, Taiwan. The project title is "Modeling Human Visual Attention using
Object-based Attention." The host scientist is Dr. Su-Ling Yeh.

This project is developing a visual attention model as measured by shift in
gaze, which is based on object-based attention theory and takes object parts
(proto-objects) into account in addition to the usual spatial features. Current
visual attention models predict where people look next based on salient regions
of a scene, such as noticeable objects or just features that are prominent
somewhere in the image. This corresponds to spatially-based attention, such that
attention is driven by interesting locations in the scene. However, recent work
suggests that objects can serve as the attention selection basis, in a way that
when a person is already attending at an object, changes that occur on the
attending object is noticed faster than the same changes that occur away from
the object, albeit the same spatial distances. This object-based attention has
not yet been captured in predicting human visual attention, and it is the goal
for this project to incorporate object-based attention processing with existing
spatially-based models in order to predict gaze shift that are more consistent
with human behavior. The research model predicts that the shift of eye fixation
utilizes the theory of object-based attention, and it requires three major
components for processing: objects, the associated object parts (proto-objects),
and the saliency map. The top-down object information is being obtained by
applying state-of-the-art object detectors in computer vision; proto-objects are
being segmented by merging coherent pixel fragments (superpixels) that are
similar in low level features; and the saliency map is being generated using
multi-scale blob detector on the image, with blob strength denoting the degree
of spatial saliency. Initial fixation is set at the most salient region, and
whenever an object is selected as being fixated, object-based attention suggests
that consequent fixations may prioritize on the associate proto-objects before
moving to another spatial salient location, in contrast from existing models
that may immediately release from the attending object if other spatial location
is deemed more salient. The performance of the eye movement model will be
validated against a human fixation dataset using 1000 images from the PASCAL
VOC2008 dataset and 104 images from the SUN 2009 dataset.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this project facilitates the learning
exchange between the fields of Psychology (human vision) and Computer Science
(computer vision). The model can also help and improve visual aids design for
the general public, and the underrepresented groups that may require visual
representations to be more intuitively perceived. This impact naturally leads to
more partnerships between research, education, and the industry, which is all
based on the better understanding of human visual attention.