* 1316731
* Matrix variate modeling and analysis of large scale biological data with complex dependencies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Shuheng Zhou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2017
* USD 220,000.00

Matrix-variate models provide a way to analyze complex multivariate datasets in
which meaningful relationships may exist among both the variables and among the
observed units. This is an extension of the more standard setting of
multivariate statistical analysis, in which the variables are dependent, but the
observations are viewed as being independent. The primary motivation for
treating the data as a single high-dimensional sample is the potential for
increased power when estimating parameters that are sensitive to relationships
among the experimental units. Recent advances in high-dimensional non-asymptotic
theory, convex analysis, and algorithms allow such models to be fit to the very
large data sets that arise in critical scientific areas such as genomics and
neuroscience. A major goal of this project is to assess the extent to which
accounting for relationships among samples allows more accurate estimates to be
made of relationships among variables. An example of how this might be applied
is in the assessment of associations between rare genetic variants and a
phenotype. The Sequential Kernel Association Test (SKAT) uses a kernel matrix
which is essentially a covariance matrix of the genetic features. The
investigators will evaluate the use of the covariance matrix obtained from the
recently-proposed Gemini approach to matrix-variate analysis as a kernel for the
SKAT procedure. Three scientific applications have been identified to which the
Gemini framework may be usefully extended. In addition to conceptual and
algorithmic challenges, these applications require the theory and methodology
for the Gemini estimators to cover new settings, for example, due to SNP
genotypes being highly non-Gaussian, and due to brain connectivity graphs
changing over time. The investigators will adapt the baseline Gemini models and
algorithms to these new settings, and study their statistical and computational
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent technological breakthroughs in
instrumentation allow large and detailed data sets describing living systems to
be efficiently collected. Researchers in biology and health science have
embraced these technologies, but have sometimes been frustrated by the fact that
such data must be interpreted conservatively, to guard against making non-
reproducible claims. Research progress would be accelerated if it were possible
to analyze such data in a way that provides more statistical power, without
expensive increases in the sample size. One path to doing this is to move beyond
the paradigm of treating the observed units in a study (e.g. human research
subjects or laboratory animals) independently. The investigator and his
colleagues have developed a new type of statistical procedure that uses inferred
relationships among the units of observation to more accurately estimate
physical and biological unknowns. They plan to develop the theory behind their
technique, to develop software for carrying out the analyses, and to work with
scientists in cancer biology, genomics, and neuroscience to assess the potential
for using this approach to obtain novel scientific insights. The project will
focus on three scientific problems: identification of DNA lesions involved with
cancer incidence and progression, identification of inherited genetic variants
associated with human diseases, and characterization of neural connectivity
changes induced by changes in consciousness state.