* 1316723
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jeffrey McDaniel, McDaniel                Jeffrey
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Jeffrey McDaniel of University of California, Riverside to
conduct a research project in the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering area during the summer of 2013 at National Cheng Kung University in
Tainan, Taiwan The project title is "Design and Verification Tools for Chips to
Automate Biological Experiments." The host scientist is Dr. Tsung-Yi Ho.

This project is developing a top to bottom design automation tool chain for
microfluidic bio-chips, which are able to automate biochemical experiments. The
tool chain integrates components that have been developed independently at the
University of California, Riverside (UCR) and National Cheng Kung University,
Taiwan. The input to the system is a structured description of the experiment;
the tool chain performs the necessary scheduling, placement and routing, and
outputs a specification for a chip that can be fabricated using capillary
electrophoresis subsystems, which have a broad range of applicability in
biochemical assays by separation and detection of unique species. The scheduling
of the chip involves binding specific operations to the individual component of
the chip which will perform that operation. The components are then placed on
the chip, and the channels between the components are routed. The chip is then
verified by the tool chain to ensure correctness in accordance to the original
experiment. The tool chain, increases the potential for commercial development
of low-cost biochips which may supplement, or even replace, traditional benchtop
chemistry equipment.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the tool chain brings a standardized format
to chip design and assay specification that does not currently exist, allowing
for an easier collaboration with other universities. It will facilitate rapid
dissemination of biochip designs between laboratories, which will enhance
scientific reproducibility of experiments. The Fellow plans to publicly release
the tool chain to academia once it reaches a mature and stable state, allowing
the wider research community to benefit from its development. UCR is a federally
recognized minority serving institution. Under the guidance of the his Ph.D.
supervisor, the Fellow he is collaborating with two female undergraduate
research assistants and plans to continue mentoring them, along with
underrepresented minority students, throughout his Ph.D. studies at UCR.