* 1316834
* Secondary Science Teaching with English Language and Literacy Acquisition (SSTELLA)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Patricia Stoddart, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,885,185.00

This is a four-year Discovery Research K-12 project to develop, implement, and
study an experimental model of secondary science pre-service teacher education
designed to prepare novice school teachers to provide effective science
instruction to English language learners (ELLs). The project incorporates the
principles underlying the Next Generation Science Standards with a focus on
promoting students' scientific sense-making, comprehension and communication of
scientific discourse, and productive use of language. It articulates theory and
practice related to the teaching of science content and the development of
English language and literacy, and provides teachers with models of integrated
practice in video cases and curriculum units. To test the efficacy of the study,
a longitudinal, mixed-methods, quasi-experimental study is conducted at four
institutions: the University of California-Santa Cruz, Arizona State University,
the University of Arizona, and the University of Texas-San Antonio.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three research questions are: (1) What is the impact
of the project's pre-service teacher education program on novice secondary
science teachers' knowledge, beliefs, and practice from the pre-service program
into the second year of teaching?; (2) What is the relationship between science
method instructors' fidelity of implementation of the project's practices and
novice teachers' outcomes (knowledge, beliefs, and practice)?; and (3) What is
the relationship between novice teachers' implementation of project-promoted
practices and their students' learning? To answer these questions, the project
collects and analyzes quantitative and qualitative data on novice teachers (85
treatment group and 85 control group) over three years utilizing surveys,
interviews, observations, and student assessment instruments. Teachers' beliefs
and knowledge about teaching science to ELLs are measured using the project-
developed Science Teaching Survey, which provides quantitative scores based on a
Likert-type scale, and the science teacher interview protocol to provide
qualitative data, including the contextual factors affecting implementation of
project-promoted practices. Classroom observations are captured through
qualitative field notes and the Classroom Observation Rubric--a systematic
project-developed observation instrument that measures implementation of the
practices. Student learning outcomes are measured using (a) the Woodcock-Mu√±oz
Language Survey (students' proficiency at applying listening, reading, writing,
and comprehension abilities); (b) the Literacy in Science Assessment (students'
productive use of language in authentic science literacy tasks); (c) the
Scientific Sense-Making Assessment (how students make sense of core science
ideas through scientific and engineering practices); and (d) appropriate state
standardized assessments. In addition, the Opportunity to Learn Survey gauges
students' perceptions of implementation of literacy integration, motivation in
class, and identity as readers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project outcomes are: (a)
a research-based and field-tested model for pre-service secondary science
teacher education, including resources for science methods courses instructors
and pre-service teachers; and (b) valid and reliable instrumentation usable in
similar research and development environments.