* 1316782
* Climate Change Narrative Game Education (CHANGE)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Ping Wang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ann Rivet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 449,972.00

This exploratory project helps high school students learn complex Global Climate
Change (GCC) science by making it personally relevant and understandable. CHANGE
creates a prototype curriculum, and integrates it into elective Marine Sciences
high school courses. Research will examine the project's impact on student
learning of climate science, student attitude toward science, and teacher
instruction of climate science. The goal of this project is to develop a place-
based futuristic gaming simulation model that can easily extend to the other
locales in other states, based on local climate change effects, local
stakeholders, local economic and social effects to motivate the high school
students in that area. CHANGE uses: (a) scientifically realistic text narratives
about future Florida residents (text stories with local Florida characters, many
years in the future based on GCC), (b) local, place-based approach grounded in
west-central Florida Gulf Coast using scientific data, (c) a focus on the built
environment, (d) simulations &amp; games based on scientific data to help
students learn principles of GCC so students can experience and try to cope with
the potential long term effect of GCC via role-play and science-based
simulation, and (e) a web-based eBook narrative where sections of narrative text
alternate with simulations/computer games. The proposed project will work with
25 high school Marine Science teachers in 25 schools in Hillsborough County,
Florida. The project delivers new research for instructional technologists and
serious game developers regarding effective interface and usability design of
intermedia narrative gaming-simulations for education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project employs and researches innovative models for delivering high school GCC
education. GCC is a complex topic involving numerous factors and uncertainties
making teaching this extremely important topic very difficult. The pioneering
techniques proposed for this project will advance science education of GCC. It
also will deliver new research for instructional technologists and serious game
developers regarding effective interface and usability design of intermedia
narrative gaming-simulations for education. Effective education is probably the
most crucial part in our ability to cope with climate change. CHANGE will
educate underserved low SES and minority high school students in Hillsborough
County, and later elsewhere, with a model making GCC personally relevant to
them.