* 1316649
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* David Fryxell, Fryxell                 David
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds David Fryxell of the University of California Santa Cruz to
conduct a research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at the
University of Auckland in Auckland, New Zealand. The project title is "Invasive
Species in a Changing Climate: How Will Contemporary Trait Change Shape the
Dynamics of Invaded Ecosystems?" The host scientist is Dr. Kevin Simon.

As global temperatures rise freshwater organisms must adapt, and recent evidence
suggests that rapid evolutionary adaptation can affect ecosystems in
contemporary time. In order to understand the potential effects of contemporary
thermal adaptation on freshwater ecosystems, this project focuses on
understanding how an invasive fish, the western mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis),
has adapted to warm geothermal ponds, and how that thermal adaptation affects
freshwater communities and ecosystems processes. This project is the first to
explicitly test the ecological implications of contemporary thermal adaptation.
It also addresses key issues facing New Zealand's environment (global warming
and invasive species), and contributes novel insight to the nascent field of
eco-evo dynamics (where evolution and ecology are interacting in contemporary
time).

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the Fellow is working alongside several
undergraduates; he hopes to share with them novel perspectives in biology. In
addition, the Fellow is giving a talk at a local high school about the
importance of evolution to conservation.