* 1316235
* Smarter together working conference: Developing a shared curriculum of Complex Instruction for elementary mathematics methods courses
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Amy Parks, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 12/31/2014
* USD 106,677.00

This working conference will help university professors who teach elementary
mathematics methods courses learn to use Complex Instruction, a research-proven
pedagogy for building mathematical content knowledge and supporting the learning
of diverse students. In Complex Instruction, educators design tasks that require
multiple mathematical abilities to solve. For example, solving a particular task
might require computational skills as well as the ability to visualize a
3-dimensional object and represent that object on paper. Through this
mathematical complexity, the tasks demand that students engage deeply with
mathematics and draw on each others' mathematical strengths. In addition, in
Complex Instruction teachers use strategies that minimize status differences in
the classroom that impact participation, ensuring that all students - regardless
of their popularity, first-language, race, or income level - participate
equitably. During the conference, 28 university instructors from across the
country will design tasks to be used in mathematics methods courses for
prospective elementary teachers. Mathematics educators from University of
Georgia, University of Arizona, University of Michigan, and Michigan State
University will work together to design and host the conference. The conference
is expected to produce a cohort of mathematics educators knowledgeable about
Complex Instruction, and who can then support colleagues at their home
institutions in learning to use the pedagogy as well as promoting the use of
Complex Instruction in mathematics classrooms in U.S. elementary schools.

After learning the essential elements of Complex Instruction, conference
participants will design Complex Instruction curriculum modules to implement at
their home institutions. Evaluation of the conference will include surveys and
phone interviews with conference participants to assess their knowledge of and
use of Complex Instruction. In addition, some participants will be selected for
more extensive follow-up, including the collection of videos of Complex
Instruction lessons in their courses and surveys of their students. Data will be
analyzed to identify major themes related to the knowledge of the participants
and their students, the supports and obstacles present in various contexts in
relation to adopting a new pedagogy, and the impact of Complex Instruction on
the methods courses.

All of the tasks and the activities designed during the conference will be
available not only to the conference participants but also to anyone interested
in Complex Instruction through the website, www.ci.org. In addition, by
developing experts in Complex Instruction at more than a dozen universities
across the country, the conference will play an important role in disseminating
this relatively new, but effective, pedagogy. Evidence about the effectiveness
of Complex Instruction suggests that large-scale incorporation of this practice
into mathematics methods classrooms will increase the mathematics understandings
of prospective elementary teachers and ultimately their students, particularly
those in schools with significant numbers of marginalized students.