* 1316246
* Electronic Communities for Mathematics Instruction (e-CMI)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Albert Cuoco, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 07/31/2016
* USD 449,739.00

This 2-year Exploratory project, Electronic Communities for Mathematics
Instruction (eCMI), is designed and conducted by the Education Development
Center (EDC) in collaboration with the Institute for Advanced Study and the Park
City Mathematics Institute (PCMI). It builds on EDC's successful experience over
the last twelve years with the design and implementation of the summer program
for secondary mathematics teachers at PCMI. It addresses the following two needs
in the field of professional development for secondary mathematics teachers:
increase content knowledge and understanding of the Common Core State Standards
for Mathematics; and investigate and develop alternative models to conduct
transformative, content-based professional development that meets the
recommendations of the MET-II report. Addressing the need to find affordable,
effective professional development models, particularly given the enormous task
of helping teachers understand the implications of the Common Core, the project
eCMI will design and conduct a research study and pilot a professional
development design, centering on the following two questions: (1) How can tools,
experiences, and facilitation be structured in order to build an authentic and
vibrant multisite community of learners? (2) To what extent and in what ways
does participation in eCMI lead to increases in secondary teachers' knowledge of
mathematics, particularly the knowledge and use of mathematical habits of mind?
The long-term goal is for eCMI to evolve into a common large-scale national
professional development program that helps secondary teachers implement the
Common Core, with special focus on the Standards for Mathematical Practice.

To create a context for investigating the two questions above, eCMI will develop
and pilot a blended program using online and local mathematics facilitation in a
course focused on deepening knowledge of mathematics using the Common Core as a
blueprint. The project team will refine and extend the ?e-table? concept,
developed over the past few years at PCMI, in which teachers in different sites
work together with a facilitator via sophisticated electronic conferencing
technology. The mathematics course will consist of nine three-hour sessions
conducted online on during the academic year. Each session will integrate
challenging mathematics content, carefully designed and focused on developing
mathematical habits of mind through problem solving, with explicit opportunities
that ask teachers to reflect on the implications of these experiences for their
learning and beliefs. Teachers will be asked to spend time between sessions in
deeper discussions online by sharing responses to reflective prompts and
responding to each other?s prompts. Sessions will be delivered to tables of five
or six participants and a table leader meeting live at the same site and
connected electronically to other sites. Table leaders will be teachers or
university faculty experienced with the following style of delivery: serious and
challenging mathematics that is driven by problem-based experience. The project
team will collect information on teachers' beliefs about the nature of
mathematics and their strategies for approaching mathematics.

Secondary teachers who immplement the standards for mathematical practice
require extensive experiences in the practice of mathematics. Several
professional development programs, including PCMI, have been able to provide
such experiences but they are expensive in cost and labor. eCMI will adapt the
proven PCMI design, one that uses carefully designed problem sets in which
significant mathematical results emerge from reflection on numerical and
geometric experiments, to blend online and face-to-face platforms in a way that
has the potential to increase the reach of the program by orders of magnitude.
The exploratory project, through pilot and research programs, will lay the
foundation for such a scale up by working with 15-30 secondary mathematics
teachers. Results of the research will inform the field about ways in which
teachers can be provided with genuine mathematical experiences through the use
of online media paired with local facilitation.