* 1316347
* Integrating Quality Talk Professional Development to Enhance Professional Vision and Leadership for STEM Teachers in High-Need Schools
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2019
* Pricilla Murphy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,106,207.00

This project expands and augments a currently-funded NSF Noyce Track II teacher
recruitment and retention grant with Quality Talk (QT), an innovative, scalable
teacher-facilitated discourse model. It is hypothesized that the QT model will
enhance pre- and in-service secondary teachers' development of professional
vision and leadership skills necessary for 21st century STEM education. Over the
course of four years, the work will address critical needs in physics and
chemistry education in 10th through 12th grade classrooms in five of Georgia's
high-need school districts by strengthening the capacity of participating
teachers to design and implement lessons that support effective dialogic
interactions. As a result of such interactions, students' scientific literacy
will be enhanced, including their ability to participate in content-rich
discourse (i.e., QT) through effective disciplinary critical-analytic thinking
and epistemic cognition. The contributions of this project, beyond the tangible
benefits for teacher and student participants, include the development,
refinement, and dissemination of an effective QT intervention and professional
developmental framework that the entire science education community can use to
promote scientific literacy and understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
goals are being achieved through a series of three studies employing
complementary methods and data sources, and a focus upon dissemination of the
model in the final project year. The first two years of the project focus on
developing and refining the curricular and intervention efficacy materials using
design-based research methods. In Year 3, the project engages in a quasi-
experimental study of the refined QT model, followed by further refinements
before disseminating the materials both within Georgia and throughout the
national science education community in Year 4. Quantitative measures of teacher
and student discourse and knowledge, as well as video-coding and qualitative
investigations of intervention efficacy, are being analyzed using multiple
methods. In collaboration with, but independent from project staff and
stakeholders, the participatory and responsive evaluation utilizes a variety of
qualitative and quantitative methods to conduct formative and summative
evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of four years, the project
will involve the participation of approximately 32 teachers in Georgia whose
students include substantive percentages from populations underrepresented in
the STEM fields. In addition to advancing their own students' scientific
literacy, these participating teachers receive professional development on how
to train other teachers, outside of the project, in using QT to promote
scientific literacy. Further, the project will conduct a QT Summit for
educational stakeholders and non-participant teachers to disseminate the
intervention and professional development model. Finally, the project team will
disseminate the findings widely to applied and scholarly communities through a
website with materials and PD information (http://www.qualitytalk.org),
professional journals, conferences, and NSF's DRK-12 Resource Network. This
project, with its focus on teacher leadership and the pedagogical content
knowledge necessary to use discourse to promote student science literacy,
significantly advances the nation's goals of producing critical consumers and
producers of scientific knowledge.