* 1316250
* Fluid and chemical fluxes across the seafloor of a passive margin
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Willard Moore, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 06/30/2018
* USD 565,448.00

Submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) is now recognized as an important pathway
for the introduction of nutrients, carbon, and metals into coastal ocean waters.
The full impact of SGD is uncertain, however, because we do not understand all
the driving mechanisms. Whereas most studies of SGD have focused at the
coastline, increasing evidence from the South Atlantic Bight indicates that the
majority of SGD occurs far (1-70 km) offshore. Mechanisms for discharge far from
shore are not yet well understood. Observations from a cluster of seafloor wells
20 km offshore of North Carolina suggest that this discharge reflects slow
upward migration of saline fluids from depth. These porefluids are also affected
by rapid flushing of sandy seafloor sediments by seawater during storms or
migration of cold ocean currents. This project will test the hypothesis that
these flow processes are common and drive significant fluid exchange over large
areas of the continental shelf. The project will also estimate the geochemical
fluxes of radium, nutrients and carbon across the seafloor. The study area will
be a 150 square-km area that reaches 20 km offshore near Charleston, South
Carolina. Geophysical surveys will map seafloor bathymetry and identify buried
sedimentary structures that could channel groundwater traveling upward toward
the seafloor. Thermal arrays will be installed to depths of 2-5 m below the
seafloor at 10 locations. Data from these arrays will indicate the depth and
frequency of rapid ocean-driven flushing and quantify possible long-term upward
flow from depth. Three pairs of wells installed in a shore-perpendicular
transect will supply pressure data that will provide independent estimates of
fluid fluxes. The wells will also be sampled for nutrients, carbon, and radium
tracers, which will indicate mixing between radium-poor seawater and radium-
enriched pore waters. Geochemical fluxes across the seafloor will be determined
based on calculated fluid fluxes and observed geochemical
compositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The realization that groundwater discharging
directly to the ocean supplies significant quantities of nutrients, carbon, and
metals to coastal waters represents a paradigm shift in our understanding of
geochemical fluxes to the coastal ocean systems. Previously, only inputs from
rivers, the atmosphere, and upwelling (exchange with the deeper ocean) were
considered. Now, increasing evidence suggests that the volume of saline
groundwater that discharges across broad continental shelves is at least as
large as river discharge, but the flow mechanisms and chemical compositions of
groundwater discharge in offshore regions are very poorly understood. It is
essential that studies of submarine groundwater discharge focus farther offshore
in order to understand these processes. This work has the potential to spur
significant revisions of textbook views of the hydrologic cycle and geochemical
budgets for the ocean. In particular, saline groundwater may be supplying
significantly greater nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) than has previously
been realized. These nutrients affect the fertility of coastal ecosystems, which
include economically significant fisheries, and may contribute to outbreaks of
harmful algae blooms as well as ocean 'dead zones'. The work is designed to
include significant student participation, including participation by under-
represented groups.