* 1316706
* Searching for Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 11/15/2013,10/31/2016
* Peter Graham, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 10/31/2016
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Peter W. Graham at
Stanford University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Standard Model of Particle Physics
has been tremendously successful, yet leaves many questions unanswered. Data
from the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) has begun to reveal the physics of the TeV
scale but there is much still to be discovered, including the nature of dark
matter and the resolution of the hierarchy problem. Professor Graham will
calculate the consequences of recent LHC results for well-motivated theories of
physics beyond the Standard Model, such as supersymmetry. It is anticipated that
this project will lead to the discovery of new types of experimental signals
that can be probed at the LHC, including different types of displaced vertices
and fractionally charged particles. Additionally, Professor Graham will design a
new type of dark-matter detector. While a large number of experiments are
searching for Weakly Interacting Massive Particle (WIMP) dark matter, it is very
difficult to search for the equally well-motivated axion dark matter, and indeed
most of the allowed parameter space for axion dark matter remains unreachable by
current experiments. Professor Graham will propose new signals of axions and
axion-like particles, including a time-oscillating nuclear electric dipole
moment (EDM), and will design a detector based on nuclear magnetic resonance
technology to search for this oscillating EDM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will also have significant broader impacts. Professor Graham will be
actively involved in science education, including designing curricula and
courses for undergraduate and graduate students. He will also have significant
involvement with K-12 physics education. Professor Graham has developed strong
connections with several local public elementary schools and will work actively
on promoting awareness and understanding of modern topics in physics research.
This includes directly educating the students and teachers, running labs in the
classroom, and giving tours of modern physics laboratories. Professor Graham
will also work actively with graduate students and postdocs on research,
training them to become theoretical particle physicists. He will also continue
to make connections with other subfields of physics, including astrophysics,
atomic physics, and condensed-matter physics, bringing closer collaboration
amongst these different fields.