* 1316805
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Joshua Stepanek, Stepanek                Joshua         G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Joshua Stepanek of the University of Colorado Boulder to
conduct a research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at Tokyo Gakugei
University in Koganei, Tokyo. The project title is "Taxonomic and Phylogenetic
Investigation of the Diatom Genus Amphora." The host scientist is Dr. Shigeki
Mayama.

Diatoms are an important and diverse group of microalgae found in virtually all
aquatic environments. Within diatoms, members of the genus Amphora have been
singled out as a potentially important biofuels source due to their ability to
naturally produce large amounts of cellular oil. Although shown to be promising,
the diversity and evolutionary history of the group continues to be poorly
understood, undermining its potential usefulness. Preliminary data has shown
Amphora to be a collection of distantly related subgroups, widely distributed
throughout the diatom tree of life. This project continues an investigation into
the taxonomy and evolutionary history of the genus Amphora, utilizing both the
unique flora of Japan, as well as the expertise of Japanese diatom researchers.
These goals are being met through the targeted collection of known Amphora
populations, followed by the isolation and culturing of Amphora taxa present.
From these collections, an evolutionary tree is being constructed using
morphological and molecular techniques. Collaborative outcomes include: the
description and publication of new species encountered during collections; the
most extensively sampled phylogeny to date for the genus Amphora; and insights
into the evolution of important lineages and characteristics within diatoms.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. The unique experience of conducting research in Japan will
be disseminated through departmental seminars at the University of Colorado.
These will highlight the research conducted, as well as the cultural experience
obtained through an EAPSI fellowship to a broad group of young researchers who
could benefit from a similar experience. Furthermore outcomes from this study
provide an ideal example of "real world" applications of evolutionary research
and will have broader impacts outside the scientific community. Through public
outreach programs of the Evolution Outreach Committee at the University of
Colorado, this research will provide an opportunity to bring evolution out of
the laboratory and demonstrate its practical importance in an accessible way to
a general public audience. Relating how ongoing evolutionary research effects
people?s everyday lives and is closely tied to practical problems and decision
marking is an important component of this evolutionary study.