* 1316864
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Stephanie Tong, Tong                    Stephanie      M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Stephanie Tong of University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
to conduct a research project in Engineering during the summer of 2013 at the
National Center for Research on Earthquake Engineering (NCREE) at National
Taiwan University (NTU) in Taipei, Taiwan. The project title is "Model-based
Tracking Control Design for Accurate Shake Table Response." The host scientist
is Dr. Keh-Chyuan Tsai.

Shake table testing is an effective method for evaluating the response of
structures under dynamic loading, particularly earthquake excitations. To take
full advantage of shake table testing, tracking control algorithms are applied
for more accurate reproduction of earthquake ground accelerations. Realization
of an appropriate tracking control algorithm will ensure that the actual shake
table response matches the commanded shake table response. The project
accomplishes this through the development of a model that captures the dynamics
of the system driving the multiple shake table system at the NCREE laboratory
and formulating tracking control schemes to ensure robust tracking control.
Compensation for tracking error of the system will be provided by feedforward
controllers, which control the system through an adjusted command anticipating
the system behavior, and feedback controllers, which control the system by
correcting the accumulated error.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, appropriate tracking control strategies
secured for the NCREE shake table will ultimately advance modern control design
by allowing other shake table users to obtain more meaningful testing results
for improved structural control methods. The procedure to develop the tracking
control will be shared so that perhaps other facilities with similar testing
equipment can apply the same concepts in improving their tracking control. Upon
return to the home institution, the fellow will give a seminar describing both
the scholastic and cultural experience.