* 1317382
* EAGER: Sediment Transport in the Wake of a Marine HydroKinetic Turbine
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Kenneth Kiger, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 03/31/2015
* USD 56,920.00

Marine HydroKinetic (MHK) energy is a largely undeveloped renewable energy
source with great potential. Energy recovery from freestream &amp;#64258;ows
such as rivers, tidal passages, and ocean currents may eventually make a
signi&amp;#64257;cant contribution to U.S. power, but we currently lack
understanding of how to recover this energy in an environmentally-safe way.
Because of the highly concentrated nature of the resource and the environmental
sensitivity of most, if not all, of the high-energy-density sites, successful
recovery of MHK energy depends critically on &amp;#64257;nding answers to the
most pressing environmental concerns. Speci&amp;#64257;cally, we do not yet
understand how the operation of MHK devices alters the local &amp;#64258;ow
environment and resulting sediment dynamics, nor do we have the methods to
quantify these effects. Redistribution of sea &amp;#64258;oor sediment by the
wake of the turbine or its support structure could potentially change the
character of the benthic ecosystem. Resuspension of sediment may reintroduce
contaminants that had otherwise settled out of the freestream, and the momentum
de&amp;#64257;cit in the wake of the turbine could lead to enhanced deposition.
For marine hydrokinetics to become a viable energy resource in the U.S. and the
rest of the world, we must understand the environmental effects of these
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this EAGER project, Laboratory-scale
demonstration experiments will be performed on models of MHK turbines to model
the different environments where MHK energy recovery is currently being
evaluated. A novel two-phase particle image velocimetry (PIV) technique
developed at UMD will be used to quantify the suspended load dynamics of both
the carrier &amp;#64258;uid and the sediment particles. Bed pro&amp;#64257;ling
will be used to assess changes in the local erosion and deposition. The long-
term of the PIs is to characterize and quantify the two-phase &amp;#64258;ow-
physics of the interaction between the sea &amp;#64258;oor geophysical
environment and the wake of an MHK turbine, with a speci&amp;#64257;c interest
in the redistribution of sediment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work lies in the fundamental
nature of non-equilibrium sediment dynamics that occur as a result of a complex
&amp;#64258;ow characterized by high levels of turbulence and vorticity. First,
the PIs will quantify the effect of the near wake of a MHK turbine on sediment
uplift and transport in laboratory-scale experiments, primarily with the goal to
produce demonstration data that illustrates the capabilities and utility of the
facility and techniques. Based on the enhanced understanding of the relevant
&amp;#64258;ow-physics gained through these experiments, the PIs will start the
initial investigations of the scaling conditions and modeling that will allow
the creation of new models for sediment transport induced by MHK &amp;#64258;ow
&amp;#64257;elds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this work will extend to both the educational and industrial arenas.
The proposed research will enable MHK energy to be assessed in a fair, timely
and ef&amp;#64257;cient manner, over a broad range of potential operational
sites and conditions. Thus, it could open the doors to a new source that could
quickly impact the percentage of renewable energy produced in the United States,
displacing non-renewable and polluting sources.