* 1317047
* Collaborative Research: Comparative morphological analysis of the hand and wrist in Ardipithecus ramidus and Miocene hominoids
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Biren Patel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 63,080.00

The 4.4 million year old fossil species Ardipithecus ramidus may represent one
of the oldest human ancestors, and it holds potentially critical insights into
the initial evolutionary divergence of humans and chimpanzees from their last
common ancestor. Establishing the primitive condition (or 'starting point') for
that divergence would have transformative implications for nearly every aspect
of research on human origins and evolutionary biology. Unexpectedly, the
skeleton of Ar. ramidus has been described as differing from that of the living
apes more than had been predicted - instead resembling that of more primitive
apes from the early Miocene epoch. In particular, some have argued that the hand
and wrist retain features related to cautious climbing and palmigrady (use of an
extended wrist and weight-bearing palm, adapted for moving above branches). Much
of the anatomy, however, has not been examined in a rigorous, quantitative
context, and comparisons with Miocene apes have been limited. The project will
analyze Ar. ramidus and a broad comparative sample of extant primates and fossil
species using three- dimensional (3D) morphometrics to test the hypotheses that:
1) Ar. ramidus used its hands in a manner inconsistent with advanced vertical
climbing, suspension, and/or knuckle-walking as used by living apes; and 2) Ar.
ramidus is a hominin (i.e., more closely related to humans than chimpanzees). If
these hypotheses are upheld, then models of hominin origins cannot assume a
highly suspensory or knuckle- walking ancestor, or one that engaged in vigorous
vertical climbing. Consequently, explanations for many human adaptations would
have to be drastically modified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; All metric data and the
generated 3D digital models of most specimens will be available via a public
online database or provided to museums housing the original material.
Importantly, the 3D models constitute a record of irreplaceable fossils and
skeletal material from several domestic and international institutions. This
award supports early-career scientists, including one Asian American principal
investigator (PI), and one of the co-PIs will foster collaboration between
American and Spanish researchers. Finally, the project provides vital
opportunities for students to learn skills in anatomical imaging and computer
modeling, which are indispensable in the basic sciences and biomedicine.