* 1317237
* Collaborative Research: A Bioarchaeological and Biogeochemical Approach to Understanding the Intersection of Social Identities and Local Biologies in the Context of Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Kelly Knudson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2016
* USD 144,572.00

In the pre-Hispanic Andes, as in many regions, there is a tension between the
relative importance of state and local communities in many aspects of everyday
life. To better understand state-level organization in the Andes and its impact
on lived experiences in the past, this collaborative project will test models of
pluralism versus centralized control in the Middle Horizon (ca. AD 500-1100)
Tiwanaku polity of the South Central Andes. Using the theoretical framework of
?local biologies,? which acknowledges that individuals are shaped by local
environmental factors as well as culturally specific beliefs, this research
project examines the relative role of the Tiwanaku polity in socialization of
children and the formation and maintenance of social identities, like gender and
ethnicity. These questions are addressed through three years of
bioarchaeological and biogeochemical data collection and analysis in Moquegua,
Peru, and Tiwanaku, Bolivia, and at the University of Vermont and Arizona State
University in the United States. The project also will systematically compile a
database of existing information dispersed in archives at multiple institutions
in the United States and abroad. The data generated through this project will
advance the fields of bioarchaeology and archaeological chemistry, as well as
more general understandings of childhood in the past and
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts of this project include the
education and training of students and professionals from the United States,
Peru, and Bolivia. Project members will participate in each stage of the
research process and gain skills allowing them to apply this knowledge to their
own research. More generally, this research provides a long-term perspective on
the complexities of social and biological constructions of childhood,
particularly those impacting child and maternal health. Finally, the project
will integrate diversity into its education and research programs with two
female directors and researchers from four different countries. By creating new
international collaborations and integrating diverse professionals and students
into the research, the project will create a scientific community that reflects
the global population and will train future scholars to thrive in such an
environment.