* 1317138
* Collaborative Research:  Records of Permian Environments and Climate from Mid-Continent Redbeds and Evaporites.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Kathleen Benison, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2015
* USD 72,228.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Records of Permian environments and climate from mid-
continent redbeds and evaporites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michael Soreghan and
Gerilyn Soreghan, University of Oklahoma, EAR-1053018&lt;br/&gt;Kathy Benison,
Central Michigan University,
EAR-1053025&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The Permian Period (~300-250
million years ago) is a time of great change, including an end to the long-term
mountain building that formed the supercontinent Pangaea, the end of a major
continental glaciation, and the prelude to the largest mass extinction in Earth
history. Continental sedimentary rocks, including red-bed siliciclastics and
evaporites, were deposited during the Permian throughout the midcontinental
United States and record major climate change. This research will integrate
sedimentologic and geochemical data from outcrops and cores to interpret
depositional environments and paleoclimate from these mid-upper Permian redbeds
and evaporites. The goal of this research is to determine whether: 1) the mid-
continent was dominated by extensive lakes, including freshwater and saline
perennial as well as saline and acid-saline ephemeral types; (2) regional
climatic changes are faithfully recorded in these strata; and (3) ?redbeds?
record a causative link between iron-rich eolian dust and extremely acid saline
lakes. Understanding these abrupt climatic and environmental changes in the past
improves our ability to test and refine climate models.