* 1317040
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Justin Acheson, Acheson                 Justin         F
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Justin Acheson of University of Wisconsin Madison to conduct a
research project in Biology during the summer of 2013 at The University of Tokyo
in Tokyo, Japan. The project title is "Understanding the Effects of Redox State
in Protein-Protein Electron-Transfer Complexes." The host scientist is Prof.
Hideaki Nojiri.

Electron transfer plays an essential role in the cellular processes of all
living organisms, and in most cases must be achieved by transient protein-
protein interactions. In order to achieve efficient transfer, while deterring
spurious and possibly detrimental interactions, organisms have evolved
interacting partners to share complimentary surfaces as well as redox affinity.
This project probes how the binding affinities are changed as a result of redox
state and reduction in the multi-component enzyme system carbazole 1,
9a-dioxygenase, a member of an important class of enzymes with potential for
bioremediation.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, a relationship will be established between
labs that work to answer similar questions, and lead to further collaborations.
By sharing this experience, the Fellow will encourage students and colleagues to
take opportunities to study abroad, and develop relationships with international
scientists that can greatly flourish throughout their careers.