* 1317105
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Yves Petinot, Petinot                 Yves
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Yves Petinot of Columbia University to conduct a research
project in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering area during the
summer of 2013 at the Institute of Statistical Mathematics in Tokyo, Japan. The
project title is "Hierarchical Language Models for Natural Language Generation
and Web Summarization." The host scientist is Professor Daichi Mochihashi.

This research project aims at developing and evaluating hierarchical models of
natural language that can support the statistical generation of human-readable
sentences, and in particular, of Web gists. Web gists are static, typically
single-sentence long summaries of Web Uniform Resource Locators (URLs). The
project explores statistical and machine learning approaches to automatically
predict how elements of language appear in Web gists. Organically available Web
resources, including hierarchy-based Web directories, are being used as a basis
for learning and experimental validation.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this research project aims at facilitating
the large-scale, efficient and non-biased discovery of information and services
accessible through the Web both by human and machine agents.