* 1317718
* NRI: Small: Understanding neuromuscular adaptations in human-robot physical interaction for adaptive robot co-workers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Jun Ueda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,199,427.00

The goal of this award is to develop theories, methods, and tools to understand
the mechanisms of neuromotor adaptation in human-robot physical interaction.
Human power-assisting systems, e.g., powered lifting devices that aid human
operators in manipulating heavy or bulky loads, require physical contact between
the operator and machine, creating a coupled dynamic system. This coupled
dynamic has been shown to introduce inherent instabilities and performance
degradation due to a change in human stiffness; when instability is encountered,
a human operator often attempts to control the oscillation by stiffening their
arm, which leads to a stiffer system with more instability. The project will
establish control algorithms for robot co-workers that proactively adjust the
contact impedance between the operator and robotic manipulator for achieving
higher performance and stability. This research will 1) understand the
association between neuromuscular adaptations and system performance limits, 2)
develop probabilistic methods to classify and predict the transition of
operator's cognitive and physical states from physiological measures, and 3)
integrate this knowledge into a structure of shared human-robot and demonstrate
the efficacy in a powered lifting device with real-world constraints at vehicle
assembly facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will
benefit the communities interested in the adaptive shared control approach for
advanced manufacturing and process design, including automobile, aerospace, and
military. Such next-generation manufacturing is expected to improve productivity
and reduce assembly time as well as physical burden of assembly line workers.
Research outcomes will be integrated into current courses at both graduate and
undergraduate levels. Students will be recruited from interdisciplinary and
multicultural groups including under-represented groups. K-12 outreach will be
carried out in conjunction with Georgia Tech Student and Teacher Enhancement
Partnership Program and a summer robot camp in a local non-profit association.
An online portal is maintained for dissemination.