* 1317199
* Large Deviation Methods for the Analysis and Design of Accelerated Monte Carlo Schemes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jimmie Doll, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2017
* USD 550,000.00

The main focus of the research program is the use of large deviation ideas for
the design and analysis of accelerated Monte Carlo methods. In addition, the
underlying large deviation theory will be developed where needed. The PIs will
emphasize two classes of problems, which are (i) accelerating the convergence of
an empirical measure to a target stationary distribution and (ii) the estimation
of the probability of a single rare event. In prior work the PIs have initiated
use of the large deviation rate for the empirical measure of a Markov process as
a tool for algorithm analysis. By considering suitable limits of the already
effective parallel tempering algorithm, they developed a new algorithm called
infinite swapping, as well as computationally tractable variants called partial
infinite swapping. The research program involves further theoretical development
of the algorithm and the associated large deviation tools, as well as
applications to challenging problems from materials science. With regard to the
estimation of the probability of a rare event, the PIs will continue to develop
an approach based on large deviations and subsolutions to an associated
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation for the design and analysis of importance
sampling and certain types of branching algorithms. The primary applications
focus of the research program is the study of nanoscale materials. Because their
basic physical and chemical properties can differ significantly from those of
their bulk counterparts, such materials are of substantial practical and
theoretical interest. Understanding how these basic properties are determined by
the atomic-level details involved, an essential element in realizing the
ultimate design potential of these systems, involves overcoming a number of rare
event challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monte Carlo algorithms are one of the
most flexible and useful numerical tools in the applied sciences and
engineering. They are used to solve a broad range of problems, such as
determining thermodynamic properties in models from chemistry and material
science, evaluating equilibrium properties in large scale networks, and in
problems of classification and estimation in Bayesian statistics. However, with
many Monte Carlo algorithms, rare events play a dominant role in determining the
quality and hence usefulness of the resulting numerical approximation. An
important example is the approximation of integrals via Markov chain Monte
Carlo. These applications are very challenging when the distribution has pockets
of significant probability and transitions between these pockets are rare.
Another example is estimation of the probability of a single rare event, such as
unexpectedly large payouts in insurance claims or the transition between
metastable wells in a model from chemical physics. The PIs will develop and
apply methods from large deviation theory, which is the branch of probability
that analyzes and characterizes rare events, to the problem of efficient
algorithm design. They will apply these algorithms to problems of materials
science.