* 1317771
* 2009 Research Infrastructure Improvement Grant
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Yiming Ji, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Cooperative Agreement
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 06/30/2016
* USD 9,029,853.00

Proposal Title: 2009 Research Infrastructure
Improvement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: South Carolina Research
Authority&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The South Carolina 2009 NSF EPSCoR RII proposal
unites Claflin, Clemson, MUSC, SC State University, and USC and presents an
integrated plan to implement a statewide vision that will give South Carolina a
competitive edge in the field of biofabrication ?an emerging ?transforming?
technology ? operationally defined as computer-aided, layer-by-layer deposition
of biologically relevant material with the purpose of engineering functional 3D
tissues and organs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Research Plan to engineer
a 3D vascular tree is divided into five ?thrust? areas. Thrust I focuses on
analysis of structural-functional properties of an authentic (natural) branched
vascular tree. Thrust II focuses on directed differentiation of adult stem cells
into monomer units of vascular cell types, specifically to induce stem cells
isolated from fat tissue to enter a smooth muscle cell lineage. Thrust III
requires functional biomechanical testing of engineered, sequential segments and
comparison to naturally occurring (authentic) branched vascular trees. Thrust IV
is biofabrication of a branched vascular tree; that is to create linear 3-D,
hollow tubular segments representing branches that can be transformed into
branched ?Y? or ?T? vascular units. Thrust V focuses on accelerated tissue
maturation of bioprinted, branched vascular tubes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. A major challenge in tissue
engineering is the ability to maintain viability of large masses of cells or
tissue constructs upon transfer from in vitro culture conditions to in vivo
hosts. Most current efforts focus on rapid fabrication of solid scaffolds, or on
2D and 3D cell biopatterning. Less emphasis has been placed on applying the
principles of developmental biology and the fundamental biological process of
cell and tissue self-assembly. The proposed infrastructure enhancements are
essential components for engineering branched, lumenized tubules that can be
scaled up (industrialized) to assemble in the future a functional, branched
vascular tree, addressing perhaps the greatest obstacle to successful
engineering of tissue and organ replacements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Proposed RII activities will lead to: (1) innovative partnerships for
training a new workforce in an emerging high tech, high impact industry; (2)
dissemination and public education regarding advances and breakthroughs at the
interface of engineering, science, and computation; (3) academic-industrial
collaborations in developing and improving prototype devices for bioprinting,
bioreactors, and biomechanical quantitation; (4) a vanguard position in a new
S&amp;T field that is truly global, unfettered by geographical, cultural and
historic boundaries, with prime opportunities to attract underrepresented groups
into a new field at the cusp of bioengineering, computation and biomedical
science; and (5) opportunities for social sciences and other professional
disciplines to evaluate and integrate ethical, legal, social and economic
implications of ultimately implanting biofabricated replacement tissues and
organs. These considerations highlight the importance of a highly science-
literate, well informed press corps and public in order to understand and fairly
represent multiple sides of complex issues.&lt;br/&gt;