* 1317775
* NRI: Small: Collaborative Research: Learning from Demonstration for Cloud Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Sonia Chernova, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 06/30/2017
* USD 433,351.00

The proposed work seeks to leverage cloud computing to enable robots to
efficiently learn from remote human domain experts - "Cloud Learning from
Demonstration." Building on RobotsFor.Me, a remote robotics research lab, this
research will unite Learning from Demonstration (LfD) and Cloud Robotics to
enable anyone with Internet access to teach a robot household tasks. The value
of this work stems from three aspects. First is the remote system that can learn
task models from a series of remote demonstrations from a single user, focusing
on learning high-level tasks as opposed to low-level motor skills. The second is
the extension of learning from demonstration to multiple teachers. This
represents an important relaxation of a limiting assumption to focus on
evaluating teacher strengths and effectively handling distinct task solutions.
Finally, transparency mechanisms to allow a remote user to develop a correct
mental model about the robot?s learning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long
term goal of this research is to one day make personal robots accessible to
everyday people. The interactive learning framework based on RobotsFor.Me
provides unique opportunities for education and outreach. Thomaz and Chernova
will outreach to K-12 teachers and students by creating an education portal
surrounding RobotsFor.Me containing hands-on workshop curricula. This material
will be integrated with the WPI Frontiers program for middle school students,
and the GT ePDN professional education network for teachers. A key impact on
students at GT and WPI will be direct involvement in this research agenda, and
integration with AI, robotics and HRI courses. Chernova is the Diversity
Coordinator in the Robotics Engineering Program, and faculty advisor for Women
In Robotics Engineering and Women in Technology student groups which will enable
braod exposure. Thomaz mentors the RoboWomen graduate women?s group. Software
components will also be made available as open source and the PIs have a
collaboration plan in place with researchers at Willow Garage, and through
student internships will transfer technology to their labs.