* 1317101
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Jonathan Root, Root                    Jonathan       C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Jonathan Root of Boston University to conduct a research
project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during the summer of 2013
at the Institute of Statistical Mathematics in Tachikawa, Tokyo. The project
title is High Dimensional Pattern Analysis Algorithms Which Can Operate on
General Types of Data. The host scientist is Dr. Kenji Fukumizu.

The problem of understanding intelligence, both biological and artificial, is
one of the most important scientific questions today. A current approach to this
problem is through the topic of learning, or learning from data. The Fellow's
research is in kernel methods with applications to learning theory. More
specifically the work investigates a large dimensional theory for kernel
methods, which has had little theoretical attention. In studying high
dimensional kernel methods, it is reasonable to consider a series of domains of
diverging dimensionality, for which a series of kernels is introduced. Thus this
project considers the behavior of the kernel in the limit as both the
dimensionality of X and the sample size diverge. In doing so, the spectrum
associated to a kernel is studied.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. In addition, the Fellow plans to publish the results of
the reseach in peer-reviewed journals. Moreover, the Fellow will speak on the
research at seminars at Boston University, and other universities upon
invitation.