* 1317702
* NRI: Small: Dynamic Locomotion: From Humans to Robots via Optimal Control
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Emanuel Todorov, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,217,726.00

The objective of this research is to develop algorithms that can make robots and
simulated characters move like humans. A range of dynamic locomotion tasks
including walking, running, getting up and climbing, as well as task variations
such as walking backwards, and concurrent tasks such as holding a cup of water
while walking, will be studied. The approach is based on optimal control theory.
Human movements will be analyzed, and the performance criteria with respect to
which they are optimal will be identified. Algorithms that optimize the same
performance criteria will then be developed.

Intellectual merit: Movement analysis will be based on a new mathematical
framework where inference of performance criteria from observed movements
becomes a convex optimization problem. Control synthesis will exploit new
algorithms for real-time optimization which are able to plan long movement
sequences involving multiple contact events. These algorithms rely on novel
formulations of the physics of contact which are more amenable to numerical
optimization, as well as a new physics simulator which exploits advances in
parallel processing.

Broader impact: This research will change how robots and simulated characters
move. Currently many robotic control systems with the appearance of dynamic
movements are controlled in open loop, or are designed to execute one specific
task. This work will enable robots to express more natural and versatile
movements, as well as make robot programming more automated. The resulting
controllers will also serve as models for human motor control.