* 1317961
* NRI: Small: Additive Manufacturing of Soft Robot Components with Embedded Actuation and Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Paul Krueger, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 640,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new 3D printing/additive
manufacturing process that will allow the direct fabrication from digital
designs of integrated, multi-material devices such as soft robots with embedded
actuators, sensors, and circuitry. The focus of the research will be (1) to
design, prototype, characterize, optimize, and demonstrate the new process, and
(2) to design, model, fabricate, and test an electromagnetic actuator and
capacitive sensor made using the process. A testbed "robot printer" will be
developed, along with control software and process design files. The research
will require a number of technical and scientific advancements to provide the
desired capabilities, including co-deposition of multiple materials in multi-
layered patterns and formation of low-resistance electrical junctions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will lead to a new manufacturing process for soft robots, an emerging class of
devices promising greater safety, better manipulation of delicate and irregular
objects, the ability to squeeze through small openings in search and rescue
operations, etc. The challenge of manufacturing soft robotic components that
include a large number of distributed actuators, sensors, and associated
circuitry can be economically approached by concurrent 3-D printing with two
types of materials: one that is conductive for interconnects, and the other
insulating and flexible. Today's 3-D printing works with one type or the other,
but not both. Overcoming this limitation would be transformative and enable a
wide range of sophisticated, active structures to be readily fabricated. Beyond
robotics, applications of the research include active prosthetics, minimally-
invasive surgical instruments, and smart implants, as well as stretchable and
wearable electronics. Undergraduate and graduate students will be heavily
involved, and a partnership with the Perot Museum of Nature and Science (Dallas,
TX) to develop a semi-permanent display and live demonstrations will expose a
wide public audience to 3-D printing and robotics.