* 1317096
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Eleanor Byler, Byler                   Eleanor
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Eleanor Byler of the University of Washington in Seattle to
conduct a research project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during
the summer of 2013 at the Kavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the
Universe at the University of Tokyo Kashiwa campus in Japan. The project title
is "Mapping the Internal Structure of Galaxies to Study Galaxy Growth and
Evolution." The host scientists are Drs. Masahiro Takada and Kevin Bundy.

Studying the internal structure of galaxies helps us understand the processes
that regulate their growth and evolution. Star formation, gas content, and
internal feedback processes all affect the development of structure within a
galaxy. We would like to map these properties within a galaxy in detail using
the power of spatially resolved spectroscopy, but turning raw spectral
measurements into meaningful physical properties has been done inconsistently
for small samples of galaxies. This work develops tools to uniformly calculate
these properties for the entire galaxy sample, providing robust comparisons and
the statistical significance necessary to meaningfully study the evolution of
galaxies.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the galaxy maps produced this summer will be
used as a part of a citizen science effort for object classification and pattern
identification allowing everyone can share in the experience of scientific
discovery.