* 1317760
* Mechanistic Studies on Quinoline and Other Photoremovable Protecting Groups for Biological Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/23/2012,08/31/2014
* Timothy Dore, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 122,625.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports Professor
Timothy M. Dore at the University of Georgia who will explore the mechanism of
photodeprotection and optimize the sensitivity of photoremovable protecting
groups (PPG) that are sensitive to two-photon excitation (2PE). A host of
spectroscopic techniques will be used to study quinoline and other PPG with
sensitivity to 2PE. These materials have the potential to be used to
photoregulate the action of biological effectors. Optimizing their photochemical
properties for biological applications requires a good understanding of the
photodeprotection reaction mechanism. The study will expand the base of
photoprotecting groups available, as well as carry out photophysical and
photochemical studies aimed at providing an improved understanding of the
mechanism by which the systems operate. The research in this proposal will
enable the development of novel tools and techniques to apply to fundamental
scientific questions in neuroscience, developmental biology, biochemistry,
physiology, and medicinal chemistry.

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program in
the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation, Dr. Timothy M. Dore
will prepare appropriate chemical compounds and understand the photophysical
characteristics that will make them useful in two-photon excitation for precise
3-D control of biological processes. In addition to the broader impact of the
relationship of the work to the biological sciences, the inclusion of
undergraduate researchers is a major strength of the proposal. The
multidisciplinary nature of this research provides an excellent medium to
integrate research and education and to train students to become outstanding
scholars with a depth of understanding of organic chemistry and photochemistry.
Undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented groups, play a
major role in the research. The PI has trained over 25 undergraduates and many
are coauthors on articles and manuscripts and have matriculated into doctoral
programs. The research plan includes the participation of underrepresented
groups in science.