* 1317976
* NRI: Small: Dexterous Manipulation with Underactuated Hands: Strategies, Control Primitives, and Design for Open-Source Hardware
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Aaron Dollar, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,197,571.00

The proposed work will contribute to the fundamental understanding of dexterous
manipulation, especially in how low-dimensional hands that have traditionally
been used for pure grasping tasks can be leveraged for excellent manipulation
capabilities. The PI team will investigate how the passive mechanics of
compliant and underactuated hands can be utilized for manipulation strategies
include vibrational stick-slip, equilibrium point manipulation, and finger
gaiting, as well as develop low-level planning and control schemes to implement
those for a wide range of manipulation movements. This work will lead to the
development of general-purpose robot hands having low-dimensional actuation and
sensing. Furthermore, the focus on design for open-source dissemination through
rapid prototyping techniques will result in novel fabrication strategies in
furtherance of fast innovation in a range of fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
thread of the proposed work is that simple hand designs and control schemes will
be made freely available through an open-source repository. The hands will be
able to be easily and inexpensively fabricated with rapid prototyping
techniques, lower the entry barrier from expense hand hardware and encouraging
continual design improvements. Additionally, the team will kick-start a user
community around those hands through an on-site tutorial at Yale for
approximately 20 students and postdocs from top manipulation research groups.
For the education and outreach component of this proposal, a major thrust
involves enhancing RoboticsCourseWare.org, the PI's open-access repository for
robotics teaching materials, in order to highlight open-source and other
inexpensive hardware platforms for educational purposes. A strong focus on
involving a diverse group of undergraduates and high school students in the
research plan is also highlighted.