* 1317097
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Kevin Yehl, Yehl                    Kevin          M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Kevin Yehl of Emory University to conduct a research project
in Biology during the summer of 2013 at National University of Singapore in
Singapore. The project title is "Correcting Gene Errors by Using a Nanoparticle
Therapy." The host scientist is Dr. Xiaogang Liu.

Nature's ability to selectively edit the genome by cleaving and ligating
portions of messenger RNA (mRNA) is a process termed splicing and enables a
single gene to encode for a diverse set of proteins. This processes increases
the diversity of living systems and is responsible for why complex organisms,
such as humans, can display vast collection of proteins using such a relatively
small number of genes. Although this process is highly regulated, it remains
error prone, and can result in specific types of diseases. This research project
addresses this problem by rationally designing a synthetic spliceosome, a nano-
spliceozyme, through spatially confining the appropriate catalytic units on a
nanoparticle scaffold, which can edit these problematic gene products (mRNA). If
successful, the project may lead to novel therapeutics to treat cancers and
undruggable genetic diseases.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. This experience will initiate future collaborations
between the two labs and also establish future collaborative contacts for the
Fellow. In addition, the Fellow intends to construct a blog, which will be
posted at the home university's chemistry department website and will be updated
bi-weekly during the summer collaboration. Moreover, the Fellow will construct a
publically accessible webpage describing in general terms the research studied
and pictures documenting the summer experience and Singapore culture. Prior to
departure, the fellow mentored Emory undergraduates in preparing the necessary
enzyme for the research project. Also, the Fellow will give a presentation to
the home chemistry department describing the experience. In order to impact the
local community, the Fellow will work with Emory's center for science education
to incorporate their scientific discoveries into local high school and college
curriculums.