* 1317749
* NRI: Small: Robotic Scouts: Augmenting Human Perception for Underground Rescue
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* William Whittaker, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 08/31/2016
* USD 608,000.00

Robots are potential tools for life saving in underground rescue operations like
mine disasters. Human rescuers are thwarted by roof falls, explosion dangers,
quality of air, visibility through smoke and dust, mental stress and physical
endurance. The inability of human rescuers to cover sufficient distance in a
short time often has fatal consequences for accident victims. Robots which
autonomously scout ahead of human rescuers and summarize environmental
information can greatly enhance situational awareness, enabling teams to push
forward without delay. This proposal envisions immersive, robotically-created 3D
models, fused from many sensor sources and created through smoke, dust, mud,
flood and fire. These expansive models provide rescuers with visual clarity that
are uncorrupted by environmental condition. Illumination artifacts, sensor noise
and errors are removed by fusion and intelligent view planning of radical new
modalities including LIDAR, RADAR, multispectral imaging and actively-
illuminated RGB sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the world has often been
captivated by high-visibility mine accidents, robots are tangible tools with
visible results that have the opportunity to become the centerpiece of any
rescue effort. The disrupting effect of the first trapped miner found and human
life saved by a rescue robot would inspire countless people to appreciate the
evolving role of science and technology in our lives. Prior underground robotics
work by this team have generated considerable press and initiated acceptance of
robotic technology in even the most change-adverse industries. The investigators
will continue to push for robots through media appearances, lab and mine tours
for school children and live demonstrations at science museums. This project
will support education at all levels, which includes supporting postdoctoral and
graduate research in robotics at CMU, employing undergraduate REU interns, and
developing curriculum for the Mobile Robot Design course at CMU. Contributions
from this research will impact automation in industries ranging from underground
production to civic inspection, and defense.