* 1317104
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Tyler Massaro, Massaro                 Tyler          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds Tyler J. Massaro of The University of Tennessee, Knoxville to
conduct a research project in the Math and Physical Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia. The project title
is "How to best use resources to mitigate devastating bushfires." The host
scientist is Dr. Daniel Spring.

In severe weather conditions there is potential for devastating wildfires to
occur. Early detection and response increase the chances of preventing such
fires, but minimal research has been done on the optimal allocation of resources
between surveillance and response. This project develops analytical methods and
numerical optimization models for determining investments in surveillance and
response infrastructure that minimize the total costs of preventing fires from
becoming a serious detriment to local economies and ecosystems.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this project aims to immediately benefit
fire-pacted communities in Australia and elsewhere by supporting local fire
management with ecologically sound, economically feasible surveillance and
response strategies.