* 1317981
* NRI: Small: Reflex approximation of optimal control for an energy-efficient bipedal walking platform
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Andy Ruina, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 999,912.00

The broad research goal of this project is to better understand the mechanics,
balance, and energetics of bipedal walking. The first specific goal is to
design, build and test a two-legged walking 'platform', a waist-down robot, and
its computer controller. One can think of this platform as a legged Segway, for
use by others putting on robotic upper bodies with arms and heads. The goal is
to match the robustness of existent bipedal robots but with no need for
electrical cords or hydraulic tubes and with approximately a 90 percent
reduction in energy use. This will be achieved by the development and use of a
reflex-based controller that minimizes the needed sensor bandwidth and on-board
computation. The second goal is to advance the theories of walking balance and
energetics including, especially, basic models for understanding the tradeoffs
between robustness, versatility, energy efficiency, sensor accuracy and motor
size. Deliverable outcomes include a demonstrable robot with a new 'reflex-
based' controller, public access to complete design and control information,
basic design formulas for the fundamental design trade-offs, student design and
research experience, and inspiring demonstrations for public
viewing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, robots based on this platform
design could replace wheel and tread based systems used for, and proposed for
use for, service robotics. The advantages of legs over wheels include a more
anthropomorphic look, for human interaction, and, ultimately with further
development, the ability to function on rough terrain. The basic theories of
balance and energetics developed in this work will add insight concerning human
walking, ultimately helping with the diagnosis and remediation of human
disabilities, including aiding the design of assistive and prosthetic devices.
The hands-on development work will educate and inspire engineering students
working on the project. The demonstrations and demonstration videos will serve
as an inspiration to those considering engineering careers.