* 1317214
* NRI: Small: Collaborative Research: Don't Read my Face: Tackling the Challenges of Facial Masking in Parkinson's Disease Rehabilitation through Co-Robot Mediators
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Ronald Arkin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 587,987.00

The overarching scientific goal of this project is two-fold: (1) to develop a
robotic architecture endowed with moral emotional control mechanisms, abstract
moral reasoning, and a theory of mind that allow corobots to be sensitive to
human affective and ethical demands, and (2) to develop a specific instance of
the architecture for a co-robot mediator between people with "facial masking"
due to Parkinson's disease (PD) that reduces their ability to signal emotion,
pain, personality and intentions to their family caregivers, and health care
providers who often misinterpret the lack of emotional expressions as
disinterest and an inability to adhere to treatment regimen, resulting in
stigmatization. To tackle these problems, the project brings together two
roboticists with extensive prior experience in robot ethics and modeling
emotions as well as implementing them in integrated autonomous robotic systems.
The robotics expertise is combined with that of an expert in early PD
rehabilitation and daily social life. The project will build on extensive
software, hardware and data set resources, including complex robotic control
architectures with ethical control mechanisms, personality and emotion models,
and affect and natural language capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general
expected outcome of the project is an architecture for co-robots that can be
adapted to a great variety of health care scenarios in an effort to enrich and
dignify already stressed and stigmatized relationships between humans. The
project also includes novel educational efforts such as a course in occupational
therapy robotics as well as significant K?12 outreach through the Tufts Centers
for STEM Diversity and for Engineering Education and Outreach, as well as
various important community and public activities such as presentations on
health care robotics to focus and patient groups.