* 1317310
* Improving Retention in Engineering by Incorporating Applications into Freshman Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Mark Daniels, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,660,000.00

This project is being supported under a special funding focus for STEP,
"Graduate 10K+," an activity of the National Science Foundation, supported in
part by donations from the Intel Foundation and the GE Foundation, to stimulate
comprehensive action at universities and colleges to help increase the annual
number of new B.S. graduates in engineering and computer science by 10,000 over
the next decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the University of Texas at Austin (UT
Austin), the most common reason for which first-year students withdraw from
engineering is failure in freshman calculus courses. To address this barrier to
retention, the project is providing a design-based context for learning in the
freshman calculus sequence by development and implementation of engineering
experiences that target key mathematical concepts with which students typically
struggle. The goal of this project is to decrease failure rates in the
redesigned first-year calculus courses by 50 percent, raising first-year
retention by 100 students annually to 94 percent, and increasing the number of
engineering graduates from the Cockrell School of Engineering at UT Austin by
110 per year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies
in the transformed recitation sections of the freshman calculus sequence that
are being developed based on evidence-based practices. At full scale-up of the
program, a total of 1000 engineering students are enrolled in the transformed
recitation sections of freshman calculus classes. Course modules are being
developed through collaborative efforts between engineering and mathematics
faculty, while a Fellow in Engineering Education, mathematics teaching
assistants, and engineering learning assistants implement the transformed
recitations. The recitation sections, which engage students in solving design-
based engineering problems by applying the concepts being taught in the calculus
course, are using a combination of self-paced, online instructional materials
and active, instructor- and peer-facilitated, team-based activities. Students
view online background information about engineering challenges and work basic
problems prior to class, then solve additional problems and discuss design
implications in their recitation sections. The design-based engineering problems
also are being incorporated into subsequent fundamental engineering courses
including Statics, Dynamics, and Transport Phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's broader impacts are being realized in the comprehensive dissemination
of the transformed freshman calculus model and course material to universities
in the University of Texas System, UTeach replication sites, and other
institutions. In addition, the UTeachEngineering program is adopting the
material in the curriculum for the year-long high school course "Engineering
Your World," which has been adopted by more than 100 schools.