* 1317815
* NRI: Small: Collaborative Planning for Human-robot Science Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Gaurav Sukhatme, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 09/30/2017
* USD 482,252.00

This project envisions the future of scientific exploration as a collaborative
endeavor between human scientists and autonomous robotic systems. The key
challenge to materializing this vision lies in combining the expert knowledge of
the scientist with the optimization capabilities of the autonomous system. The
scientist brings specialized knowledge and experience to the table, while the
autonomous system is capable of processing and evaluating large quantities of
data. This research leverages these complementary strengths to develop a
collaborative system capable of guiding scientific exploration and data
collection by integrating input from scientists into an autonomous learning and
planning framework. This is achieved by combining probabilistic planning with
inverse reinforcement learning to integrate human input and prior knowledge into
a unified optimization framework in the context of scientific exploration. The
project team is validating the approach in the challenging domain of autonomous
underwater ocean monitoring. This domain is particularly well suited for the
testing of human-robot collaboration due to the limited communication available
underwater and the necessary supervised autonomy capabilities. By integrating
feedback from the human user into an algorithmic planning framework, the goal is
to improve the efficiency of scientific data collection and gather data about
phenomena that were previously outside the reach of scientific investigation.
The use of autonomous vehicles for scientific data collection is becoming
increasingly prominent; however, the research community lacks a foundational
understanding of the interactions between scientists and autonomous vehicles.
This work focuses on principled methods for integrating human input into
algorithmic optimization techniques moving towards the goal of supervised
autonomy for robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to
change the way scientific data are collected through the development of a
foundational framework for human-robot scientific collaboration. Such a
framework is expected to have broad implications throughout the fields of human-
robot interaction and artificial intelligence. The proposed research is being
integrated into the robotics and computer science curriculum at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels. It is also being utilized for K-12 robotics
outreach programs in Los Angeles. The algorithms created in this research are
transitioned to field tests and operations via ongoing collaborations with the
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI) and the Southern California
Coastal Ocean Observing System (SCCOOS).