* 1317477
* NRI: Small: Magnetic Mobile Micro-Robotic Swarms using Smart Magnetic Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Metin Sitti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 800,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop methods for modeling, design
and control of a large number of magnetic mobile micro-robots for a given
specific application. Here, micro-robots are proposed to be made of novel smart
magnetic composites for remote, parallel magnetic actuation and control in two
dimensions and three dimensions in small confined spaces such as inside the
human body, a micro-fluidic chip, and small desktop workspaces. The research
will result in methods which are general enough to apply across all magnetic
micro-robotic systems and that can be exploited in diverse applications.
Deliverables include a catalog of fundamental modeling, analysis, design and
fabrication tools, demonstration and validation via hardware, documentation of
research results, and engineering student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide an opportunity to create
new micro-robotic systems for use in health-care, microfluidic bio-devices,
tissue engineering, programmable matter, and desktop micro-manufacturing
applications. The results will be disseminated to allow the creation of
commercial micro-robotic devices for medical, bioengineering and micro-
manufacturing applications. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will
benefit through classroom instruction and involvement in the research. The
research results of the project will be presented to children, K-12 students,
K-12 teachers, IEEE student members, and college students through public
lectures. The achievements of the project will be also exhibited in science
museums for educating the public and children on micro-robotics.