* 1317034
* Learning Algebra and Methods for Proving (LAMP)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* David Yopp, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 09/30/2016
* USD 370,746.00

The Learning Algebra and Methods for Proving (LAMP) project tests and refines a
hypothetical learning trajectory and corresponding assessments, based on the
collective work of 50 years of research in mathematics education and psychology,
for improving students' ability to reason, prove, and argue mathematically in
the context of algebra. The goals of LAMP are: 1) to produce a set of evidence-
based curriculum materials for improving student learning of reasoning, proving,
and argumentation in eighth-grade classrooms where algebra is taught; 2) to
produce empirical evidence that forms the basis for scaling the project to a
full research and development project; and 3) to refine a set of instruments and
data collection methods to support a full research and development project. LAMP
combines qualitative and quantitative methods to refine and test a hypothetical
learning trajectory for learning methods of reasoning, argumentation, and proof
in the context of eighth-grade algebra curricula. Using qualitative methods and
quantitative methods, the project conducts a pilot study that can be scaled up
in future studies. The study produces an evidence-based learning trajectory and
appropriate instruments for assessing it. &lt;br/&gt;Over the past two decades,
national organizations have called for more attention to the topics of proof,
proving, and argumentation at all grade levels. However, the teaching of
reasoning and proving remains sparse in classrooms at all levels. LAMP will
address this critical need in STEM education by demonstrating ways to improve
students' reasoning and argumentation skills to meet the demands of college and
career readiness. &lt;br/&gt;This project promises to have broad impacts on
future curricula in the United States by creating a detailed description of how
to facilitate reasoning and argumentation learning in actual eighth-grade
classrooms. At present, a comprehensive understanding of how reasoning and
proving skills develop alongside algebraic thinking does not exist. Traditional,
entirely formal approaches such as two-column proof have not demonstrated
effectiveness in learning about proof and proving, nor in improving other
mathematical practices such as problem-solving skills and sense making. While
several studies, including studies in the psychology literature, lay the
foundation for developing particular understandings, knowledge, and skills
needed for writing viable arguments and critiquing the arguments of others, a
coherent and complete set of materials that brings all of these foundations
together does not exist. The project will test the hypothetical learning
trajectory with classrooms with high proportions of Native American students.