* 1317103
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Mohammad Fanaei, Fanaei                  Mohammad
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,240.00

This action funds Mohammad Fanaei of West Virginia University to conduct a
research project in Engineering-Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
during the summer of 2013 at the University of Sydney in Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia. The project title is "Increasing Bandwidth Efficiency in
Distributed Sensing Using Limited-Feedback Strategies." The host scientist is
Prof. Abbas Jamalipour.

One of the main limitations of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) is their
stringent energy and bandwidth constraints. This project reduces the amount of
required feedback information communicated from the central entity of a WSN,
called the fusion center (FC), to distributed sensors, using an adapted form of
limited-feedback strategies. In particular, the Fellow and host are designing
channel-aware, adaptive power-allocation schemes for linear distributed
estimation in WSNs based on limited feedback of forward channel state
information (CSI) from the FC to local sensors. Different codebook-design
approaches for the quantization of the CSI vector space are being investigated
and the effects of this quantization on the estimation performance of various
linear distributed estimators are being studied, measured by the minimum mean-
squared error, estimation outage probability, and estimation diversity.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society and culture. These activities meet the NSF goal to
educate for international collaborations early in the career of its scientists,
engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S. scientific
workforce. Furthermore, this Fellowship provides the PI with an opportunity to
publicize the high-performance grid-computing infrastructure developed by the
Valenti reseach group at West Virginia University. The researchers in the fields
of information theory, communications theory, and wireless networking can
remotely have access to this infrastructure and run their computationally-
intensive simulations in parallel. The Fellow also intends to conduct outreach
in the communications theory and wireless networking research community to
introduce this infrastructure, both at the host institution and at other
research laboratories and regional institutions.