* 1317506
* Experimentally testing the roots of poverty and violence:  Changing preferences, behaviors, and outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Christopher Blattman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 02/28/2014
* USD 104,872.00

It is widely believed that poor and unemployed young men are more likely to
fight, riot and rebel. In poor countries like Liberia, governments are
especially fearful of the young, urban poor, who may be especially vulnerable to
armed recruitment, rioting, or election violence. In addition to increased
security, the most common policy recommendation is cash transfer and employment
programs. This study uses a field experiment with high-risk young men in Liberia
to answer four questions. First, is there a causal relationship between poverty
and violence? While there are many theoretical rationales, microlevel evidence
is sparse and inconclusive. Second, do poverty and violence have common
behavioral roots? A growing literature argues that present bias, impulse control
and lack of discipline can lead to poverty. But violent acts, both instrumental
and emotional, may also be directly influenced by time preferences and self-
control. If so, any poverty-violence correlation would be partly spurious.
Third, can preferences like present bias and non-cognitive skills such as
impulse control and conscientiousness be modified, thereby reducing poverty and
social instability? Fourth, how do preferences and non-cognitive skills shape
economic and political behavior, and how best to measure them?surveys,
psychological tests, or incentivized games?

This study builds on two prior experiments that show (a) a reduced-form
relationship between employment programs and violence; and (b) correlation
between time preferences and both poverty and violence. They cannot, however,
conclusively answer our questions. To test these, this study examines two cross-
cutting interventions with 1000 poor urban street youth: (i) an 8-week
Transformation Program (TP) using group cognitive behavior therapy; and (ii) an
unconditional cash transfer. A random 25% of youth receive each individual
intervention and a further 25% receive both; 25% remain as an untreated control
group. Short-term evidence from a 100-person pilot of this intervention bears
out our predictions. While the small sample results are seldom statistically
significant, the directions and magnitudes are promising. The TP increases
patience, impulse control, and self-discipline (measured through incentivized
games as well as surveys); it increases investment and reduces poverty; and it
lowers crime, political violence and interpersonal aggression. The cash transfer
reduces poverty as well as aggression, and provides cautious support for two of
the main causal mechanisms linking poverty to violence.

Intellectual merit: Patience, impulsivity and discipline are thought to be fixed
in adults. We will provide experimental evidence of large and sustainable change
through a real-world program. Second, in addition to showing these traits are
malleable, their exogenous manipulation would provide clear evidence of a causal
effect of time preferences on economic decision-making and poverty. The real-
world nature of the experiment is important, as most aggression research is
psychological, lab-based, and with US and European populations. Third, the
psychological foundations of political violence are surprisingly weak or
outdated, based largely on aggression research from the 1930s. The results will
expand the psychological understanding of aggression, challenge conventional
theories of political violence, and help initiate a field of behavioral
politics, likely the first to examine violence. Fourth, there is little
convincing evidence on the causal effect of poverty on violence, almost none of
it experimental. This study tests this link directly, and compares interventions
rooted in competing theories. Finally, there is little evidence comparing the
performance of preference and non-cognitive skill measures from surveys,
psychological tests, and incentivized games, and little comparison of
neuropsychology and economics measures.

Broader impacts: First, the study will have a large impact on the design and
targeting of youth employment and stabilization programs worldwide, especially
in Africa and fragile states. Evidence on the efficacy and efficiency of
unconditional cash transfers to such a high-risk group is novel and important.
The transformation program will be manualized and publicly available online for
ease of replication elsewhere. The intervention is designed to be highly
scalable and inexpensive, and is a candidate for scaling-up in Liberia?a plan
already in discussion with the government and NGOs. Second, the study will be an
opportunity to provide research training and field experience to two graduate
students, pre-graduate students, Liberian university graduates and masters
students, and several members of the government and non-profit sectors in
Liberia. Third, the comparative analysis of neopsyhological and economic
measures of preferences and non-cognitive skills, as well as the comparison of
survey, psychological and incentived measures, will be a broad public good
informing questionnaire design and measurement across the behavioral sciences.