* 1317474
* Collaborative Research: Cooperation and Competition at Crystal River
* SBE,BCS
* 08/31/2012,08/31/2014
* Victor Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 6,042.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Thomas Pluckhahn, Victor
Thompson, and Brent Weisman will conduct archaeological research at the Crystal
River site, a mound complex on the Gulf Coast of Florida dating primarily to the
Woodland period (ca. 1000 B.C. to A.D. 1000). Crystal River has long been noted
as one of the most important sites in North America, but remains poorly
understood due to the limited scope and under-reporting of previous
investigations. The research objective is to examine the dynamic between
cooperation and competition in the formation of early village societies. This
topic has rarely been a focus of concerted study, although notions regarding
competition and cooperation are implicit in archaeological theories of human
societies. In the few instances where the topic has been directly addressed, the
focus has primarily been on chiefdoms and states, where competitive and
cooperative practices were already institutionalized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will evaluate spatial and temporal variation in three categories of
material remains: prestige goods, public architecture, and feasting debris. The
goal is to determine whether these remains are spatially restricted and
temporally punctuated (indicating greater competition) or open-access and
regularly scheduled (indicating greater cooperation.) The project will employ
two methods for accomplishing a fine-grained study of these remains, while
respecting the need for site conservation: 1) comprehensive reanalysis of the
collections from previous investigations; and, 2) systematic, minimally invasive
new field work to both correct the biases and limited scope of previous studies.
The field investigations include geophysical survey, coring, and test
excavations. Laboratory analyses include a variety of archaeological dating
techniques, as well as studies to determine season of occupation and rate of
deposition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributes to the understanding
of the dynamic between competition and cooperation in human societies---one of
the foremost issues in the social sciences. The project also contributes to the
study of social complexity through focused study of early villages, precursors
to better-studied ranked and stratified societies. Finally, the project
contributes to the understanding of Crystal River and related sites of the
Woodland period on the Gulf Coast, an area and time period marked by one of the
most distinctive, yet least understood, material culture complexes in the
prehistory of North America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has
broader impacts in education, within academia and beyond. Undergraduate and
graduate training are given priority; this training includes both specialized
techniques and traditional archaeological methods. Affiliations with the Florida
Public Archaeology Network and the Public Archaeology program at the University
of South Florida provide a ready-made infrastructure for the involvement of the
general public in the research, and a framework for the training of graduate
students in the theory and method of public archaeology. Finally, the insights
that will be generated through the proposed study will be applied to enhancing
on-site museum displays, signs, and brochures, better interpreting for the
general public one of the nation's most important archaeological sites.