* 1317073
* Social Dynamics:  Leveraging Online Social Networks to Shape Science Identities and Support Learning Science Concepts in Middle School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Lynn Tran, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2017
* USD 449,998.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social Dynamics is an exploratory project to
investigate how face-to-face teaching leveraging the use of an online social
network learning platform (SNLP) can increase middle school students' science
learning and enhance their development of contextual identities related to
science. Units from the recently developed and tested Ocean System Sciences
(OSS) curriculum are the basis for the instruction. All six teachers receive
professional development in the first summer and teach the OSS in year one.
Testing is carried out with the same teachers in years two and three. The
design-based research generates evidence about how teachers can use a Facebook-
like social network platform, My Big Campus, which is currently used by school
districts nationwide to complement face-to-face classroom instruction. The
project investigates the ways engagement in an SNLP supports student science
identity development and learning; the instructional practices that support
engagement in an SNLP; how teachers use these practices to support learning and
shape student science identities; and the relationships that exist between
student science identities and learning within the face-to-face and SNLP
contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To disassociate the impacts of the SNLP and
identity on learning, two teachers from Oakland Unified School District use only
face-to-face instruction. One only uses science learning strategies; the other
employs identity strategies in addition to the science learning strategies. In
San Diego, two sets of two teachers use both face-to-face and SNLP - one set
using only science learning strategies and the other set using both science
learning and identity strategies. Teachers are assigned randomly to the science
only and science plus identity implementations and will be separated during
professional development. Twelve students, who exhibit online behaviors that
stand out, are selected for in-depth interviews. The analyses requires
sophisticated data tracking systems that allow for student scores to be linked
over the period of one year, and students to be linked to their teachers over
the course of one year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project should contribute to
the scarce research about the effectiveness of the use of social media in
science instruction.