* 1317867
* EAGER: Peptide affinity membranes for binding influenza viruses: H1N1 and H5H1
* ENG,CBET
* 12/03/2012,08/31/2014
* Muhammad Karim, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 77,251.00

0943424&lt;br/&gt;Karim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This EAGER
proposal is a high risk high gain proposal. Recent outbreak of H1N1 flu and the
worldwide spread of H5N1 avian influenza virus and its infection to human beings
has raised a global concern about these viruses to cause a pandemic. According
to the World Health Organization report of May 20, 2009, 41 countries have
confirmed 10,243 cases of H1N1 flu with 80 fatalities. In the US, these numbers
are 5,469 and 6, respectively. A treatment or a rapid vaccination process for
H1N1 and H5N1 is urgently needed. The proposal addresses this issue in this
transformative idea to develop a peptide-based membrane system so that flu
viruses can be captured from either a cell culture broth or from human blood.
The main goal is to develop a cell culture-based vaccine production method,
which uses a peptide-based purification step. The peptide is developed using the
available genomic information regarding hemagglutinin (HA) surface protein of
flu viruses. We hypothesize that for a given virus, an affinity peptide with a
high specificity could be selected by using a screening tool. Moreover, with the
chemical attachment of the affinity peptide group to a membrane surface, this
affinity matrix could be used to repeatedly bind and elute the specific type of
virus. We further hypothesize that the virus surface protein plays a significant
role on the virus binding process. Therefore, an affinity membrane designed
based on a specific strain of influenza virus may be used to bind other viruses
which have high homogeneity to this virus. This research will be helpful in
better understanding the role of the virus surface protein on the affinity
binding process. A term of 'homogeneity' is usually used to describe how similar
two influenza virus strains are. By choosing several influenza viruses with
different homogeneity, the effect of the surface protein on the virus binding to
an affinity membrane could be characterized. This research will answer the
question regarding how sensitive the effect of the homogeneity is on the binding
of a virus to a given affinity membrane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since microporous
affinity membrane combines both the advantages of the microfiltration and resin
based affinity chromatography, the virus production and purification process
could be significantly simplified. This is specifically suitable for the cell
culture based influenza virus vaccine production process. By carefully choosing
an appropriate membrane pore size, cells removal and virus purification could be
achieved within one step. Cell cultures will be flown through one side of a
microporous affinity membrane. During this period, cells and cell debris will be
rejected by the membrane pores while viruses and proteins and/or DNA and other
small biological components will migrate inside the membrane pores. Viruses will
then be specifically bound by these functional peptide groups grafted on the
membrane pore surface while protein, DNA and other biological components will
pass through the membrane pores. After washing, viruses with high purity can be
eluted from the bounded membranes. This simplification of the purification
process may speed up the H1N1 and H5N1 vaccine development, commercialization
and production process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Completion of the
proposed studies will have significant impact and possible applications in H1N1
and H5H1 flu intervention. The proposed new peptide-based membrane will simplify
the virus purification process and it may speed up the vaccine development,
commercialization and production process. The prepared membrane may also be used
in the virus diagnosis by quick collection and purification of virus samples.
Further, this method may be extended to diagnose other viruses, such as the West
Nile virus. Further, a possible clinical device may be developed which can
specifically remove viruses from human blood. By circulating human blood through
a membrane device containing affinity membranes for a specific flu virus, these
viruses can be made to bind to the membrane surfaces thus reducing the overall
virus population in the blood; this device may be then combined with some other
intervention methods such as using TAMIFLU. This project will involve
multidisciplinary researchers from Chemical Engineering and TTU Health Sciences
Center. One of the educational goals of the project is to train one post-doc and
one PhD student in the cutting edge research of vaccine and peptide-based
membrane technology. An undergraduate student will be selected from well
publicized outreach programs at TTU, e.g. Engineering Outreach Center, and
McNair Scholars Program. The UG student will then be encouraged to go to
graduate school and have a career in bio related field. The PI has significant
experience in attracting female and minority candidates to his research group.
Outreach to local schools will be done through funded programs such as Science
it's a Girl's Thing, Pre-college Engineering, Teacher Training Workshop, and
Engineering Outreach Mentor.