* 1317331
* Oceanographic Instrumentation, RV Blue Heron, 2013
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2015
* Richard Ricketts, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2015
* USD 16,975.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation for the R/V
Blue Heron, an 86 foot Coastal vessel owned by the University of Minnesota and
operated by the Large Lakes Observatory as part of the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large Lakes Observatory operates the largest
university-owned research vessel on the Great Lakes, the R/V Blue Heron. Built
in 1985 for fishing on the Grand Banks, the Blue Heron was purchased by the
University of Minnesota in 1997, sailed from Portland, Maine, up the St.
Lawrence Seaway to Duluth, and converted into a limnological research vessel
during the winter of 1997-98. She is outfitted with state-of-the-art research
equipment, has berthing for 11 crew and scientists, and can operate 24 hours per
day for up to 21 days in between port calls. The Blue Heron is part of the
University National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), and is available
for charter by research scientists on any of the Great Lakes. In 2012, the
vessel completed 65 funded days where 26 (40%) were for NSF. In 2013, Blue Heron
will sail 55 days. 24 of these (44%) will be for
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic instrumentation requested in this
proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;Underway system upgrade $16,975&lt;br/&gt;Satellite
phone network $1,596&lt;br/&gt; $18,571&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is
under criterion two of the Proposal Guidelines. They provide infrastructure
support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in
support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually
undergo separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The
acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-
funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.