* 1317143
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Computational Geometry Problems in Polygonal Domains
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Haitao Wang, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2017
* USD 337,964.00

Tremendous progress has been made in the field of computational geometry in the
last few decades. Efficient algorithms have been developed to solve geometric
problems. However, there are many problems in computational geometry that do not
yet have good algorithms or even do not have any algorithmic solutions. The main
goal of this project is the development of new fundamental techniques in
algorithms for solving those geometric problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to investigate a particular group of problems in computational
geometry: problems in polygonal domains (or polygons with holes) in the plane.
These problems are particularly interesting and fundamental because they model
many geometric problems in the plane. The specific problems include computing
shortest paths measured by Euclidean or other metrics, minimum link paths, other
geometric paths, geodesic Voronoi diagrams, visibility polygons, geodesic
diameter and center, polygon decomposition, facility locations, and geometric
data structures, etc. The goal is to develop new algorithmic techniques for
solving these problems efficiently. This research will bring diverse
methodologies from other areas such as discrete mathematics, graph theory,
operations research, combinatorial optimization, computational complexity, data
structures, etc. The project is expected to greatly improve our understanding of
the geometric structures of the problems in polygonal domains and to produce new
algorithmic tools for solving these problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will potentially enrich the area of computational geometry by
introducing new techniques. The algorithms and observations obtained from the
project will also benefit computer science and other related disciplines where
geometric algorithms are widely used. Another important part of this project is
to train graduate students to practice in doing research, especially in
developing algorithms for solving problems in computational geometry.