* 1317849
* NRI: Small: Collaborative Research: Rethinking Motion Generation for Robots Operating in Human Workspaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Lydia Kavraki, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 923,140.00

This proposal develops a new motion planning paradigm for enabling robots to
work in the presence of humans or cooperatively with humans as co-workers. The
paradigm is intended to be fast, reactive, and responsive to the requirements
that arise from human-robot interaction. It involves the definition and
subsequent implementation of constraints that encode properties of human-aware
paths and can be translated to cost functions characterizing path quality. New
motion planners are proposed. The operation of these planners is guided by
constraints and their corresponding cost functions. The planners produce paths
compatible with a given set of constraints. A mechanism to incorporate user
feedback on the relative importance of constraints is provided and semi-
autonomous operation of the robots is considered. Importantly, the planners are
embedded in a novel hybrid-systems framework that allows a robot to
automatically switch among planners, and hence behaviors, in order to take into
account different constraints and user preferences that arise in the context of
semi-autonomous operation. Besides the actual implementation of the planners on
specific platforms, this project also disseminates all developed libraries and
planners. Compatibility will the Robot Operating System (ROS) is provided for
wide adoption, while tutorials at major conferences are planned. The training of
graduate students and female undergraduate students are a central focus of this
proposal.