* 1317384
* SusChEM: Workshop on Supercritical Fluids and Energy, Brazil, October 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Erdogan Kiran, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 12/31/2014
* USD 49,300.00

This award is being co-funded by the Office of International and Integrated
Activities. The primary objective of this workshop on Supercritical Fluids and
Energy is to create a unique opportunity to (1) Review the state of
Supercritical Fluid Science and Technology to assess its future potential
utilizations and impact in various areas pertaining to energy; (2) Assess the
bottlenecks that are hindering advances towards large scale implementations and
help develop recommendations to facilitate transformation from laboratory to
industrial practice; (3) Identify future research needs and promote
international collaborative research efforts; (4) and Create a platform to
directly engage future generation of researchers, and give them the opportunity
to interact closely with the current leaders in the field and build their
international networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop intends to bring
about 25-30 leading experts as panel members who will provide sound and informed
perspectives on the future directions and the role Supercritical Fluids Science
and Technology can play in several key areas on energy. These will include: (a)
Conversion of biomass to fuels and development of bio-refineries; (b)
Supercritical fluids as working fluids in power generation and refrigeration
cycles; (c) Supercritical fluids in the development or in processing of
materials that impact energy efficiency such as porous insulation materials with
low thermal conductivity, or membranes for fuel cells; and (d) Supercritical
fluids as benign solvents for green chemistry and for sustainable technologies
such as waste minimization, carbon capture and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop also intends to bring about 50 - 60 young scientists to this workshop
who may become the future leaders. The workshop will form a nucleus for new
collaborative efforts and possible multi-national research initiatives. The
workshop will be co-chaired by Erdogan Kiran (Virginia Tech, USA) and Angela
Meireles (University of Campinas, Brazil). The workshop will be held at the
University of Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Brazil is leading in its activity in
bio-based alternative fuels, and as such is a natural location to address the
central topic of Energy. Dr. Flavio C. Albuquerque from PETROBRAS, Brazil will
be serving as an industrial representative in the local organizing committee.
Brazil is also very active in the area of processing of bio-based materials
using supercritical fluids, and will provide the platform to look at the
limitations in transforming bench-top research findings to industrial
implementation.