* 1317469
* Stratospheric and Tropical Influences on the Mid-Latitude Circulation Response to Rising Greenhouse Gases
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Richard Seager, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2018
* USD 661,453.00

This project seeks to understand how increases in global-mean temperature due to
rising greenhouse gas concentrations will affect the jet stream and storm tracks
(the typical paths of midlatitude frontal systems) found in the midlatitudes of
the Northern and Southern Hemisphere. Previous studies of global warming
simulations have found that jet streams and storm tracks in both hemispheres
shift towards their respective poles with rising temperature, but the dynamical
mechanisms for the shifts are not well understood. Moreover, simulations from
different models do not agree as to the magnitude of the shifts. One issue
addressed in this project is the role of stratospheric dynamics in producing the
shifts (particularly in the Northern Hemisphere), and the extent to which
enhanced representation of the stratosphere (more levels in the stratosphere on
the model computational grid, for instance) leads to qualitative differences in
the shifts. A second issue addressed is the extent to which the jet and storm
track shifts in the Southern Hemisphere are influenced by tropical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the work come from the
practical value of an improved understanding of the atmospheric circulation
response to greenhouse gas-induced warming. Shifts in the jet streams and storm
tracks can affect regional climate in the midlatitude, and poleward shifts may
lead to widening of the dry subtropical subsidence belts. The project also seeks
to understand differences in circulation change from different models, and may
help to reduce uncertainty in projections of future climate change. In addition,
the work will support and train a graduate student, thereby providing for the
future work force in this area.