* 1317826
* 2013 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Atmospheric Chemistry; Mount Snow, Vermont; July 28 - August 1, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Steven Brown, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2014
* USD 25,000.00

The 2013 Atmospheric Chemistry Gordon Research Conference (GRC) will take place
at Mt. Snow, VT, July 28-August 2. It will bring together an international group
of atmospheric scientists who specialize in diverse research topics and who
represent research in universities, government laboratories, and private
research institutes. The central objective of the conference is to promote
exchange of information and ideas on topics of contemporary interest in
atmospheric science. The meeting is broad in scope, covering topics such as
climate, air quality, the stratosphere, the biosphere and oceans, and
atmospheric chemical mechanisms. The Gordon Research Conference format provides
a unique combination of intellectual exchange via formal presentations, off-the-
record exchanges from the floor, discussions at the poster sessions and the
casual interactions outside the meeting. The format also encourages participants
to bring their most recent and provocative results to stimulate discussion at
the cutting edge of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2013 Atmospheric
Chemistry GRC will follow in this tradition, and will include sessions on the
following topics: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; * Perspectives on Atmospheric Chemistry
and Climate&lt;br/&gt; * Energy, Emissions and Atmospheric Impacts&lt;br/&gt; *
Nucleation&lt;br/&gt; * Atmosphere Ocean Interactions&lt;br/&gt; * Aerosol
Chemistry and Consequences&lt;br/&gt; * New Directions in Atmospheric
Oxidation&lt;br/&gt; * Anthropogenic Biogenic
Interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this conference has a long
tradition of mentoring young scientists--that is, graduate students and new
post-doctoral scientists--and initiating them into this interdisciplinary field
through both the formal and informal conference activities and the ACCESS
("Atmospheric Chemistry Colloquium for Emerging Senior Scientists") which
immediately precedes the GRC. The contributions of young scientists to the
discussions at GRC will be an integral part of the scientific discourse there.