* 1317268
* PFI: BIC  Shellfish Mariculture in Downeast Maine: Building Innovation Capacity to Diversify Economic Opportunities
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2013,12/31/2015
* Sandra Shumway, University of Maine at Machias
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 12/31/2015
* USD 630,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from the
University of Maine at Machias (the easternmost of the seven campuses in the
University of Maine System) examines opportunities to create new marine
aquaculture jobs and new wealth in east coastal Maine through shellfish research
involving two commercially important species: blue mussels (Mytilus edulis) and
Arctic surfclams (Mactromeris polynyma). Currently, mussels are cultured using
juveniles sourced from the wild where spatial and temporal variation in both
biotic and abiotic conditions does not allow for consistent annual production
schedules. Surfclams are not cultured anywhere at present, and, although present
in the Gulf of Maine, are harvested commercially only in the Canadian Maritimes
where they are dredged hydraulically at depths greater than 20 meters. The
surfclams are flash frozen and only their feet are marketed. The proposed
activities advance knowledge and understanding within the field of shellfish
aquaculture involving the hatchery, nursery, and growout phases of these two
commercial bivalve species that have yet to be produced in shellfish hatcheries
in the U.S. The research effort will yield information critical to other
researchers and commercial businesses about the parameters that affect growth
and survival of each species from early to later life-history stages.

The broader impacts of this research are related to increasing U.S.
competitiveness in the seafood industry. For example, since 1990, U.S. mussel
imports have increased from 2,600 tons to more than 15,000 tons. Over 90% of the
imports come from two countries, New Zealand and Canada, because the domestic
supply is inadequate to keep up with consumer demand. Other impacts involve
mentoring undergraduate students in teaching, training, and learning through
hands-on hatchery and field-based activities that will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups (academic and geographic). The academic-small business
partnership is fundamental to the shellfish research that creates a stronger,
more efficient research infrastructure. As configured, this partnerships will
lead to commercialization activities that are sustainable and compatible with
the cultural heritage and ecological values of downeast Maine. PI Beal (a
Fulbright Scholar) and co-PI Shumway (an Aldo Leopold Fellow) have extensive
experience bridging the gap between industry and academia and will be active in
the project as well as in outreach activities.

Partners at the inception of the project are the lead academic institution,
University of Maine at Machias, a public, undergraduate institution of 1,000
students and 100 employees in eastern Maine; and three primary, small
technology-based business partners: AC, Inc (Beals, ME), the largest wholesale
seafood business in eastern Maine with 23 employees; New DHC Inc. (Machiasport,
ME), a salmon aquaculture company in eastern Maine with 55 employees; and,
Pemaquid Oyster Company, Inc. (Waldoboro, ME), a shellfish aquaculture company
with 6 employees. Other academic and governmental partners include the
University of Connecticut, Department of Marine Sciences (Avery Point, CT); Two
branches of National Oceanic and Atmoshperic Administration (NOAA): National
Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) in Milford, CT; and National Centers for Coastal
Ocean Science (NCCOS) in Charleston, SC.