* 1317731
* PFI: BIC-  Electricity from Bio-Ethanol Powered Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Rongrong Chen, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2016
* USD 599,985.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from
Indiana University/Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) aims to address
challenges of durability, cost, and efficiency in novel anion-exchange-membrane
direct ethanol fuel cell (AEM-DEFC) technology coupled with the optimization of
ethanol fuels to produce holistic, market-valued energy devices and fuel
sources. The biggest limitation for currently commercialized low temperature
fuel cells is the high cost and degradation of membranes and platinum-based
electrocatalysts. AEM-DEFCs have several key advantages over these fuel cells:
(1) faster, more efficient oxygen and ethanol reactions to produce more energy
with less raw material; (2) wider choices of cheaper, non-platinum electrodes;
(3) greater stability of fuel cell components; and (4) increased fuel safety and
portability by using bio-ethanol. Since 2008, the PI's team has innovated and
patented the technology for affordable, highly efficient polymeric electrolyte
membranes and catalysts in anion-exchange-membrane fuel cells. The remaining
challenge for advancing this early-stage technology to the marketplace is
demonstrating its stability and efficiency in a wide range of applications and
fuel types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are to
create technology alliances among partners that build innovation capacity from
the unique multidisciplinary interaction of experts in fuel cell technology and
adjacent fields. The innovation capacity of IUPUI will be increased through the
establishment of integral partnerships to obtain AEM-DEFC component materials,
fuel sources, marketing strategies, and fuels optimization research expertise.
The innovation capacity of the small business partners will be reinforced
through applications for their existing intellectual property by: 1) providing a
new market for bio-ethanol fuel production (Xylogenics, Inc.); 2) expanding
existing market strategies and prototyping and validation processes into fuel
cell technologies (Faraday Technology, Inc.); and 3) refining AEMFC technologies
by addressing the catalyst challenges in addition to membrane development
(Tremont Technology LLC). More broadly, AEM-DEFCs have great potential to
replace combustion-powered generators and rechargeable batteries for remote
military operations and portable electronic applications, respectively, because
of their high efficiency, portability, low-detection (lower heat signature), no
battery recharge, and low cost. The timely development of efficient, durable,
and cost-effective AEM-DEFCs and corresponding bio-ethanol fuels is imperative
to meeting current and future energy demands while reducing operating costs and
military vulnerability through locally-source bio-fuels. Commercialized AEM-
DEFCs will have local impact by revitalizing industrial and rural economies and
global impact by alleviating pressure on non-renewable resources and reducing
greenhouse gas emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the
project are the lead academic institution: Indiana University/Purdue University
Indianapolis, including the Department of Engineering and Technology, the
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and the Richard G. Lugar
Center for Renewable Energy; small technology-based business partners: Faraday
Technology Inc. (Clayton, Ohio), Tremont Technology LLC (Fishers, Indiana), and
Xylogenics Inc. (Indianapolis, Indiana); and other partners in the following
sectors: non-profit--Indiana University Research and Technology Corporation
(Indianapolis, Indiana); government--Indiana Department of Corrections
(Indianapolis, Indiana); and small business--Melon Acres, Inc.(Oaktown,
Indiana).