* 1317210
* PFI: BIC- Innovations in Chemical Vapor Deposited Diamond Crystals and Nanostructured Diamond Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Shane Catledge, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2016
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from the
University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) plans to capitalize on the recent
advances in the synthesis of diamond by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in order
to develop the next generation of diamond-based sensors for extreme environments
and diamond-coatings for higher-power solid state lasers and longer-lasting
biomedical implants. Developments in the synthesis of diamond over the last
three decades have made it possible to grow mono-, poly-, and nano-crystalline
diamond on various surfaces. Combining UAB's existing research expertise and
intellectual property in the synthesis of CVD diamond with the technological-
oriented research to be performed in this project will lead to the development
of 1) novel diamond-based sensors for characterizing materials under extreme
environments; 2) CVD diamond-coated laser media for improved heat dissipation;
and 3) diamond-coated biomedical implants with lifespan extending over thirty
years. This project aims to address the difficulties encountered in and ways to
improve on the adhesion of CVD diamond films on laser media and biomedical
implant materials like stainless steel and cobalt-chrome alloys. The research
will also contribute to the knowledge base on the growth mechanisms of diamond
single crystals as well as on the growth of nanostructured diamond coatings on
metallic and non-metallic substrates.

The broader impacts of this research are enhanced innovative capacities of the
academic institution and the industrial partner companies. The research proposed
in this project will result in diamond crystals with embedded electrical,
magnetic, and stress sensors for applications in extreme conditions of pressures
and temperatures. The increase in lifespan of biomedical implants will improve
the quality of life for millions of Americans and will reduce the need for
revision surgeries. The diamond-coated laser media with minimal loss and high
damage threshold will enable new laser applications in industry and medicine.
UAB postdoctoral scholars, graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from
the exposure they will receive by working in close contact with the industry
personnel. Also, by partnering with Birmingham Business Alliance (BBA), an
economic development organization focused on the economic growth in the seven-
county Birmingham region, this project will have a broader impact in the
nucleation of new businesses in the innovation depot in the downtown Birmingham
area.

Partners at the inception of the project are 1) Lead Institution: University of
Alabama (Department of Physics) and 2) Small Business Partners: Almax easyLab
Inc.(headquartered in Boston, MA); Onyx Optics Inc.(Dublin, CA); and Vista
Engineering & Consulting LLC (Birmingham, AL).