* 1317140
* Ecological determinants of luteal reproductive function
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Kathryn Clancy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 229,643.00

The causes of miscarriage, an often devastating event that occurs not
infrequently in women's reproductive lives, are poorly understood. What is known
is that the luteal phase of early pregnancy (the time of conception and
implantation) is not only critically important to successful reproduction, it
also is the phase which is the first to be suppressed when women experience
stress. This research utilizes an anthropological approach to place female
reproductive functioning and the spectrum of variation in luteal phase biology
between women into an ecological and developmental context, focusing on a human
population under moderate levels of energetic and immune function stress. The
results will illuminate the causal factors relating to human variation in the
luteal phase and the resulting impacts on reproduction, which are poorly
understood.

This project will promote greater understanding by studying the endometrium, the
site of embryo implantation and thus important to luteal phase and miscarriage
research. By focusing on a non-western population in rural Poland, a comparative
perspective is gained which can promote understanding of why American women
experience reproductive disorders more than people in other countries. The
approach places the endometrium in a broader context of the stressors
experienced by women living under variable ecological stressors that may
suppress its ability to support pregnancy. It also is the first-ever study of
women?s systemic reproductive functioning over an entire menstrual cycle, since
it includes daily urine collection for analysis of reproductive hormones and
stress biomarkers, alongside ultrasound of the endometrium, demographic data,
and bodily measurements of the women in this population.

This population-level research therefore will characterize the relationship
between the ovaries and endometrium in an energetically and immunologically
stressed, agricultural environment; study the associations between these
stressors and luteal function; and provide a longitudinal perspective which can
explore how developmental milestones like birth weight and age at first
menstruation influence luteal function. Once baseline, normal variation in the
luteal ovaries and endometrium is analyzed, future studies will be able to more
fully illuminate how stressors could affect the maternal environment and drive
miscarriage. The work promotes understanding of human biology far beyond what
can be gained in a clinical study, yet has clinical applications for the
development of safer and more effective personalized hormonal contraceptives
that consider age, childhood conditions and lifestyle in their dosing structure.
It also will advance scientific discovery via a structured mentoring program for
underrepresented students, incorporation of the research into introductory and
advanced coursework, and by widely disseminating this anthropological
perspective and research results to the general public using the PI's standing
as an award-winning blogger at Scientific American.