* 1317170
* Collaborative Grant: Total Energy Expenditure in Hominoids Measured Using Doubly Labeled Water
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Stephen Ross, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 79,866.00

All organisms must expend energy to accomplish the essential physiological tasks
of growth, maintenance, and reproduction. Previous work has shown that species
often vary in the amount of energy spent on these tasks, and that this variation
has very important effects on species' ecology and pace of life. If we are to
fully understand the evolved energetic and life-history strategies of ourselves
and other related hominoid primates, it is necessary to acquire comparative
data; at present, however, very little is known about the energy expenditure
strategies of the living apes. This project will provide this structured
comparative data on living apes through investigation of how much energy these
species spend each day, and these energy expenditure measurements will be used
to test the hypothesis that ape energy expenditures constrain their rates of
growth, reproduction, and aging, and reflect their diet and ecology in the wild.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Total daily energy expenditure (calories/day) in apes
(chimpanzees, bonobos, gorillas, orangutans, and gibbons) will be measured using
a technique called the doubly labeled water (DLW) method. DLW tracks the body's
rate of carbon dioxide production over a two-week period, which in turn provides
an accurate measurement of the calories expended during that time; DLW is
considered the gold-standard for measurements of daily energy expenditure. Using
ape populations housed in Association of Zoos and Aquariums-accredited zoos,
total daily energy expenditure will be measured among adult males and females
using the DLW method. In addition to testing hypotheses regarding energy
budgets, these measurements will advance the current understanding of the
physiology and nutritional requirements of these species, as there are currently
very few data available for ape energy expenditure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include a better
understanding of the nutritional and metabolic requirements of apes, which may
improve management strategies for captive apes and therefore improve the health
and well-being of apes in captivity; obesity and other metabolic problems are a
leading cause of illness in captive apes. This project also will strengthen and
develop the role of U.S. zoos in basic research, and will provide research
training and experience for undergraduates at Hunter College, Washington
University, University of Cincinnati, and at other institutions near
participating zoos. Finally, this project will increase public awareness of
scientific research and its benefits, as information regarding the project will
be made publicly available at participating zoos.