* 1317817
* Conference:2013 IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium Student Awards Support to be held in Austin, TX January 20-23 2013
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2013,03/31/2014
* Rashaunda Henderson, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 03/31/2014
* USD 5,000.00

2013 IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium&lt;br/&gt;Student Awards Support
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2013 Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) Radio and Wireless Week (RWW), hosts five conferences that
focus on wireless components, circuits and systems. Four IEEE societies sponsor
(1) The 13th Topical Meeting on Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF
Systems (SiRF); (2) The Power Amplifiers for Radio and Wireless Applications
(PAWR) Conference; (3) The Wireless Sensors and Sensor Networks (WiSNet)
Conference; (4) The Biomedical Wireless Technologies, Networks, and Sensing
Systems (BioWireleSS) Conference; and (5) The Radio and Wireless Symposium
(RWS). Each meeting is co-located at the same venue and allows technologists to
network on recent advancements. Specific topical areas are addressed in the
individual meetings but the co-located venue allows for interaction across
multiple areas. Each of the five conferences selects finalists from the accepted
student author submissions to compete in student poster competitions. The
students are judged by their technical program committee in five different
categories: novelty of paper, quality of poster, quantity of information
presented, preparedness of the presenter, and interest to the RWW community.
This proposal is written to request funds to support prizes for the individual
student competitions. Up to 25 finalists will present their work in a special
poster session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research involves the gathering of academic and
industrial specialists within an intimate venue to discuss the current and
future trends of wireless technology for applications of national and
international interest. The five conferences focus on circuits and systems for
advanced biomedical applications and sensor systems with special emphasis on
power amplifiers and silicon technologies. Each year 400 attendees from academia
and industry participate in these meetings. Peer-reviewed oral and poster
presentations will be made along with IEEE Distinguished Lecturer talks given
within the four-day meeting. The most recent results from RF to terahertz
frequencies will be discussed and four high-impact workshops will be given at
the start of the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal include the
opportunity to highlight quality student research being pursued at US and
International Universities. Students gain technical experience by presenting
their research in a friendly poster competition environment. This opportunity
supports the STEM pipeline by identifying young engineers and scientists and
encouraging them to continue working in this highly technical field. The student
finalists and winners will be recognized at the annual awards banquet.