* 1317195
* An Integrative Study of the Genetic and Molecular Basis of Human Brain Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Soojin Yi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

A hallmark of human evolution is the exceptional size and complexity of our
brains. Previous genetic studies have revealed that genes that are specific to
human brains show particular evolutionary characteristics both at the DNA
sequence and at the level of gene expression. However, the causes of such
molecular changes are not known. The proposed research will investigate the
molecular basis of human brain evolution using an integrative approach of
genetic, epigenetic, and gene expression analyses. A central hypothesis of the
proposed research is that epigenetic changes, in particular changes of DNA
methylation, have facilitated the evolution of human brains. DNA methylation is
a key epigenetic modification of genomic DNA that mediates information transfer
between the genotype and phenotypes.

The objectives of this study are first to generate DNA methylation maps of
multiple humans, chimpanzees, macaques and marmosets. This novel data will be
then integrated with gene expression maps of the same samples. By doing so, we
can answer 1) whether DNA methylation levels exhibit a particular evolutionary
trend among the primate brains examined, 2) if DNA methylation changes are
correlated with gene expression changes in a species-specific manner, and 3)
whether such changes are more pronounced for genes that are pertinent for the
brain size and complexity. Consequently, the proposed research will elucidate
the evolutionary changes and the functional consequences of DNA methylation in
human brains.

The proposed research is integrative in nature and will contribute to training
undergraduate and graduate students in diverse disciplines including primate
evolution, phylogenetics, molecular anthropology, and comparative genomics. The
proposed research is integrated with an institutional outreach program, Georgia
Industrial Fellowship for Teachers, to provide training for high school students
and teachers in the metro Atlanta area. As a central activity of the proposed
research, an open access website harboring comprehensive information on genomic,
epigenomic and expression differences of the study species will be developed.
Finally, the proposed research will increase our understanding of the genetic
and molecular basis of the evolution of human brains, which is one of the most
fascinating aspects of human evolution.