* 1317044
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Anne Marti, Marti                   Anne
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 5,070.00

This action funds Anne Marti of The University of Texas at Dallas to conduct a
research project in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences area during the
summer of 2013 at The National Tsing University in Hsinchu, Taiwan. The project
title is "The Design and Characterization of Novel Metal Organic Frameworks
(MOFs) for carbon dioxide Capture." The host scientist is Dr. Sue-Lein Wang.

The global consumption of energy has steadily increased each year due to
population and industrial growth, thus issues such as global warming have
received much attention. As a result, scientists have been investigating ways to
reduce carbon dioxide produced from the burning of fossil fuels. One approach is
carbon capture and sequestration technologies, which allow carbon dioxide to be
captured and stored. Metal Organic Frameworks (MOFs) are crystalline hybrid-like
materials that consist of metal ions and organic linkers) that combine to form a
variety of porous structures tunable to meet application requirements. MOFs can
have high surface areas, large pores, and can be thermally and chemically stable
for gas storage, separation, catalysis, and chemical sensing. MOFs are potential
candidates for carbon dioxide capture due to their unsaturated metal sites and
organic moieties that can have a high affinity for carbon dioxide. New MOFs for
carbon dioxide capture have been synthesized. They are being characterized at
the host University in order to determine their crystal structures using single
crystal x-ray diffraction. This technique helps determine the MOF's internal
lattice characteristics such as bond angles, lengths and other details of site
ordering. The information gathered allows the MOF's performance to be evaluated
for carbon dioxide capture. The study is based on extensive characterization of
new materials for carbon dioxide capture; therefore it is expected to provide
new insights to the scientific community in order to reduce carbon dioxide
emissions.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, the proposed research study is anticipated to
promote not only scientific collaboration between the current and host
Universities but bring a positive outlook about the experience to other
graduate/undergraduate students from these areas. The fellow will learn valuable
communication skills from this experience, which will aid in the teaching of
current and future graduate/undergraduate, and high school students all of whom
work within the Fellow?s group. Being of Hispanic descent, the Fellow's
experience may influence other minority groups to apply and participate in
higher learning experiences.