* 1317560
* Collaborative Research: Visual Cortex on Silicon
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2021
* John Carroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 4,913,456.00

The human vision system understands and interprets complex scenes for a wide
range of visual tasks in real-time while consuming less than 20 Watts of power.
This Expeditions-in-Computing project explores holistic design of machine vision
systems that have the potential to approach and eventually exceed the
capabilities of human vision systems. This will enable the next generation of
machine vision systems to not only record images but also understand visual
content. Such smart machine vision systems will have a multi-faceted impact on
society, including visual aids for visually impaired persons, driver assistance
for reducing automotive accidents, and augmented reality for enhanced shopping,
travel, and safety. The transformative nature of the research will inspire and
train a new generation of students in inter-disciplinary work that spans
neuroscience, computing and engineering discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
several machine vision systems today can each successfully perform one or a few
human tasks - such as detecting human faces in point-and-shoot cameras - they
are still limited in their ability to perform a wide range of visual tasks, to
operate in complex, cluttered environments, and to provide reasoning for their
decisions. In contrast, the mammalian visual cortex excels in a broad variety of
goal-oriented cognitive tasks, and is at least three orders of magnitude more
energy efficient than customized state-of-the-art machine vision systems. The
proposed research envisions a holistic design of a machine vision system that
will approach the cognitive abilities of the human cortex, by developing a
comprehensive solution consisting of vision algorithms, hardware design, human-
machine interfaces, and information storage. The project aims to understand the
fundamental mechanisms used in the visual cortex to enable the design of new
vision algorithms and hardware fabrics that can improve power, speed,
flexibility, and recognition accuracies relative to existing machine vision
systems. Towards this goal, the project proposes an ambitious inter-disciplinary
research agenda that will (i) understand goal-directed visual attention
mechanisms in the brain to design task-driven vision algorithms; (ii) develop
vision theory and algorithms that scale in performance with increasing
complexity of a scene; (iii) integrate complementary approaches in biological
and machine vision techniques; (iv) develop a new-genre of computing
architectures inspired by advances in both the understanding of the visual
cortex and the emergence of electronic devices; and (v) design human-computer
interfaces that will effectively assist end-users while preserving privacy and
maximizing utility. These advances will allow us to replace current-day cameras
with cognitive visual systems that more intelligently analyze and understand
complex scenes, and dynamically interact with
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine vision systems that understand and interact
with their environment in ways similar to humans will enable new transformative
applications. The project will develop experimental platforms to: (1) assist
visually impaired people; (2) enhance driver attention; and (3) augment reality
to provide enhanced experience for retail shopping or a vacation visit, and
enhanced safety for critical public infrastructure. This project will result in
education and research artifacts that will be disseminated widely through a web
portal and via online lecture delivery. The resulting artifacts and prototypes
will enhance successful ongoing outreach programs to under-represented
minorities and the general public, such as museum exhibits, science fairs, and a
summer camp aimed at K-12 students. It will also spur similar new outreach
efforts at other partner locations. The project will help identify and develop
course material and projects directed at instilling interest in computing fields
for students in four-year colleges. Partnerships with two Hispanic serving
institutes, industry, national labs and international projects are also planned.