* 1317217
* Adaptation to diet and its impact on the gut microbiome and genomic variation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,04/30/2017
* Sarah Tishkoff, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2017
* USD 306,600.00

Diets vary greatly across the globe, and our ability to digest foods depends on
genes present in the human genome and bacteria found in the human gut (i.e., the
gut microbiome). Within the past few years, scientists have discovered that the
gut microbiome has a very important influence on human physiology and can impact
nutritional status, as well as disease risk. Indeed, variation in the gut
micriobiome is thought to play a role in obesity, malnutrition, auto-immune
disease, and infectious disease susceptibility. However, we do not know how much
gut bacteria vary across diverse human populations, and what may account for
that variation. In addition, substantial variation exists for human genes
involved in digestion, nutrition, and immunity, particularly for African
populations. By focusing on ethnically and geographically diverse Africans
practicing a variety of human diets, this research project can significantly
contribute to understanding these fundamentally important aspects of the biology
of our species, addressing fundamental questions about modern human history and
the genetic basis of traits related to human biology and adaptation.

The research will include field studies of three hunter-gather, three
pastoralist, and three agriculturalist populations in Eastern, Central, and
Southern Africa. Data collected will include anthropometric measurements (e.g.
height, weight, and body mass), DNA sequences of diverse Africans, lactose
tolerance data, detailed information about diet and nutrition, and fecal samples
(which will allow assessment of bacteria present in the gut microbiome). The gut
microbiome data will be integrated with detailed information about nutrition, as
well as anthropometric, metabolic, and genetic data, to better understand the
genetic and environmental factors that contribute to human adaptation to diet.
For example, gut bacteria in pastoralists who drink large quantities of milk may
be enriched for species that can metabolize the sugar lactose present in milk
and, thus, may be informative for studying factors contributing to lactose
tolerance, as well as for understanding gene, culture, and bacterial co-
adaptation at a larger scale. The project will make a number of significant
contributions to the fields of anthropology, genetics, microbiology, and
evolutionary biology. Given the existing gap in our knowledge of African genetic
and phenotypic diversity relative to other geographic regions, the publically-
available data generated by the research will be an important resource for
anthropologists, microbiologists, and genetic researchers, contributing to
studies of human origins and the design and interpretation of disease
association studies. Additionally, because the gut microbiome has a large
influence on nutrition, metabolism and immune response, this research project
could have an important impact on understanding risk factors for diabetes,
infectious disease and under-nutrition. And through the collaborative research,
this project also will contribute significantly to the research training of both
American and African students and scientists.