* 1317315
* RAPID: Distributed Temperature Instrumentation for Performance Assessment and Long-Term Implications of an Unconventionally Deep Geothermal Exchange Well
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2013
* Dante Fratta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2013
* USD 64,997.00

The objective of this project is to install a comprehensive suite of fiber optic
(FO) distributed temperature sensing (DTS) instrumentation to obtain short- and
long-term measurements of temperature and heat flux profiles in an
unconventionally deep (~300 m) geothermal ground source heat pump (GSHP) system
currently being constructed in Wisconsin. Construction of a single, but very
deep, exchange well offers potential advantages over conventional practice of
constructing multiple, but relatively shallow (e.g., ~50-75 m) heat exchange
wells for residential/commercial heating and cooling applications. There are,
however, a number of poorly understood issues having both important practical
and scientific implications. Short- and long-term measurements of exchange fluid
temperature and heat flux will be made along the entire (600 m) heat exchange
path of a deep GSHP system for the first time. Long-term measurements of the
heat flux profile will be obtained while the system is in use to meet seasonal
heating/cooling demand of a single-family residence. Short-term measurements
will obtained from a series of "stimulation" tests designed to investigate
perturbations imposed to the system operating variables (e.g., exchange fluid
flow rate or input temperature). These data will be used to link the heat flux
profile to subsurface heterogeneities in geology and hydrogeology (e.g.,
groundwater flow), and the natural geothermal gradient. Results will also be
used to ground-truth and calibrate a finite-element based numerical model to
conduct long-term (e.g., 20-year) simulations of GSHP efficiency, life-cycle
assessment, and to extend the project results for application to more general
subsurface geologies, borehole geometries, and seasonal heating and cooling
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results will have significant
practical and scientific merit. Information from the instrumentation and
modeling effort can be used to design better ground loop systems for
unconventionally deep (as well as shallow) geothermal heat exchange systems, to
quantify short- and long-term GSHP performance, and to assess the implications
of seasonal load imbalance on system efficiency. Information can also be used to
address basic scientific questions regarding the potential geochemical
ramifications of using the earth as a heat source/sink and to more effectively
calibrate natural records of climate change gleaned from deep subsurface
temperature measurements. While the study is expected to impact the geothermal
industry on a broad scale, the impact to the industry in Wisconsin in particular
is expected to be significant. Over 93% of Wisconsin's electrical fuel is
imported from other states and geothermal energy is increasingly being
considered an essential energy source. Project activities will be leveraged
across multiple educational environments through outreach and teaching
activities designed to impact K-12 students, undergraduate students, graduate
students, and practicing professionals. Activities will be integrated with: (1)
a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program on Energy Geotechnics
currently ongoing at the University of Wisconsin-Madison (UW), (2) extension
courses offered to the practicing engineering and science community through the
UW Engineering Professional Development (EPD) program, including a short course
on Design of Geothermal Systems, (3) a platform session with the Wisconsin
Geothermal Association, (4) lectures in large freshmen-level courses at UW, (5)
dissemination in journal and conference publications, and (6) a geothermal
session and field tour for UW-EPD's Badger Camp(TM), a renowned in-residence
summer camp for middle school students interested in the STEM fields.