* 1317379
* NRI: Small: Modeling, Quantification, and Optimization of Prosthesis-User Interface
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Konrad Kording, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 999,900.00

PI: Sensinger, J. W.; Hargrove, L.; and Kording, K. P.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 1317379&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problem Description: Better robotic
prostheses can dramatically improve the quality of life for the more than 40,000
Americans with an upper limb amputation, many of whom reject existing devices
because they have trouble controlling them in the same intuitive, subconscious
way that they controlled their intact arms. Prosthesis control is difficult
because amputees experience great uncertainty both with respect to whether their
device will respond appropriately to their control signals and whether sensory
feedback cues accurately reflect the actual movement. Researchers have focused
on improving isolated aspects of control, for example by improving filters or
mimicking able-bodied sensory cues through haptic devices, but these approaches
have minimally reduced the uncertainty of prosthesis control. Human interaction
with a prosthesis is a multifaceted, time-varying problem that is difficult to
solve. What is missing from robotic prosthesis research are principled methods
for optimizing control strategies and sensory cues which take into account
behavioral choices people are known to make in the face of high
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research is
innovative because it poses the co-robot problem in a broader context that
incorporates the highly sophisticated behavioral decisions that humans make in
optimizing their control strategy and sensory cues. This principled approach is
able to integrate multiple effects in ways that were not possible using previous
approaches. For example, the proposed approach naturally incorporates the fact
that people prefer to use less exerted effort to accomplish a task, but tolerate
more effort during portions of movement that require greater precision (e.g.
final portion of a trajectory). On the other hand, the approach does not favor
high-certainty haptic cues if those cues provide redundant information to
existing sensory cues such as vision, or if the haptic information does not
reduce the uncertainty of controllable system dynamics. Due to the large sources
of control-signal noise present in amputees, the proposed work will lead to
improved techniques within the fields of computational motor control and optimal
control. This research builds on the team?s extensive experience in the design
and control of upper-limb prostheses and in developing the field of
computational motor control. Achievement of the proposed aims will contribute to
the field of robotic control and to such diverse fields as human-robot
interaction, perception, manipulation, and
exoskeletons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: True biomimetic prostheses,
exoskeletons, and humanoid robot control will not be possible until there is a
firm understanding of how humans integrate with these co-robots in the face of
interacting sources of uncertainty. This computational motor project will
provide transformative insight into how humans control movement in the presence
of large uncertainty and thus fill a critical gap in the knowledge base of this
field. The framework developed in this research will be of great interest to the
motor-control research community and may be useful in the restoration of other
movement disorders such as spinal cord injury and stroke. The lead institution
of this proposal, the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago (RIC), is consistently
ranked the top rehabilitation hospital in the country. The close proximity of
research and clinical excellence within RIC ensures that the benefits resulting
from this work will be quickly disseminated to prosthesis users. The research
team will also seek to reach a broader audience?the laboratories at the RIC are
regularly visited by students from local high schools and universities, and the
RIC also contributes to outreach activities within inner-city Chicago. These
outreach programs promote an awareness of rehabilitation research and an
enthusiasm for pursuing a career in engineering. Additionally, the team will
develop a K-12 educational module based on the template of the successful Summer
School in Computational Sensory-Motor Neuroscience developed at Northwestern
University and Queen?s University, which will provide a combination of theory
and student-driven experimentation using games that will address many of the
Illinois Learning Standards in science, math, and English language arts.