* 1317163
* Comparative and population genomic studies of Madagascar's extinct subfossil lemurs
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* George Perry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2017
* USD 292,832.00

Humans arrived to the island of Madagascar only approximately 2,300 years ago.
Since that time, humans have affected the island's environment and its unique
biodiversity through deforestation and hunting practices. As a result, many
Malagasy animal species are at risk for extinction. For example, over 70% of the
island's 100 species of lemurs, the primates of Madagascar, are considered
Endangered or Critically Endangered by the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature. In addition, from unmineralized skeletal remains, we
know of at least 17 now-extinct "subfossil" lemur species, some of which lived
as recently as 500 years ago, or less. All of the extinct species were larger
than every living lemur species, and some substantially so, up to the size of a
male gorilla. This study aims to use ancient DNA methods and massively parallel
sequencing technology for genetic studies of the extinct subfossil lemur
species, and to make genetic comparisons between the extinct and living lemur
species. These comparisons are important for understanding the history of the
extinct species themselves, but also for broadening our understanding of the
history of human-environment interactions on Madagascar and for identifying
primary lemur extinction risk factors - knowledge which may influence the
prioritization of conservation efforts for the still surviving lemur species.
Researchers will sample bone and teeth from subfossil lemur skeletons to extract
DNA and sequence complete mitochondrial genomes from single individuals of 14 of
the 17 extinct subfossil lemur species, as well as from population samples of
seven of these species. For comparative purposes, the researchers also will
sequence complete mitochondrial genomes from populations of 10 living lemur
species.

The proposed research will involve international collaborations between US
academic institutions and the University of Antananarivo in Madagascar. This
work will provide extensive training for both US and Malagasy graduate students,
and will help build the capacity for genomics data analysis in Madagascar. In
addition to the primary scientific publications resulting from this work, the
conservation implications of the study will be summarized in an article
submitted to the open access journal Madagascar Conservation & Development,
facilitating broad dissemination of the conservation significance of the
research results.