* 1317649
* Academic Integrity Management (AIM) of a collaborative three year computer science degree program
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Sathya Narayanan, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,123,000.00

ABSTRACT

This project is being supported under a special funding focus for STEP,
"Graduate 10K+," an activity of the National Science Foundation, supported in
part by donations from the Intel Foundation and the GE Foundation, to stimulate
comprehensive action at universities and colleges to help increase the annual
number of new B.S. graduates in engineering and computer science by 10,000 over
the next decade.

California State University Monterey Bay (CSUMB) and Hartnell College have
assessed the challenges facing underrepresented and disadvantaged students
seeking educational opportunities in computer science. Given the obstacles and
the resources available, CSUMB and Hartnell committed to developing a three-year
bachelor's degree option coupled with significant student support structures and
financial assistance as a way to improve outcomes.

The project is incorporating the following features: o Collaboration between a
2- and 4- year college, in which students are completing the first 1.5 years of
the program primarily at Hartnell and the final 1.5 years primarily at CSUMB; o
Improving the college-readiness of students through a summer bridge program; o
Organizing students into cohorts that are maintained from enrollment through
transfer and graduation; o Providing ongoing academic support through
identification of academic needs and provision of support services; o Delivering
career development support through workshops and internship placements; o
Providing scholarship support that eliminates the need for students to seek
outside employment. o Executing a detailed evaluation plan with an external
evaluator to study the performance of project components.

Additionally, the project has secured a commitment from the Matsui Foundation, a
local non-profit organization, to provide significant funding that supports full
scholarships for students.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in its implementation of a three-year
Bachelor of Science degree program in computer science/information technology
(CSIT) to successfully attract, retain, transfer, and graduate students from
disadvantaged and underrepresented populations. The project incorporates three
critical components: (1) an accelerated three-year time frame, (2) collaboration
between a community college and a university, and (3) a cohort-based learning
model.

The project's broader impacts are felt in the increased access to computer
science and success of 150 underrepresented and disadvantaged students, through
the combination of an accelerated program, student scholarships, student
cohorts, and leveraging computer science support programs. Dissemination of
evaluation data and best practices from this project are also providing
substantial information to education leaders to duplicate collaborative three or
four year pathways that utilize resources of multiple institutions to increase
retention and graduation of students in computer science and STEM.