* 1317640
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Programming Architectures, Abstractions, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Shawn Douglas, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

The computing revolution began over two thousand years ago with the advent of
mechanical devices for calculating the motions of celestial bodies.
Sophisticated clockwork automata were developed centuries later to control the
machinery that drove the industrial revolution, culminating in Babbage's
remarkable design for a programmable mechanical computer. With the electronic
revolution of the last century, the speed and complexity of computers increased
dramatically. Using embedded computers we now program the behavior of a vast
array of electro-mechanical devices, from cell phones and satellites to
industrial manufacturing robots and self-driving cars. The history of computing
has taught researchers two things: first, that the principles of computing can
be embodied in a wide variety of physical substrates from gears to transistors,
and second, that the mastery of a new physical substrate for computing has the
potential to transform technology. Another revolution is just beginning, one
whose inspiration is the incredible chemistry and molecular machinery of life,
one whose physical computing substrate consists of synthetic biomolecules and
designed chemical reactions. Like the previous revolutions, this "molecular
programming revolution" will have the principles of computer science at its
core. By systematically programming the behaviors of a wide array of complex
information-based molecular systems, from decision-making circuitry and
molecular-scale manufacturing to biomedical diagnosis and smart therapeutics, it
has the potential to radically transform material, chemical, biological, and
medical industries. With molecular programming, chemistry will become a major
new information technology of the 21st century.

This Expeditions-in-Computing project aims to establish solid foundations for
molecular programming. Building on advances in DNA nanotechnology, DNA
computing, and synthetic biology, the project will develop methods for
programmable self-assembly of DNA strands to create sophisticated 2D and 3D
structures, dynamic biochemical circuitry based on programmable interactions
between DNA, RNA, and proteins, and integrated behaviors within spatially
organized molecular systems and living cells. These architectures will provide
systematic building blocks for creating programmable molecular systems able to
sense molecular input, compute decisions about those inputs, and act on their
environment. To manage system complexity and to provide modularity, the project
will establish abstraction hierarchies with associated high-level languages for
programming structure and behavior, compilers that turn high-level code into
lists of synthesizable DNA sequences, and analysis software that can predict the
performance of the sequences. This will allow molecular programmers to specify,
design, and verify the correctness of their systems before they are ever
synthesized in the laboratory. In addition to these software tools, the project
will study the theory of molecular algorithms in order to understand the
potential and limitations of information-based molecular systems, what makes
them efficient at the tasks they can perform, and how they can be effectively
designed and analyzed. Putting the products of this fundamental research to the
test, the project will pursue real-world applications such as molecular
instruments for probing biological systems and programmable fabrication of
nanoscale devices.

This project will expand the network of scientists and engineers working in
molecular programming by building a diverse community of students, teachers,
researchers, scientists, and engineers. This community will be fostered through
the creation of publicly accessible software tools, courses, textbooks,
workshops, tutorials, undergraduate research competitions, and popular science
videos to teach the principles and methods of molecular programming and to
engage young researchers and the public in this exciting new field. Industrial
partnerships with relevant biotechnology and other high-tech companies will
ensure fast transfer of knowledge generated into real-world products. Perhaps
most importantly, as molecular programming becomes a widespread technology, it
has the potential to transform industry with new complex nanostructured
materials, to transform chemistry with integrated and autonomous control of
reactions, to transform biology with advanced molecular instruments, and to
transform health care with more sophisticated diagnostics and therapeutics.