* 1317989
* NRI: Small: Assistive Robots for Blind Travelers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Aaron Steinfeld, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 986,571.00

PI: Dias, M. Bernadine; Steinfeld, Aaron&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1317989&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary: As robotics technology evolves to a stage
where co-robots become a reality, we need to ensure they are equally capable of
interacting with humans with disabilities. The proposed work addresses this
challenge by exploring meaningful human-robot interaction in the context of
assistive robots for blind travelers. For people with disabilities independent
transportation remains a major barrier to employment and quality of life.
Furthermore, emergency situations necessitating evacuation is one of the
greatest fears they face. The key question we seek to answer in the proposed
work is: what role can co-robots play in empowering people with disabilities to
safely travel to and navigate unfamiliar environments? We hypothesize that co-
robots can enhance the safety and independence of these travelers by assisting
them to navigate unfamiliar urban environments effectively and providing support
when evacuating. We begin our proposed work with a needs assessment to
understand the preferences and challenges of blind travelers. The ultimate
objective is to enhance the safety and independence of blind
travelers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed work explores
three principal research areas applied to three scenarios relevant to assistive
robots for blind travelers: (1) information exchange and object manipulation,
(2) assistive localization, and (3) urban navigation and emergency building
evacuation. The research areas we plan to explore are accessible interfaces,
assistive interaction modalities, and effective cooperation mechanisms.
Envisioned scenarios include robots assisting humans to localize within
necessary resolution and context using a combination of perception, robot
localization, and crowdsourcing, robots assisting humans to retrieve lost or
fallen objects or locate objects or people of interest, robots assisting humans
to interact with other aspects of the environment such as reading notices, and
robots assisting humans during emergency evacuation of buildings. We will also
explore means of these travelers "teaching" the robots to do tasks of interest
to them. The robots will have to reason intelligently about task allocation
among themselves and coordinating with humans when needed. Overall, the proposed
research will significantly advance the knowledge of how assistive robots can
meaningfully and effectively interact with travelers with disabilities. The
uniqueness of the proposed research is captured in the accessibility of the
interfaces, the richness of the interaction modalities, and the flexibility and
range of the cooperation mechanisms. The combination of these contributions will
significantly advance the state of the art in assistive technology as well as
human-robot interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The team has a
strong commitment to undergraduate research experience. Over 75% of the students
mentored by the Principal Investigator and Co-Principal Investigator have been
women, minorities, or people with disabilities. This commitment extends to the
team's instructional activities. Team members regularly incorporate research
findings into class presentations, guest lectures, and seminars. The team is
also committed to community outreach. Both Dias and Steinfeld regularly speak to
non-academics and will include aspects of this project in such talks. A final
educational outcome will be several planned workshops at our partner
organizations and the outcomes from the proposed work are expected to impact
operations and methodologies used at these organizations. The assembled team of
researchers and partner organizations further enhances the broader impact of
this proposal. Principal Investigator Dias is one of the very few female
robotics faculty members at the university and in the discipline. She is engaged
in many mentoring and leadership activities to encourage and sustain the
participation of women in computing and to address the needs of technologically
underserved communities. The proposed team of undergraduate students, a graduate
student, and a postdoctoral research assistant will also gain significant
mentoring and education through their participation in this research. Industry
interaction extends beyond regular contact due to faculty involvement in high
profile centers. The research and evaluation program is specifically geared
towards people with disabilities. Therefore, the contributions of the proposed
work will make significant advancements towards realizing the vision of safe and
independent travel for people with disabilities. The results of the proposed
work will be disseminated broadly through a variety of avenues and all outcomes
of the research will be made available in accessible formats to the community
partners and their networks.