* 1317290
* A SAFE vessel:   Advancing research capabilities to the Gulf Stream
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Douglas Nowacek, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2014
* USD 141,101.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Marine Laboratory of the Nicholas
School of the Environment, Duke University, is awarded a grant to purchase a 27'
research vessel to access near-shore and offshore waters from Beaufort NC to the
Gulf Stream off Cape Hatteras on a daily basis. The vessel can also be trailered
to access points along the North Carolina coast and beyond and will be available
to the oceanographic research community at large for research on the eastern
seaboard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific research conducted from the vessel
will focus on the Cape Hatteras offshore region and the coastal ocean and the
Albemarle-Pamlico Sound estuarine system. The Labrador Current and Gulf Stream
converge at Cape Hatteras, creating a dynamic oceanographic feature in which
warm and cool waters mix. The Cape Hatteras region continues to receive
scientific attention as a biogeographic barrier between the Western North
Atlantic Warm and Temperate (Carolina) and Boreal provinces, as a zone of high
primary productivity and micro-zooplankton grazing, as a source of carbon flux
to slope sediments, and as an area of on-going and projected commercial
interests. Research projects using the vessel include study of the distribution,
abundance, population structure, acoustic ecology, and behavior of pelagic
cetaceans in the Hatteras region, the ecological physiology of transparent
midwater organisms, and transport mechanisms of commercially important species
spawned offshore to inshore nursery grounds and transport of pollutants from
offshore activities into sensitive inshore
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
undertaken from the new vessel will focus on biophysical studies that can be
used to inform assessment of environmental impacts across jurisdictional
boundaries and inform management and policy decisions. Wind farms, military
training activities, fisheries, shipping, oil and gas development, mineral
extraction, and living resource protection continue to expand into near-shore
and off-shore waters; the vessel will enable studies of the biological
consequences of these and other human activities and of the dynamics and
processes of pelagic and benthic ecosystems. Near-shore and off-shore research
will address national priorities relating to stewardship of natural ocean
resources through studies of the abundance, and distribution of marine species
(including endangered marine mammals and sea turtles), their relationships to
habitats and other species, and the impacts of human activity on these taxa,
especially within the context of predictive modeling in response to
environmental change. The Marine Laboratory has vigorous undergraduate and
graduate training programs and most students in these programs engage in field
research with their faculty mentors. Students working on near-shore and offshore
studies will be trained in seamanship and at-sea research methods using this
vessel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine Laboratory, Nicholas School of the
Environment, Duke University: http://www.nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/