* 1317671
* CDS&amp;E: Mathematical Models and Computational Methods for the Tumor Microenvironment
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Robert Dillon, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2017
* USD 380,938.00

The main objective of this work is to develop comprehensive mathematical models
and computational methods at the microscale for the emergence of ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and the transition to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC)
both in vivo and in vitro microfluidic devices. The investigator and his
colleagues develop computational methods for the microenvironment models based
on integrated second-order finite volume methods for each of the system
components - fluid mechanics, chemical and ion transport in the bulk fluid,
reactions on the cell membrane, transport through the cell membrane, and
fluid/structure interaction of the elastic biological cells. The modeling
innovation includes the incorporation of ion transport, reaction, and diffusion
in a cells-based model with detailed membrane reaction kinetics and membrane
transport. This is coupled with internal kinetics and growth processes of
individual cells. Another innovation is the incorporation of Lagrangian mesh
based models for the viscoelastic properties of matrigel and extracellular
matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breast cancer is the second-leading cause of death
in women in developed countries. In USA alone, 230,480 women were diagnosed with
invasive breast cancer in 2011 and an estimated 57,650 women were tested
positive with non invasive ductal carcinoma (DCIS). Although DCIS itself is not
life-threatening, it has a high probability of progression to IDC if left
untreated. In this project, the investigator and his colleagues study tumor
microenvironments in DCIS and its progression to IDC. Successful completion of
this project provides a fundamental change in modeling of tumor evolution where
the identity of each cell is of importance. Although focus has been placed on
modeling ductal carcinoma, one can extend these techniques to the study of
variety of biological processes. A number of research fields are benefited from
this work. These include cell biology, systems biology, biomedical engineering,
computational fluid mechanics, and applied and computational mathematics. In
addition to this technical impact, the project provides a unique educational
opportunity to train graduate and undergraduate students as well as high school
teachers in multidisciplinary environments.