* 1317245
* EAGER:   Documenting Gwich'in indigenous astronomy
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Leslie McCartney, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2016
* USD 27,508.00

This EAGER project under the direction of PI Gary Holton takes advantage of a
unique opportunity to assess the feasibility of documenting indigenous astronomy
in Alaska and Canada. Although astronomy is a fundamental component of all
Alaska Native cultures, there has so far been no systematic effort to document
indigenous knowledge of the Alaskan sky. Rapid change in traditional land use
has led to this astronomical knowledge being even more endangered than the
indigenous languages themselves. In this pilot project we focus on Gwich?in, the
most viable of Alaska?s Dene (Athabaskan) languages. Extrapolating on more than
a year of archival research, the project will work with culture bearers in the
Alaska Gwich?in region to document Gwich?in terminology for starts,
constellations, and astronomical events. The project will coordinate closely
with work in progress with Canadian Gwich?in being conducted under the auspices
of the Gwich?in Social and Cultural Institute. Finally, the project will seek to
corroborate the existence of several major cosmological themes, which permeate
Northern Dene languages. The primary project deliverable will be a report
describing Gwich?in knowledge of the sky, along with star charts localized to
the Gwich?in region. These materials will be made available through the Alaska
Native Language Archive to be used by both scholars and educators. In addition
to linguist Holton, project participants include Leslie McCarthy, Curator of
Oral History at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, and Chris Cannon, graduate
student and astronomy educator.