* 1317153
* NeTS: Small: Mobile mmWaves: Addressing the Cellular Capacity Crisis with 60 GHz Picocells
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Upamanyu Madhow, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 09/30/2017
* USD 515,359.00

Smart phones and tablets enable consumers to enjoy rich audio and video content
on the go, but the proliferation of such increasingly sophisticated mobile
devices has created a capacity crisis for mobile operators. It is estimated that
supporting rich media content for a rapidly increasing fraction of mobile users
requires a 1000-fold increase in cellular network capacity, which current
cellular bands simply cannot support. The research pursued under this grant
explores an alternative, and potentially transformational, approach to cellular
data, using unlicensed spectrum in the 60 GHz band, where the available
bandwidth is orders of magnitude higher than those used in existing systems, at
the level of multiple Gigabits per second throughput on the downlink to the
mobile devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Base stations for the envisioned network
will be deployed opportunistically (e.g., on lampposts and rooftops). Due to the
small carrier wavelength, many antenna arrays with a very large number (e.g.,
1000) of elements can be built into base stations which are no larger than a
typical WiFi access point. Such antenna arrays can be used to direct pencil
beams at mobile users, with peak data rates of multiples of Gigabits per second
(order of magnitude higher than the highest WiFi data rates available today).
However, the small carrier wavelength also implies that the radio waves are
easily blocked by obstacles such as buildings, walls, and humans, including the
body of the person carrying the mobile device. In order to handle such rapid
changes in the propagation environment, novel techniques are developed for
multiple base stations to coordinate, such that they can adapt their beams to
maintain connectivity with a given mobile device, and can ensure that the data
destined for the mobile follows it around. A novel asymmetric network
architecture is employed, with low-bandwidth 60 GHz beaconing and multi-Gbps
data on the downlink, and LTE feedback and lower-speed data on the uplink. The
base stations employ compressive signal processing for rapid channel estimation
and beam adaptation, based on the feedback from the mobiles. Distributed base
station coordination mechanisms are developed for seamlessly switching base
stations or paths. The architecture minimizes complexity and power consumption
in the mobile device: the device's 60 GHz radio only needs to receive, and the
device is oblivious of handoffs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mobile broadband
capacity crisis is the greatest challenge facing cellular providers today, hence
the success of this project can impact a multi-billion dollar industry. In order
to maximize the potential for impact, the results and models will be widely
disseminated to both industry and academia. The investigators plan significant
efforts for recruitment and mentoring of female undergraduate and graduate
students, organized around the concept of a caring community.