* 1317741
* PFI:BIC Bioengineering Glucagon-like Peptide 1 Analogs and a Formulation for Oral Delivery to Treat Diabetes
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2015
* William Bachovchin, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2015
* USD 599,683.00

This PFI:BIC project from Tufts University will investigate newly discovered
orally active analogs of the peptide hormone, glucagon-like peptide-1(GLP-1), to
see whether it is possible to adapt them for use in the treatment of type 2
diabetes (T2D). GLP-1 reduces blood glucose after eating by interactions with
its receptor (GLP-1R) that signal increased insulin secretion, reduced glucagon
secretion, slowed gastric emptying and increased satiety. GLP-1R agonists
provide, arguably, the most effective therapeutic approach for achieving
recommended blood-glucose targets in the management of T2D. However, the
currently available GLP-1R agonists, exenatide and liraglutide, suffer the
drawback, especially for chronic medication, of requiring injection. The goal is
to develop a solid-dose formulation of a GLP-1 analog that combines convenience
of oral administration with the therapeutic advantages. The digestion of peptide
hormones via oral delivery is challenged by gastrointestinal (GI) proteases and
the absorption barrier of the GI tract. In addition, the active lifetime of
GLP-1 is greatly shortened by proteolytic degradation as a result of dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 (DPP4) and neutral endopeptidase (NEP) in the blood and tissues. The
early-stage technology-oriented research of this project starts with the
discovery by Dr. Bachovchin and co-workers of how to make GLP-1 more resistant
to destruction by GI proteases, DPP4, and NEP. A combination of peptide
chemistry and formulation in enteric-coated tablets will be used to achieve the
oral bioavailability and glucose-lowering potency required for clinical use. The
methods are also applicable to other peptide hormones of possible therapeutic
interest. In this vein, the Bachovchin team has modified the appetite-
suppressing peptide oxyntomodulin to provide resistance to DPP4 and NEP without
disruption of the receptor-agonist activity required for homeostatic function.

The broader impacts of this project lie in its contribution to the solution of a
large, costly public health problem. More than half of T2D patients fail to
achieve recommended targets for glycemic control, leading to high rates of
medical complications. The problem will grow as the number of diabetics rises to
an estimated 300 million in 2025. The American Diabetes Association-European
Association for the Study of Diabetes consensus recognizes GLP-1 analogs as
potentially the most effective treatment; but market penetration suggests only a
minority of patients currently receive their benefit. Avoidance of injections
reduces prescription of exenatide and liraglutide. Development of a GLP-1 analog
in convenient oral formulation would overcome this hurdle and in combination
with lifestyle changes might help to slow or prevent disease progression in the
increasing numbers of juvenile patients and prediabetics, who, because they are
asymptomatic, are less likely to accept long-term injections. For Unigene
Laboratories, Inc., the advances anticipated in the course of this project will
further validate the versatility of the Peptelligence (TM) platform for solid-
dose formulation of peptide-based drugs for oral delivery, and in turn increase
its marketability as a service. For Arisaph and Unigene, given success, a drug
candidate will result that could be clinically developed and eventually
commercialized by research and development conducted in partnership.

Partners at the inception of the project are 1) Lead Institution: Tufts
University School of Medicine (Department of Biochemistry); and 2) Primary Small
Business Partners: Unigene Laboratories Inc.(Boonton, NJ) and Arisaph
Pharmaceuticals (Boston, MA).