* 1317428
* Algorithms for Measurement Model Specification Search
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Peter Spirtes, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 12/31/2016
* USD 429,964.00

When scientists in many fields such as educational research, psychometrics,
sociology, economics, etc. are interested in knowing the values of, or inferring
causal relations between variables that they cannot directly measure, they
typically record several survey or test "items" that are thought to be
indicators of latent variables of interest, e.g. "mathematical ability"
(educational research) or personality traits such as "impulsiveness"
(psychometrics). Although it is rare that a latent variable is measured
perfectly by any single indicator, estimates of the latent variables, and their
associations with other latents, can be obtained by employing multiple
indicators for each latent variable. If the multiple indicator model is
correctly specified, then in a wide range of cases the estimates obtained are
consistent and have desirable statistical properties, and these estimates can be
used to search for causal models among the latents. If the model is mis-
specified, then estimators are typically biased, and search for causal models
among the latents is more difficult. A number of problems make it difficult to
find a correctly specified measurement model from background knowledge and
samples of the measured variables: a) associations among items are often
confounded by additional unknown latent common causes, b) there are often a
plethora of alternative models that are consistent with the data and with the
prior knowledge of domain experts, c) there may be non-linear dependencies among
latent variables, or linear relationships among non-Gaussian latent variables,
and d) there may be feedback relationships among latent variables. The
investigator and his colleagues perform research that utilizes and generalizes
recent work in algebraic statistics on rank constraints on sub-matrices of the
measured correlation matrix that are robustly entailed by given measurement
models, in order to construct reliable search algorithms that allow scientists
to find correctly specified measurement models using background knowledge and
sample data, and to use the measurement models to reliably construct models that
specify how the latent variables are causally related to each other.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the early 20th century, beginning with the work of
Charles Spearman on finding statistical evidence for a single trait he called
"general intelligence," there has been controversy on how to scientifically
determine the dimensions of personality and mental abilities; e.g. is there one
dimension to intelligence ("general intelligence") or are there many different
kinds of intelligence? Although there has been a great deal of progress in
psychometrics, psychometric methods are still rapidly evolving. The
investigators and their colleagues study how to use evidence from survey data to
reliably conclude how many dimensions various personality and mental abilities
have, and to construct psychological theories based on these conclusions.
Potential applications include building effective educational interventions,
building effective surveys for detecting personality disorders, and building
effective surveys for measuring mental health in individuals and in populations.