* 1317372
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E-MSS: Robust Algorithms for Interpolation and Extrapolation in Manifold Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Hongyuan Zha, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2017
* USD 170,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop robust algorithms for
reconstructing or synthesizing highly structured high-dimensional data based on
a low-dimensional representation learned from a training dataset, i.e., the
interpolation and extrapolation problems in manifold learning. The project will
address the elusive issue of computing a usually not well-defined low-
dimensional parametrization in the setting of various interpolation and
extrapolation problems for manifold learning, emphasizing the notion of
physically meaningful paramterizations. It will develop innovative computational
methodology for flexibly learning a low-dimensional parametrization together
with other physically important variables in the context of both unsupervised
and semi-supervised learning and especially active learning settings, for
learning and synthesis of dynamic data, and for manifold extrapolation based on
transfer learning. Included in the project is a development of a publicly
available software package which will disseminate the research results and
promote applications of nonlinear dimension reduction methodology to real-world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discoveries from this proposed research are
expected to impact a wide range of areas of applications. Computing compact
representation of high-dimensional data represents a very challenging
statistical learning problem, and manifold learning has become a very active
research field aiming at discovering hidden structures from the statistical and
geometric regularity inherent in many high-dimensional data. Reconstruction and
synthesis of high-dimensional data in the context of interpolation and
extrapolation will have significant applications in image and video processing,
computer vision, video surveillance for homeland security, computational
biology, and scientific visualization. The proposed theoretical tools and
computational methods have the promise of significantly expanding the
applicability and functionality of existing and new manifold learning methods
and thus advancing the state of the art in nonlinear dimension reduction
research. The proposed research lies at the interface between applied
mathematics, computational science, and machine learning applications and
provides an ideal setting for research cross-fertilization and collaboration as
well as training of graduate students in interdisciplinary research.