* 1317014
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute (EAPSI) for FY 2013 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* David Hildebrand, Hildebrand              David
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2014
* USD 70.00

This action funds David Grant Colburn Hildebrand of Harvard University to
conduct a research project in Biological Sciences during the summer of 2013 at
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology in Ulsan, Korea. The project
title is "Automatically Finding the Same Neurons in Optical and Electron
Microscopy Datasets to Enable Investigations of the Relationship Between
Structure and Function in the brain." The host scientist is Won-Ki Jeong, Ph.D.

Determining how the connectivity of neuronal circuits influences their
functional properties is one of the most difficult endeavors the field of
neuroscience has ever faced. This is due to the fact that these studies require
untangling and making sense of dense hairballs of dendrites and axons known as
neuropil. While we now have methods to create neuronal connectivity maps, few
experimental techniques and software tools for linking studies of neuron
functional properties to those of neuronal circuit connectivity exist. This
project creates software that resolves this problem after interrogating which
computational algorithms are best suited to identifying, localizing, and
corresponding the same neurons in optical and electron microscopy datasets,
which provide information about neuron function and circuit structure,
respectively.

Broader impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Furthermore, this project will generate open-source
software tools that make it possible for others in the field to perform similar
studies and for teachers to bring together students interested in life sciences
and computer science. Small example datasets will be made available with the
software tools for teachers and self-learners to illustrate to students how
relatively simple "connect-the-dots" relationships in the brain can carry
important implications for biological function.