* 1317503
* Collaborative Research: Atlas of Lie Groups and Representations: Computational Aspects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Annegret Paul, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 12/31/2017
* USD 65,946.00

The primary goal of The Atlas of Lie Groups and Representations project is to
solve a fundamental problem in representation theory of Lie groups: the
classification of the irreducible unitary representations of real reductive Lie
groups. The contributors are taking a computational approach to the problem.
They have developed the mathematical theory required to reduce the problem to a
finite computation. This required rethinking representation theory from the
ground up from this new point of view. The key tool is a modified notion of
invariant Hermitian form, called the c-Hermitian form, which has critical
uniqueness properties lacking in the usual Hermitian form. This allows the
formulation of an algorithm to compute the sign of c-Hermitian and Hermitian
forms, in terms of a new family of Kazhdan-Lusztig-Vogan
polynomials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symmetry plays a fundamental role in
mathematics and the sciences. In the late 19th century Sophus Lie showed that
the symmetry of a system can be captured in an abstract mathematical object;
these are now known as Lie (pronounced Lee) groups. The ways in which a
particular symmetry (i.e. Lie) group can manifest itself are known as unitary
representations. The main goal of the Atlas of Lie Groups and Representations is
to understand all such representations. This has applications to physics, as
well as many areas of mathematics, including number theory and geometry. The
approach is computational. Both the mathematical and computational challenges
are great, and the project brings together mathematicians and computer
scientists.