* 1317361
* US/Korea Workshop on Collaboration in Advanced Manufacturing Research; Seoul, Korea; 25-28 March 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Kamlakar Rajurkar, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 02/28/2015
* USD 94,792.00

This award will fund a United States delegation of about 20 experts to attend a
workshop in Seoul, Republic of Korea (ROK), to discuss advanced manufacturing
with a similar number of researchers from the ROK. The workshop will be held in
March, 2013, and the ROK delegation will be hosted by the Korean National
Research Foundation. The goal of the workshop is to identify research topics of
mutual interest to academic researchers supported by National Science Foundation
domestically, and by the Korean National Research Foundation in Korea. The
workshop discussions will focus in four topical areas: industrial robotics,
manufacturing mathematics, materials processing and sub-micron and nano-
manufacturing. The workshop will be preceeded by two days of tours of important
Korean manufacturing research facilities to give the United Stated delegation a
better understanding of the areas of expertise and research facilities available
in Korea. The workshop itself will also be two days in duration. The result of
the workshop will be a report detailing areas for beneficial collaboration
between Korea and the United States with the expectation that it will be
followed up with proposals for research in these areas.

This workshop will promote international collaboration in academic research,
particularly in the four topic areas of the workshop. By so doing, it will
accelerate research in these areas. Further, it will help students gain an
international perspective and broaden their educational experience.