* 1317913
* NRI: Small: Compliant Multifunctional Robotic Structures for Safety and Communication by Touch
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Elisabeth Smela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

The objective of this research is to enable better training of robots by
enabling them to physically communicate via human touch using new compliant
multifunctional structures. To achieve this, arrays of conducting polymers will
be developed to form a system similar to the human nervous system that can sense
shape and forces distributions. This sensor array will be integrated into
composite foam structures using a scalable additive manufacturing process. To
support development of models and to serve as proof-of-concept for these
multifunctional structures on robotic platforms, simulated co-robotics
experiments will be conducted using a robotic arm interacting with objects of
varying compliance. Experimental details of the associated contact mechanics
will be quantified in real-time using Digital Image Correlation and conventional
video imaging. Output from the sensor array will then be related to shape and
force distributions by solving the nonlinear inverse problem using a novel
Singular Value Decomposition method. Research results will be documented and
disseminated, and the experiments will be converted to STEM demonstrations
targeted at educating young girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead
to new compliant, scalable, sensing structures that simultaneously monitor in
real-time both global and local shapes, as well as force distributions. Since
compliant multifunctional sensing structures do not yet exist for robots, it is
envisioned that the proposed work will enable realization of new bio-inspired
control principles for training robots. This will significantly advance the
ability to make safer interactions and decisions in co-robotics by
differentiating robotic interactions with humans from other objects in their
environment. The proposed integration of research and education will train new
mechanical engineers to create multifunctional products that enable new products
and new capabilities in existing products in critical areas such as healthcare.
The new fabrication methods will enable these structures to be manufactured in
the United States in a cost-competitive manner, increasing employment.