* 1317059
* From Undergraduate STEM Major to Enacting the NGSS
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Valerie Otero, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,944.00

The Colorado Learning Assistant (LA) model, recognized nationally as a hallmark
teacher recruitment and preparation program, has run a national workshop
annually for four years to disseminate and scale the program. This project
expands the existing annual workshop to address changing needs of participants
and to prepare eight additional faculty members to lead new regional workshops.
Workshop sessions integrate crosscutting concepts, scientific practices, and
engineering design as articulated in the Framework for K-12 Science Education
(NRC, 2012). Infusing the Frameworks into the workshop helps STEM faculty better
understand their role in preparing future K-12 teachers to implement the new
standards, by transforming their own undergraduate courses in ways that actively
engage students in modeling, argumentation, making claims from evidence, and
engineering design. The National Science Foundation (NSF), the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute (HHMI), the American Physical Society's PhysTEC project, and
University of Colorado-Boulder, provide resources for national workshops in 2013
and 2014 allowing 80 additional math, science, and engineering faculty from a
range of institutions to directly experience the LA model and to learn ways to
implement, adapt, grow, and sustain a program on their own campuses. Evaluation
of the project focuses on long-term effects of workshop participation and
contributes to efforts to strengthen networks within the international Learning
Assistant Alliance. The launching of 10 - 12 new LA programs is anticipated, and
many existing programs will expand into new STEM departments as a result of the
national workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop participants are awarded
travel grants and in return, provide data each year for two years so that long-
term impacts of the workshop can be evaluated. Online surveys provide data about
each institution's progress in setting up a program, departments in which the
program runs, number of faculty involved, number of courses transformed, numbers
of teachers recruited, and estimated number of students impacted. These data
provide correlations between workshop attendance and new program development,
and allow the computation of national cost per impacted student as well as the
average cost per STEM teacher recruited. Anonymous data are made available to
International Learning Assistant Alliance partners to promote collaborative
research and materials development across sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2013
and 2014 national workshops train eight faculty members who have experience
running LA programs to offer regional workshops for local university and
community college faculty members. This provides even greater potential for
teacher recruitment and preparation through the LA model and for data collection
from diverse institutions. This two-year project has potential to support 320
math, science, and engineering faculty as they transform their undergraduate
courses in ways consistent with the Frameworks, in turn affording tens of
thousands of undergraduate students (and hundreds of future teachers) more and
better opportunities to engage with each other and with STEM content through the
use of scientific and engineering practices. STEM faculty who participate in
what appears to be an easy to adopt process of course transformation through the
LA model, become more aware of issues in educational diversity, equity, and
access leading to fundamental transformations in the way education is done in a
department and at an institution, ultimately leading to sustained policy changes
and shared vision of equitable, quality education.