* 1317952
* NRI: Small: EEG and EMG Human Model-Based Adaptive Control of a Dexterous Artificial Hand
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Erik Engeberg, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2015
* USD 250,000.00

The research goal of this award is to explore different methods for upper limb
amputees to control dexterous artificial hands with brain waves. Biomedical
signal processing techniques will be developed to enable this with a single,
small recording electrode placed noninvasively on the amputees' heads. The
recorded brain waves will be wirelessly transmitted to the hand in real time. A
top-level controller will be developed to interpret the intent of the amputees
while a low-level controller will be used to synchronize the dexterous grasp
motions of the artificial hand. Algorithms will also be developed using tactile
feedback from the fingertips to automatically prevent grasped objects from being
accidentally dropped when they are transported or disturbed. Amputees will
participate in a study to compare the newly developed artificial hand control
techniques with brain waves to conventional control techniques with muscle
signals during common tasks of daily life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will result in a noninvasive and economic method for
amputees to control a dexterous artificial hand with brain waves. This could
substantially improve the functionality of prosthetic hands for many amputees.
The use of minimal hardware will facilitate the clinical adoption of this
technique and the autonomous low-level control algorithms will produce a brain
machine interface that places a low cognitive burden on the operator. This
research can also be readily applied to benefit many disabled people including
stroke victims and quadriplegics and can positively impact other areas of
robotics such as improvised explosive disarmament, underwater and space
exploration, and rescue robotics. Underrepresented engineering students will
benefit from being included in this research plan. Additionally, undergraduate
and graduate engineering students will benefit from newly developed classes and
laboratory exercises resulting from this research.