* 1317133
* Hormonal changes among fathers and their impact on child development and relationship quality
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Alan Feranil, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2016
* USD 305,807.00

Research has shown that in some societies fathers have lower testosterone levels
than non-fathers. Recent research by the investigators conducting this project
was the first to use data collected over multiple years to show that it is the
transition to married life and first-time fatherhood which causes large declines
in testosterone, compared to if men remain single and childless. These decreases
in testosterone in new fathers and married men have been hypothesized to improve
men's functioning as parents and spouses, but this has yet to be thoroughly
tested, and it is known that not all men who become married or have children
experience substantial decreases in testosterone. This variation across men in
their hormonal responses might be linked to differences in mens roles across
professional, social, and familial (including nuclear and extended kin) lives.
To clarify the behavioral effects of these hormonal changes, their variation
across men, and how these hormonal aspects impact child well-being and
relationship quality requires that men and their families be followed through
time. This project will explore these questions among 908 men, their spouses,
and children participating in a unique study in the Philippines that has
followed a large sample of families for 30 years. Demographic, health,
behavioral, and relationship data will be collected through interviews with men
and their spouses. Parents will provide child well-being and development data,
and men's testosterone will be measured in saliva samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; By correlating hormone levels with detailed reports of
men's familial, professional, and social behaviors and comparing with outcomes
related to child well-being and family relationships, this study will help
clarify the importance of men's biology to the functioning of families. This
project also expands understanding of the ways in which behavior and biology
differ between individuals and across cultural groups by contributing important
insights into the range of human diversity in fathering/marital behaviors and
their relationships to male hormonal profiles. In achieving these goals, the
project will be central to an integrative graduate/undergraduate training
program in human biology at Northwestern University, and will broadly and
positively impact productive international scientific collaboration between
scholars and universities in the United States and the Philippines.