* 1317205
* Spectral Value Sets: Theory, Algorithms and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Michael Overton, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 431,745.00

Spectral value sets arise in the modeling of linear dynamical systems with
uncertain feedback. They are important because they model uncertainty inherent
in the feedback which is assumed to depend linearly on the output. They are
parametrized by a parameter E which bounds the norm of the uncertainty in
question. Theoretical aspects of the project include analysis of properties of
specific extremal points of spectral value sets for a given value of E and at
points of coalescence of the spectral value set components for critical values
of E, both in terms of local geometry and algebraic measures. Algorithmic
aspects include the development and analysis of fast methods to compute (1)
maximizers of the real part or modulus over a given spectral value set for fixed
E and (2) the complex stability radius (or its reciprocal, the H-infinity norm)
defined as the largest value of E such that the associated spectral value set
lies inside the stability region (the left half-plane or the unit disk). They
also include developing methods to design controllers for open-loop plants that
result in closed-loop systems with desired stability and optimality properties,
such as locally maximizing the stability radius (minimizing the H-infinity
norm). Since these functions are not concave or convex and their optimizers are
typically at points where they are not differentiable, methods for nonsmooth,
nonconvex minimization are needed, including methods that can handle constraints
efficiently.

The mathematical properties of spectral value sets and associated algorithms to
compute their extremal values have both theoretical and practical importance.
The broader goal of the project is to bring the tools of algorithms for
optimization over spectral value sets and related problems to a wide community
of scientists and engineers, for use in many different kinds of applications.
The investigator's open-source software is already in use in a variety of
applications, including the design of aircraft controllers, a proton exchange
membrane fuel cell system, power systems, observer-based fault detection and
minimally invasive surgery. All of these systems require controllers to work
effectively: a complex system such as an airplane or a power plant requires
automatic controllers to function safely and effectively, in addition to skilled
operators who know how to use such systems. However, current methods are limited
to small or moderate-sized systems, which cannot model real physical systems
accurately. The new methods will allow the design of controllers for much larger
systems than was previously possible, including control of discretized systems
of partial differential equations, which have applications throughout the
natural sciences and engineering.