* 1317501
* CUES:  Cornell University Engineering Success Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Alan Zehnder, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 908,106.00

This project is being supported under a special funding focus for STEP,
"Graduate 10K+," an activity of the National Science Foundation, supported in
part by donations from the Intel Foundation and the GE Foundation, to stimulate
comprehensive action at universities and colleges to help increase the annual
number of new B.S. graduates in engineering and computer science by 10,000 over
the next decade. Building on Cornell Engineering's strong record of recruitment
of underrepresented minority (URM) students, the goal of the Cornell University
Engineering Success Program (CUES) is to realize the promise implicit in the
recruiting success by increasing the retention and graduation rate of URM and
first generation college (FGC) students to a level equal to the overall
engineering student body. CUES is leveraging investments already made in
recruiting, in the pre-freshman summer and in the first year experience to
increase the number of Cornell-educated engineers. The CUES project team is
implementing three research-proven interventions that address known barriers to
the success of highly qualified and talented engineering students: a spatial
reasoning course; an engineering math institute combining tuition support for
summer courses, collaborative learning and research; and enhanced
tutoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three proposed interventions, coupled to
existing support programs such as mentoring, early intervention and tutoring for
first and second year courses support students at points where both the
literature and experience at Cornell show it is most needed. The spatial
reasoning course is developing a lasting, foundational skill needed for success
in gateway mathematics and science classes. The Engineering Math Institute is
giving students a chance to get back on track with the core mathematics
curriculum and to gain exposure to learning through discovery in a research
context. Enhanced tutoring is supporting the success of students in the majors
where retention data show that additional attrition occurs. A direct result of
the CUES program is the expectation of an additional 170 Cornell Engineering
graduates, most of them URM students. Beyond the immediate impact of these
additional engineers, the CUES Program is developing a model of how the
integration of proven interventions with a comprehensive support network for URM
and FGC students can make a significant impact on one of the most difficult
challenges to overcome in increasing the number of U.S. engineering and computer
science graduates.