* 1317292
* PFI: BIC-  New Substrates Enabling Next Generation Optical Devices: Solar Cells to Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Thomas Kuech, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 599,766.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from
University of Wisconsin-Madison (UW-M), entitled, "New Substrates Enabling Next
Generation Optical Devices: Solar Cells to Lasers," exploits the recent
innovations in the form of 'virtual' substrates developed at the University of
Wisconsin to provide new materials required for opening market capabilities in
the areas of optoelectronic devices, specifically light emitters, in new
wavelength ranges and solar cells. These materials will be developed through the
industrial partnerships that provide them with a competitive advantage in
burgeoning niche markets available for such devices. The use of the hydride
vapor phase epitaxy growth of GaAs and related compounds provides the capability
to create new types of substrates, 'virtual' substrates, which serve as new
device, and hence, manufacturing platforms for optoelectronic devices. The high
achieved growth rates and control over composition has enabled the formation of
semiconductor substrates with a surface that can have a lattice parameter not
accessible by commercially available bulk semiconductor substrates. These ultra-
thick metamorphic buffer layers transition between a commercial substrate and an
epitaxial surface layer which have differing lattice parameters. The resulting
surface lattice parameter is tunable, enabling new classes of devices spanning
the spectrum for the industrial partners from solar cells to high-performance
quantum cascade lasers. The partnerships developed in this project allow for the
development of a new capacity for translational research at UW-M through the
integration of materials development, with intimate feedback from the industrial
partners in terms of design and materials metrics that arerequired for the use
of such new materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
result from 1) the impact on technologies that benefit society, create new
markets, and provide unique materials for market entry in the area of
optoelectronic devices; 2) the human capital acquired by the participants,
especially the graduate and undergraduate students; and 3) the inclusion of
undergraduate interns in an environment where the impact of engineering and the
generation of new products are readily apparent. This proposal serves to drive
these industrial-academic interactions towards the mindful development of other
materials built on a new perspective of technology transfer. Industrial partners
gain access to materials enabling classes of devices resulting in the expansion
of the markets for high performance and specialized semiconductor optoelectronic
devices. This partnership will bring to an enhanced level of utility and
development a class of 'virtual' and potentially re-usable substrates enabling
the widespread development of novel classes of devices previously unachievable
through the use of current commercial substrates. The formation, preparation,
and processing of these new substrates is carried out in the context of their
end-use in the areas of high-performance quantum cascade lasers, new quantum
well infrared solid-state lasers, and high-performance multi-junction solar
cells. The co-development of these materials by UW-M and the industrial partners
will demonstrate and enable optoelectronic devices no longer constrained by
lattice-matching to commercial substrates. The UW-M researchers gain knowledge
of the design of materials based on the understanding of the product development
cycle and those key technological issues which must be addressed to impact new
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are the
University of Wisconsin-Madison through an interdisciplinary effort between the
Departments of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Materials Science and
Engineering, and Electrical and Computer Engineering; and three small
businesses: MicroLink Devices Inc. (Independent), est. 2000 (Niles, Illinois)
has a core business in the design and manufacture of III-V epitaxial material
used in cellular phones and other wireless devices; nLight Inc. (Independent)
est. 2000 (headquartered in Vancouver, WA) focuses on specialty high-power
semiconductor lasers developing material solutions for medical, defense, and
semiconductor solar applications. Intraband LLC (UW-M Start-up company), est.
2007 (Madison, WI) is an early-stage startup with the objective of
commercializing the quantum cascade laser (QCL) technologies.