* 1317919
* Practical Filtering Methods with Model Errors
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2017
* John Harlim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 11/30/2017
* USD 249,421.00

The projects in this proposal are part of the PI's long-term career goal to
deliver a class of practically scalable data assimilation (or filtering) schemes
with solid theoretical foundations for state estimation of geophysical fluid
dynamics. This proposal is an outgrowth of the PI's recent successful effort in
designing accurate, reduced filtering methods with cheap stochastic models as
alternatives to expensive models. Four projects are proposed: 1. Design
computationally faster stochastic filters to assimilate atmospheric infrared
sounder (AIRS) in the presence of multiple cloud types in the tropics. 2.
Develop stable linear autoregressive (AR) filters for nonlinear, weakly chaotic
dynamical systems. This project involves designing a novel parameterization
scheme for AR models that avoids utilizing a long time series as in classical
regression strategy, yet respects the sufficient conditions for optimal AR
filtering, established in the PI's recent work. 3. Study the role of higher
order terms of the singular perturbation expansion when a reduced model from
classical averaging theory is used in filtering multi-scale interaction between
modes of turbulent signals with moderate separation of scales. This study
involves formal asymptotic expansion and rigorous error estimation. The PI will
show that the higher order terms are important to avoid covariance
underestimation in the presence of model errors. 4. Develop a fast filtering
framework to assimilate multi-scale dynamical systems with
"superparameterization", a fast numerical scheme to resolve interaction of
cloud-scale dynamics and large-scale tropical convecting atmosphere. The new
algorithm will include an online small-scale estimation scheme that imposes
statistical consistency between the large and small-scale variables. Fundamental
issues in real-time weather prediction are model errors. This problem is
attributed to incomplete understanding of the physics and our lack of
computational resources to resolve physical processes in various time and length
scales. Modern operational weather models poorly reproduce the tropical
observational records even after resolving 10 billion variables. This long-
standing issue prevents the global weather model forecasting skill to improve
from weekly to monthly, as reported in a recent article in the World
Meteorological Organization bulletin. The results from this proposal will
transform the future design of computational methods for various prediction
related problems in the presence of model errors, in particular numerical
weather prediction. This proposal supports an interdisciplinary research
training environment for a graduate student, involving mathematical analysis,
statistical modeling, and scientific computing. The PI, who is jointly appointed
as a faculty in the mathematics and meteorology departments at PSU, will develop
an interdisciplinary graduate course with emphasis on PDE and waves for
atmospheric and ocean modeling.