* 1317684
* Multiscale Approaches for the Dynamics and Rheology of Magnetic Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Hector Ceniceros, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 405,151.00

The Principal Investigator proposes to carry out an integrated, comprehensive
research program which combines theory and innovative numerical methods with
state of the art experimental work for the investigation of two-phase systems
with a magnetic fluid component. This project aims at developing effective,
predictive computational tools as well as to advancing the understanding of
these two-phase, complex (non-Newtonian) flows. While magnetic fluids are
technologically important on their own they also constitute an excellent model
system (due to their low dimensional configuration space) for scientific study
of complex fluids as well as for active suspensions. Consequently, the proposed
research can have a wider impact in the multiscale modeling and computation of
more general two-phase flows with a complex fluid component. The specific
objectives of the proposed work can be summarized as follows: 1) to develop
innovative, effective micro-macro numerical approaches for magnetic fluids and
two phase flows with a magnetic fluid component in 2D and 3D and to apply them
for the prediction and investigation of the dynamics and rheology of these
complex fluid systems, 2) to use specifically targeted experimental work to
validate the new computational approaches as well as to provide a feedback
mechanism to the theory, 3) to formulate simplified models based on the an
increased understanding of the rheology of magnetic fluid systems obtained by a
combination of numerical and experimental work, and 4) to advance a fundamental
understanding of the microphysical mechanisms that influence the (macro)rheology
of magnetic fluid droplets and emulsions under the presence of a magnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic fluids, also known as ferrofluids, are
manmade colloidal suspensions of magnetic nano-particles in a liquid carrier.
Emulsions consisting of suspended magnetic fluid droplets surrounded by a
continuous phase offer a high potential for technologically important
applications such as the design of new smart materials and drug targeting. To
this end, as in other applications such as polymer and advanced material
processing, it is necessary to predict or manipulate the dynamics of their
droplet microstructure. This can be done with a combination of mathematical
modeling, computer simulation, and experimental work which the investigator
proposes to develop and integrate as part of this project. The broader impacts
of the proposed activities also include education, the integration of people
from underrepresented groups, and potential industrial relevance. The proposed
research will play a central role in the education and training of a new cadre
of computational math students who will learn to work in an interdisciplinary,
international team.