* 1317666
* Collaborative Research: Formation, properties and evolution of protoplanetary vortices: Multiscale investigations of  baroclinic instability
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Keith Julien, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 12/31/2017
* USD 430,000.00

Protoplanetary disks (PPDs) are geometrically thin, rotating sheets of gas and
dust that surround young stars, and are thought to be the birthplace of planets
such as our own. Fluid instabilities and turbulence within the disk gas are
thought to be the primary mechanisms for concentrating solid particles and
initiating the planet building process, yet it is not known currently which
instability or combination thereof is responsible. Computational constraints
limit numerical simulations of PPDs to resolutions that are incapable of
resolving all temporal and spatial scales of dynamical relevance. The PIs are
overcoming these limitations by developing a multi-scale mathematical model for
the purpose of identifying and simulating fluid instabilities and turbulence in
PPDs. In this respect, the proposed work can be viewed as a new computational
and modeling framework that will potentially allow for the highest resolution
simulations of PPD dynamics to date. Particular emphasis is being placed on
understanding the nonlinear properties, through the use of high resolution
numerical simulations, of the new Equatorial Vortex Instability (EVI) that has
been identified by the PIs. By employing rigorous asymptotic methods, a
hierarchical set of equations that is capable of simultaneously modeling small-
scale and global-scale dynamics and the coupling between the two scales is under
development for the first time. The results of the proposed investigation will
provide a more comprehensive understanding of (1) the effi_ciency and interplay
between various instability mechanisms, (2) the interaction between global and
local instabilities, and (3) a better understanding of the role of turbulent
vortices in enhancing the formation of planetesimals through the segregation and
agglomeration of small particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protoplanetary disks
(PPDs) are rotating sheets of gas and dust that surround young stars, and are
thought to be the birthplace of planets such as our own. Fluid motions within
the disk gas are thought to be the primary mechanism for concentrating solid
material and initiating the planet building process, yet it is not known
currently how such motions originate. Computer simulations have proven to be
valuable tools for advancing our understanding of PPD dynamics. However, it is
not currently possible to capture all the temporal and spatial scales of
dynamical relevance in PPDs given modern-day technological constraints. The PIs
are overcoming these limitations by developing the first multi-scale
mathematical model for the purpose of identifying and simulating fluid motion in
PPDs. In this respect, the proposed work can be viewed as a new computational
and modeling framework that will allow for the highest resolution simulations of
PPD dynamics to date.