* 1318194
* PFI: BIC  Developing the Potential of Spider Silk for the Marketplace
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Randolph Lewis, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2016
* USD 599,777.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from Utah
State University (USU) is designed to move the unique properties of spider silk
from the laboratory to the marketplace. Spider silks exhibit excellent strength
and toughness simultaneously, a feat unachievable in most synthetic structural
materials, and it has a thermal conductivity equivalent to copper. At USU,
recombinant silks closely mimicking natural spider silk sequences have been
developed and synthesized. The discovery and early development of spider silk?s
properties has led to the current point of joint technology-oriented research
with business and industry partners. Three industry partners and one non-profit
collaborator all have potential of developing spider silk products. This project
will produce bio-inspired fibers with materials properties specifically
appropriate for each of the partnering companies? possible product prototypes.
This research will combine expertise and resources to make it possible to move
spider silk technology toward products in three distinct areas: 1) biomedical
applications, in particular micro-fine sutures for eye and nerve surgery; 2)
composite materials from synthetic spider silk fibers; and 3) media for
microbial fermentation and synthetic feed for silkworms designed to augment
typical materials for production of the unique proteins. In addition, the unique
thermal transfer properties of spider silk will be explored to assess its use in
a variety of applications. The research will focus on which synthetic spider
silks will be the best for the different possible uses, how to scale-up
production of those spider silk proteins to levels that can be commercialized,
and how to incorporate these fibers into the companies? prospective prototypes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research lie in the
potential of the partnership to develop the products and techniques described
above that will open up new markets due to the unique properties of these
materials, which cannot currently be matched by any other materials. The new
products envisioned would substantially increase the revenue for the partner
companies, open up new product lines, and likely lead to increased jobs for them
and downstream businesses. The companies will directly gain new technical skills
such as electrospinning, fiber testing, methods for handling unique fibers, and
testing methods for new feed media. In return, the Lewis Laboratory at USU will
gain experience in composite material design and manufacture, 3D printing, rapid
prototyping techniques, and methods for media analyses. Both the companies and
the USU laboratory will gain access to unique instrumentation aiding both
academe and industry in the future development of products from these unique
materials. Also, importantly the development of media and diets to improve the
production of the silk fibers will be crucial for production to meet expected
demand. These partnerships can also lead to the use of spider silk in additional
products in other companies. In addition to the research scientists
participating in this project, students involved in this project will also gain
valuable experience working with industry partners and with company scientists
not only in the research, but also in the planning and design phases. Students
will also have opportunities to present on their research and work with the PI
in outreach efforts to give several presentations and tours on spiders and
spider silk to K-12 students. The project will also provide hands-on workshops
for the Engineering State conference for high school students with a particular
goal of recruiting women and Hispanic students. This research area has continued
to produce enthusiastic media attention for both the PI?s research and sponsors
in the U.S. and internationally from multiple television networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are Utah State
University (Synthetic Bioproducts Institute and United Science Technology
Advanced Research(USTAR) and three primary small technology businesses: Caisson
Laboratories, Inc.(Logan, UT); Iso Nano International, LLC (San Diego, CA); Zigg
Design, LLC(Logan, UT; and a non-profit collaborator, Space Dynamics
Laboratory(Logan, UT).