* 1318727
* Quaternary and Late Neogene Growth of the Cucomungo Canyon Restraining Bend and Associated Deformation Rates, Death Valley-Fish Lake Valley Fault System, Western Great Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2021
* John Geissman, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 09/30/2021
* USD 397,365.00

This research project extends deformation rate estimates for the Death Valley-
Fish Lake Valley transcurrent fault system, western Great Basin, to the last 5
million years with a stepwise resolution of 100,000 and possibly 10,000 years.
The work will focus on a major restraining bend in the Death Valley-Fish Lake
Valley fault system that formed as lateral displacement along the Death Valley-
Fish Lake Valley fault was transferred to local shortening and uplift. The
primary objectives are: (1) determination of deformation rates; (2) assessment
of the role of discrete versus distributed deformation mechanisms; and (3)
characterization of the three-dimensional geometry and evolution of structures
and possible vertical-axis rotation during formation of the restraining bend.
The project involves integration of detailed geologic mapping, structural
analysis, stratigraphic characterization, geochronology, and
magnetostratigraphic-paleomagnetic analysis. Field and laboratory studies will
define the three-dimensional geometry, tectonic evolution, and mechanisms of
deformation active during the formation of this major contractional structure.
Assessment of deformation rates over different time intervals utilizes a robust
chronostratigraphic framework and determination of aggregate and incremental
displacements from deformation models. By combining high-precision 40Ar/39Ar age
data for numerous key stratigraphic intervals (e.g. specific tephra layers and
volcaniclastic deposits) with a magnetic polarity stratigraphy that can be
correlated with the astrochronologically-tuned Neogene geomagnetic polarity
timescale, temporal resolutions of 100,000 and possibly 10,000 years will be
obtained. Combining this temporal information with field relations involving
synorogenic strata and three-dimensional structural models allows resolution of
incremental displacements of 100 to 1,000 meters during growth of the structure.
With these displacement and timing ranges, the displacement and growth of the
restraining bend provides rate determinations comparable to those for late
Quaternary surface displacements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate estimates of the
rates of a broad range of geologic processes are critical to understanding the
evolution of the Earth's surface over different time scales. The deformation of
continents through the formation of faults and the release of seismic energy as
earthquakes, in what is known as the earthquake cycle, is becoming better
understood over durations of tens to tens of thousands of years and such
information provides important insights into whether or to what degree
earthquake activity remains the same through geologic time. Unfortunately, the
ability to estimate deformation rates on major fault systems becomes more poorly
resolved with the passage of time, mainly due to the obscuring effects of
younger deformation and the inability to measure offset of well-dated marker
units across faults. The capacity to estimate deformation rates over durations
of tens of thousands and hundreds of thousands of years in most parts of the
world remains elusive for periods of geologic time ranging from hundreds of
thousands and millions of years. Enhanced understanding the earthquake cycle
over durations of millions of years requires unraveling Earth's history over
different time scales, and can be addressed only in rare instances where
geologic structures are well preserved and provide the capacity to date geologic
events with high- precision. The anticipated results of this research project
will quantify the progressive development of a part of a major geologic fault
system exposed within the broad, currently seismically active region that is the
boundary between the eastern Sierra Nevada and the western Great Basin in the
western US Cordillera. The Death Valley-Fish Lake Valley fault system has been
active for several millions of years and records tens of kilometers of
horizontal displacement. When compared to well determined contemporary and
latest Quaternary deformation rate estimates established geodetically and from
offset geomorphic features, the results of this study will help tie active
tectonic to long-term deformation processes.