* 1318977
* EXP: Exploring the potential of mobile augmented reality for scaffolding historical inquiry learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* David Cline, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2016
* USD 549,039.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education EXP project, reserachers are
addressing how and for what purposes Augmented Reality (AR) technologies can be
used to support learning of critical inquiry strategies and processes; the
question is being explored in the context of history education and the SCIM-C
(Summarizing, Contextualizing, Inferring, Monitoring, and Corroborating)
framework developed for inquiry history education. A combined hardware/software
platform is being designed and developed to support SCIM-C pedagogy. Students
use a mobile device with augmented reality to augment their "field" experience
at a local historical site. In addition to experiencing the site as it exists,
AR technology is being built to allow them to view and experience the site from
several social perspectives and to view its structure and uses over several time
periods. Students also use the mobile device to collect, annotate, and organize
data at the local site, and the apps organize that data according to where it is
collected at the site. Additional desktop and laptop software supports
exploration, manipulation, and analysis of the data and writing and discussion
in support of telling the site's story. Research focuses on the design of AR
applications and associated technologies to support inquiry based in field work
for the variety of disciplines where analysis of change over time is important
(e.g., historical-cultural studies, geosciences, eco-sciences) and on
understanding how to use the perspectives augmented reality can provide to
promote inquiry processes and to promote understanding of how very small changes
over long periods of time may add up to very large
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning how to think critically, analyze sources,
and develop an evidence-based account is central to a variety of disciplines.
However, learners struggle to grasp the importance of such inquiry processes, to
understand how experts engage in inquiry, and to master the strategies needed to
practice such inquiry themselves. The purpose of this project is to explore how
augmented reality (AR) technology can be used to give learners concrete
experiences of life during several historical periods and support their
reasoning as they make sense of the story of the place and what influenced its
history. The researchers posit that the same types of concrete experiences with
the past and the same types of help with making sense of changes over time are
necessary to understand many sciences as well, and they expect that what is
learned about making the historical past concrete enough for high schoolers to
grasp will also be applicable to making the history of the natural world
concrete enough for high schoolers to support their understanding of such
concepts as geologic time, geologic processes, and evolutionary processes.