* 1318571
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Delay Signatures: Blurring the Boundary between the Network and the Processor
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* William Robinson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

The distinction between computing and communication has blurred with the
improvements in semiconductor technology as well as the speed and reliability of
computer networks. At a macroscopic level, individuals increasingly rely upon
smart phones, cloud computing, and similar infrastructure that combines
computing systems with networking to accomplish their daily tasks. Many end-
users even consider the client device, the server, and the network as one
blended unit that is used for productivity and/or entertainment. At the
microscopic level, the linkage between the two areas ideally should not require
the use of special-purpose software, because installing software on a network
node to enable this blending can potentially cause the node to be unstable or
more complex, and potentially introduce security flaws. However, linking the two
domains without the use of additional software remains a significant challenge.
This research focuses on understanding and characterizing the connection between
the computing node and the network to meet that challenge. For example, by
simply probing a node's network traffic and collecting its responses, it can be
determined that the internal components (e.g., microprocessor) are heavily
utilized. If the node is expected to be idle, then this indicator could signal
that the node has been compromised and is running unauthorized
software.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;This project uses a holistic approach that
combines computer architecture and computer networking to investigate and
characterize how the microarchitecture affects the network packet generation
process. Since the internal components of a node are shared resources among all
processes, including those that require network-based I/O, it is possible to
infer the load on the internal components by observing variations in delay
between successive network packets that are generated by the node. This
inference materializes as a "delay signature," and can be used to blend the
areas of architecture and networking. The delay signature provides information
that can be attributed to the internal state and settings of the
microarchitecture. Architectural settings, such as processor affinity, multi-
threading, and power-saving modes, affect the delay signature. The PIs use a
hardware testbed and a system simulator to characterize and model the basic
system components that can have a significant (direct or indirect) impact on
packet generation. The project culminates with the creation of a general-purpose
engine that automates the detection of utilization signatures and uses those
signatures to predict node utilization remotely. The PIs incorporate team-based
laboratory projects within their computer architecture and computer networking
courses to demonstrate the relationship between the two domains and to promote
integrated learning by students in both areas. Further, the investigators employ
an outreach plan with complementary components to: (1) encourage students to
enter the science and engineering fields and (2) mentor potential faculty
members to serve as educators and role models. Potential applications of the
delay signature include: (1) providing security for networked nodes by
monitoring unauthorized utilization and (2) providing efficient scheduling in
cluster grids.