* 1318167
* TWC: Small: Securing the New Converged Telephony Landscape
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Patrick Traynor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The telephony system, which enabled near universal voice communication, has
undergone a dramatic change due to technological advances and legal and
regulatory changes. Although these changes offer many benefits, including low
cost calling and richer functionality, they have introduced new vulnerabilities
that can seriously undermine the trust people have in transactions conducted
over the telephony channel. In fact, caller impersonation and social engineering
over the phone are increasingly being used to commit fraud and steal credentials
for online account takeovers. This project focuses on research that can help
secure the emerging telephony landscape against these and other emerging
threats. To better understand security threats, the project first explores the
feasibility of using a telephony honeypot for characterizing the sources and
nature of unwanted and malicious calls, and the vulnerabilities exploited by
these calls. Based on an understanding of these threats and vulnerabilities, new
techniques are investigated to combat and mitigate telephony based attacks. For
example, to address call metadata manipulation, features embedded into the call
audio itself are investigated, which can potentially be used to establish the
source of a call in a more robust manner. The project also seeks to understand
cross channel malicious activity in which attackers utilize both the web and
telephony channels to devise and mount sophisticated attacks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telephony has been a trusted channel in the past and the
project explores how trustworthy communication can be enabled in the future when
voice communication will increasingly be integrated with our other online
activities.