* 1318964
* EDU: A Virtual Lab for a Hardware Security Curriculum
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Zhijie Shi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 05/31/2018
* USD 295,573.00

The objective of this project is to create a virtual laboratory for hardware
security lab exercises. The lab exercises are based on a hands-on 'hardware
hacking' course where students can work on specialized hardware to try out
various hardware-based attacks. These lab activities include modules on side
channel power analysis attacks, electromagnetic keyboard logging, counterfeit
integrated circuit detection, and hardware Trojan attacks. Since the hardware
lab components that enable these lab modules can be very expensive, it may be
difficult to incorporate these labs in smaller universities and colleges. The
virtual laboratory allows students from other institutions to remotely use the
hardware in the University of Connecticut lab through a secure online website.
The project has a significant impact on cybersecurity education by enabling the
offering of hardware security curricula at a broader range of institutions
through the use of virtual laboratories. The virtual labs allow multiple
institutions to share hardware resources available at the University of
Connecticut and use them in their own hardware security classes. Hardware
security is a field of growing importance but there are no programs available to
train students in this area. The virtual laboratory encourages programs at more
institutions and thus increases the pool of professionals trained in hardware
security. The results of this research are being disseminated in journals and
conferences. The virtual lab framework and modules as well as results of
evaluations, project assessment, and student learning outcomes are provided on
the www.trust-hub.org website.