* 1318176
* Mitigation of the Effects of Chronic Stress through Social Bonding
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Steven Monfort, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2016
* USD 196,741.00

In many primate societies, including humans, individuals form strong, long-
lasting social bonds which can be adaptive, for example, by increasing
longevity, offspring survival, and, ultimately, reproductive success. What is
still poorly understood are the mechanisms by which social bonds achieve their
effects. One possibility is that, because of their known function in helping
individuals cope with stressors, social bonds mitigate negative effects of
chronic stress on health and reproduction. But whether, and how, daily-life
social stress influences female reproduction in primate societies also is poorly
understood. This project will address both of the above gaps in our knowledge by
examining the pathways connecting variation in social bonds with measures of
health and reproduction. It will assess whether stress hormones mediate the
susceptibility to intestinal parasite infections; examine the relationship
between social stress and reproductive physiology; and evaluate whether social
bonds mediate success in feeding competition, and hence, energy available for
reproduction. Data for this project will be collected from three troops of
chacma baboons (Papio ursinus) in the Cape Peninsula of South Africa.

The project's multifaceted data will include behavioral observations to document
sources of stress and social bonds; measurement of stress and reproductive
hormones, as well as intestinal parasite loads, via non-invasively collected
fecal samples; and collection of urinary C-peptide (a byproduct of insulin
production) to measure energy balance. Additionally, a novel field experiment
will be conducted in which intestinal parasites are eliminated from a random
selection of females to assess, for the first time in a wild primate, the
factors associated with the timing and intensity of re-infection. Utilizing this
comprehensive approach, the research will generate new insights into the
mechanisms linking social behavior, stress physiology, health, and reproduction,
and help elucidate the function of social bonds in primate societies.

Because non-human primates such as baboons share many traits with humans and are
useful in studying aspects of human biology, this project will improve
understanding of the benefits of sociality during human evolution and carry
clinical implications by elucidating the role of social stress as a risk factor
for parasite infections. The project will strengthen institutional ties between
the U.S. and South Africa, train students underrepresented in science, and
provide valuable data and educational resources to aid in management and
conservation of primates.