* 1318784
* EXP: "Earthquake Rebuild" - Mathematical Thinking and Learning via Architectural Design and Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Gordon Erlebacher, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2017
* USD 549,937.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education Exploration project, the PIs
investigate how to help middle schoolers simultaneously develop mathematics
understanding, mathematics skill, and mathematics disposition. They are taking
design-based pedagogical approach, having students practice the math they are
learning through architectural design. Their software environment, called
"Earthquake Rebuild," sets learners up in a virtual environment where an
earthquake has demolished a city, and they must use geometry and arithmetic to
make architectural and city planning decisions as they aim to rebuild the city.
In this same context software context, the investigators are incorporating means
of unobtrusive collection and analysis of performance data, called "stealth
assessment," for purposes of both tracking development of understanding and
capabilities and providing adaptive learner support. Research addresses
practical issues in design of systems that help learners deeply learn content
and skills in the context of solving real-world problems and in design of
stealth assessments. Research also addresses conceptual issues in mathematics
learning, specifically focusing on the ways that informal mathematical
conjectures emerge and are transformed into formal mathematics knowledge through
concrete application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Too many middle schoolers fail to
develop the kinds of mathematics capabilities they will need to be productive in
the workforce and to be engaged citizens. Even more middle schoolers complete
middle school without appreciating the connections between mathematics and the
real world they live in. The aim of this project is to address both of these
issues: to promote deep mathematical understanding and capabilities among middle
schoolers and to engage them in "mathematizing" their worlds -- seeing the roles
mathematics plays in the natural and built environment around them. To achieve
these goals, investigators are designing a software environment that allows
students to combine serious play and learning as they use middle-school
mathematics to reconstruct a demolished fictional city. The system is being
designed to collect data about student understanding in the background (called
"stealth assessment") so that as students engage with the system, it can help
them use mathematics to rebuild the buildings in the fictional city, more deeply
learn the mathematics they are using, and come to appreciate the usefulness of
mathematics and mathematical thinking in engaging productively in problem
solving and design activities. Investigators will learn more about how to design
learning technologies that will help learners learn and appreciate mathematics,
how mathematics is learned when students engage more systematically in using
math, and how to accomplish the types of stealth assessment needed to
personalize learning technologies to the needs of individual students.