* 1318934
* TWC: Small: Quantitative Analysis and Reporting of Electromagnetic Covert and Side Channel Vulnerabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Alenka Zajic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2017
* USD 500,535.00

Most traditional approaches to computer security assume that information from
the system can only be sent through intended output channels, such as network
connection, monitor, portable disk drive, etc. Side-channel and covert-channel
attacks circumvent these protections by extracting information that is leaked or
deliberately sent from the system through unintended signals, such as
electromagnetic emanations, power consumption, timing of computational activity,
etc. Methods for reducing such information leakage are usually tied to specific
hardware and/or specific algorithms, and are very labor intensive. This allows
specific fragments of code, such as cryptographic functions, to be relatively
safe, but is not feasible for analysis and protection in large codes, such as
entire operating systems or web browsers, that also tend to process sensitive
information. This project is investigating the relationship between software
activity and the resulting side-channel leakage, with the goal of automating
software analyses that can discover which data might be leaked and in which
parts of the code. These analyses can reveal both covert-channel (intentional)
and side-channel (unintentional) leakage vulnerabilities in software, helping
programmers focus their efforts on reducing or eliminating these
vulnerabilities. In addition to these research components that will help
increase national security, the project also includes specific outreach
activities, such as building an interactive demonstrator to help educate the
public about cyber-security concepts, and visits to local schools to help
improve K-12 education and participation of women and minorities in science and
engineering.