* 1318215
* HCC: Small: Thermal Displays in Human Computer Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Lynette Jones, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2018
* USD 491,915.00

To date most of the research concerned with exploring the use of the skin for
human-computer communication has focused on tactile displays, which represent a
promising arena for enhancing the display of information in situations in which
the visual and auditory systems are overloaded. But in addition to its tactile
sensors, the skin also houses thermal receptors that respond to changes in skin
temperature and convey information about the magnitude and rate of change in
temperature. Thermal feedback may potentially be of use as a channel of
communication or in enhancing tactile and visual feedback in multisensory
displays. The PI's objective in this research is to explore the domains in which
thermal feedback can be used as a medium of communication and to identify the
types of inputs that are most effective for users, with the long term goal of
discovering conditions under which thermal feedback enhances human performance
as reflected in more efficient information processing or the ability to respond
more effectively to an external event. The focus is on using thermal interfaces
within the context of a multisensory environment to display abstract information
rather than to facilitate object recognition in a virtual environment or when
controlling a tele-operated robot. The human thermal sensory system presents
unique challenges when considered as a medium of communication due to its
spatial and temporal properties which differ from those of other sensory
systems. Although this constrains the types of cues that can be presented to
users, it also opens up the possibility of creating new forms of feedback which
by virtue of their novelty may be quite compelling to users. The work will be
divided into three thrusts: determine the optimal configuration and operating
characteristics of thermal displays interfaced with input devices used to
interact with computers; evaluate the feasibility of using thermal stimuli to
represent abstract information and appraise the viability of using thermal cues
to present novel sensory experiences such as illusions of moisture or wetness;
and examine whether the representation of information in multisensory displays
is enhanced when thermal feedback is presented concurrently with tactile and
visual cues.

Broader Impacts: There is very little research on the feasibility of using
thermal displays to present abstract information, so this work has the potential
to open a fundamentally new application domain for thermal interfaces. The
availability of thermal cues in displays should increase the designer's ability
to choose among modalities and assign functions and types of information to the
channel that is best suited for their presentation. Project outcomes will also
contribute to the development of sensory substitution systems for those with
visual, auditory or vestibular impairments; there has been a considerable amount
of research on using the sense of touch to compensate for deficiencies in other
senses and the addition of thermal feedback to such displays provides an added
dimension for communication, potentially increasing the reliability of
communication.