* 1318015
* US-China Collaboration: Problems in Computational Algebraic Geometry
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Jerome Hoffman, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 12/31/2014
* USD 29,610.00

The proposed project catalyzes a new collaboration between the Louisiana State
University and three institutes in China, in the area of computational algebraic
geometry.Research is planned in 3 distinct
domains:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems in Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry.
Specifically: (1) Moduli of genus 3 curves with special endomorphisms of their
Jacobians. (2) Modularity questions for the Galois representations that arise
from curves in part (1); (3) Special values of L-functions for Galois
representations of the shape &amp;#961;f &amp;#8855; &amp;#966; where f is a
modular form and &amp;#966; is a nonabelian Artin representation; (4) Dynamical
systems arising from integer matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polynomial systems.
Develop efficient algorithms for solving systems of polynomials via in- volutive
bases such as Pommaret bases. Extend work already done for solving 0-dimensional
systems to higher dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generalized hypergeometric
equations. Study the GKZ hypergeometric systems attached to interesting
polytopes, for instance those coming from root systems. These give rise to
interesting families of varieties, such as Calabi-Yau
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All three areas are related to currently active
research going on in algebraic geometry, and projects will involve both
theoretical and computational tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic Geometry -
is concerned with solutions to systems of polynomial equations. Polynomials are
ubiquitous in pure and applied mathematics. They are fundamental objects
occurring in practically every domain of science, and their study is central to
many areas of current mathematical research. Part of the project is a study of
spaces defined by polynomials. Another part is to study algorithms for the
efficient solution to polynomial equations. This project also explores
connections to other parts of mathematics, for instance number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal also supports one month visits each
for a graduate student and a young post- doctoral researcher. The locus of this
research is China, especially Beijing and Tianjin. The PI will be collaborating
with Chinese mathematicians, and also teaching courses on related topics. This
project allows two young U.S. mathematicians to participate in the exciting
mathematical world developing in China. Establishing and extending such
international collaborations can have a major positive impact not only on the
narrow goals of a research project, but also on the long-term development of
research and teaching in the US.