* 1318788
* III: Small: Data Management for Real-Time Data Driven Epidemic Spread Simulations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 515,602.00

The speed with which recent pandemics had immense global impact highlights the
importance of realtime response and public health decision making, both at local
and global levels. For instance, the SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome)
epidemic is estimated to have started in China in November 2002, had spread to
29 countries by August 2003, and generated a total of 916 confirmed deaths. A
pandemic similar to the swine flu in 2009 is estimated to cost $360 billion in a
mild scenario to the global economy and up to $4 trillion in an ultra scenario,
within just the first year of the outbreak. Today, the key arsenal in the hands
of decision makers who try to plan for and/or react to these outbreaks is
software that enable model-driven epidemics and as well as the impacts of
pharmaceutical and computer simulations for disease spreading. These software
help predict geo-temporal evolution of non-pharmaceutical control measures and
interventions, relying on data and models including social contact networks,
local and global mobility patterns of individuals, transmission and recovery
rates, and outbreak conditions. Unfortunately, because of the volume and
complexity of the data and the models, the varying spatial and temporal scales
at which the key transmission processes operate and relevant observations are
made, today running and interpreting simulations to generate actionable plans
are extremely difficult.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If effectively leveraged, models
reflecting past outbreaks, existing simulation traces obtained from simulation
runs, and real-time observations incoming during an outbreak can be collectively
used for obtaining a better understanding of the epidemic's characteristics and
the underlying diffusion processes, forming and revising models, and performing
exploratory, if-then type of hypothetical analyses of epidemic scenarios. More
specifically, the proposed epidemic simulation data management system (epiDMS)
will address computational challenges that arise from the need to acquire,
model, analyze, index, visualize, search, and recompose, in a scalable manner,
large volumes of data that arise from observations and simulations during a
disease outbreak. Consequently, epiDMS fill an important hole in data-driven
decision making during health-care emergencies and, thus, will enable
applications and services with significant economic and health
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key observation is that the modeling and
execution can be significantly reduced using a data-driven approach that
supports data and simulation reuse in new settings and contexts. Relying on this
observation, in order to support data-driven modeling and execution of epidemic
spread simulations, this team will develop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+ an epidemic
data and model store (epiStore) to support acquisition and integration of
relevant data and models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+ a novel networks-of-traces (NT)
data model to accommodate multi-resolution, interconnected and inter-dependent,
incomplete/imprecise, multi-layer (networks), and temporal (time series or
traces) epidemic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+ algorithms and data structures to
support indexing of networks-of-traces (NT) data sets, including extraction of
salient multi-variate temporal features from inter-dependent parameters,
spanning multiple simulation layers and geo-spatial frames, driven by complex
dynamic processes operating at different resolutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;+
algorithms to support the analysis of networks-of-traces (NT) datasets,
including identification of unknown dependencies across the&lt;br/&gt;input
parameters and output variables spanning the different layers of the observation
and simulation data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed NT data model and
algorithms will be brought together in an epidemic simulation data management
system (epiDMS). For broadest impact, the proposed epidemic simulation data
management system (epiDMS) will be designed in a way that interfaces with the
popular Global Epidemic and Mobility (GLEaM) simulation engine, a publicly
available software suit to explore epidemic spreading scenarios at the global
scale. To achieve necessary scalabilities, epiDMS will employ novel
multiresolution data partitioning and resource allocation strategies and will
leverage massive parallelism.