* 1318913
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Anomaly Detection in Graph Streams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Lawrence Holder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* jun huan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 249,796.00

The main objective of this project is to develop scalable algorithms for
learning normative patterns and anomalies in graph streams, where the patterns
are known, unknown but fixed, or changing over time. The project team is
pursuing several techniques, including partitioning the graph over time,
processing only the changes to the graph over time, and parallel implementations
on high-performance computing platforms. They are evaluating the effectiveness
and efficiency of these algorithms in terms of expected data sizes, data rates,
and recall/precision using several real-world, large, dynamic datasets as well
as synthetic data. They are also evaluating the discovered patterns and
anomalies for their significance in the target domains. This research is
advancing the knowledge and understanding of how to efficiently process large,
high-rate data streams represented as a graph in order to learn structural
patterns and detect structural anomalies in real time. The algorithms developed
under this project represent a new level of scalability that is necessary to
address today?s massive, dynamic data environments, as well as users' needs to
quickly discover actionable intelligence in the form of trends and anomalies.

This project impacts the scientific research community by advancing the state-
of-the-art in mining graphs for patterns and anomalies in large, dynamic data
streams, and disseminating these research results via publications, software
tools and data to be provided on the project website. This project also impacts
education via the inclusion of research results into existing courses at the
teams' institutions, and the dissemination of these curricular materials via the
project website. The project supports the research training of two graduate
students, utilizing recruiting efforts from underrepresented groups to assist in
the selection of these students. The project benefits society by providing
efficient and effective tools for detecting patterns and anomalies in data that
can lead to new discoveries in a variety of domains where large amounts of
dynamic data are available, including national security, cyber-security, and
social media.

For further information see project website: http://ailab.wsu.edu/adgs