* 1318489
* SHF: Small: Contract Inference for Polyglot Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Benjamin Liblit, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 384,339.00

Software engineers use various "programming languages" to write the software
that runs on our computers, smart phones, cars, and other devices. Modern
software is a complex mix of pieces written in many different languages. But
cross-language communication is difficult and error-prone, for humans and
machines alike. The PI's research will ease the burden of developers working
across multiple programming languages by automatically generating the "glue"
that sticks different fragments together, which will let developers work in more
modern, safe, high-level languages while still benefiting from the large
existing investment in older, unsafe, low-level code. The result will be faster,
cheaper development by productive programmers, leading to more trustworthy
software to benefit society as a whole.

Specifically, the PI will use a variety of static program analyses to address
three recurring challenges of multi-language software development: disallowed
values, resource management, and error reporting. Disallowed values, such as
unexpected NULL pointers, are a form of API misuse that can lead to failures or
undefined behaviors. By identifying these and trapping them in high-level code
before they reach low-level libraries, the PI's research will allow safer
execution and improved failure diagnostics. Resource management requires
uncovering the subtle, sometimes quirky rules by which low-level libraries track
memory, file descriptors, and other resources. Static analyses to recover
resource management models will let these be managed automatically by the
improved mechanisms (e.g., garbage collectors) available in high-level code.
Lastly, error reporting analysis will identify ad hoc error propagation
mechanisms (such as returned error codes) used in low-level libraries and map
these to the structured high-level mechanisms (such as exceptions) that high-
level application developers expect. The net effect of these will be improved
library bindings that let high-level programmers do their jobs more efficiently,
introducing fewer bugs, creating tomorrow's great software for all of us to rely
upon.