* 1318202
* PFI: BIC-  Building Innovation Capacity through Partnerships in Innovation in Electrochemical Energy Storage Devices
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* William Bernier, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2016
* USD 596,329.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from SUNY
at Binghamton focuses on energy storage in ultracapacitors and electrolytic
capacitors for applications in renewable energy, transportation, and power
electronics systems. There is an urgent need for storage devices that can store
higher energy, cope with large surge currents, and have lifetimes of a million
cycles or more. The research partnership will identify and develop innovative
materials systems, optimize processes, and fabricate and test ultracapacitors to
achieve these goals. This project will focus on two emerging technologies,
innovative Li-ion (LIC) and hybrid ultracapacitors to fill the crucial energy-
power performance gap for applications in electric transportation, and graphene
electrolytic capacitors (GEC) for high impact power electronics in absorbing and
supplying high current pulses. Tapping the potential of nanomaterials,
simplified ultracapacitor designs and green process technologies are the
innovative aspects of this partnership that seeks technology solutions to the
energy storage and efficient energy utilization in energy products and in energy
harvesting systems.

The broader impacts of this research include significant benefits to society
through more efficient and lower cost energy storage in a wide range of
applications. The technologies promise long lifetimes, much lower life cycle
costs, and much less environmental impact than batteries, Combining the
expertise of a materials supplier and a commercial manufacturer of capacitors
with Binghamton University, the partnerships will build innovation capacity,
increase the viability and competitiveness of the New York State companies
through new product development, and will educate the next generation of
engineers and scientists who can contribute to this important area.

Partners at the inception of the project are Binghamton University through the
Center of Autonomous Solar Power with faculty and students from Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Chemistry, and Materials Science and Engineering. The
primary small technology-based business partners include Primet Precision
Materials (Ithaca, New York) and Custom Electronics Inc.(Oneonta, NY.) Primet is
a manufacturer of nanomaterials using a proprietary low cost process for lithium
ion batteries and other applications. Custom Electronics is a manufacturer of
capacitor devices and electronic assemblies for industrial and military
applications. Custom Electronics has also previously founded and spun-off Ioxus
Inc. as an independent company, which is now the largest domestic manufacturer
of ultracapacitors.