* 1318070
* AF:  Small:  Theory and Applications of Untrusted Quantum Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Yaoyun Shi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2016
* USD 416,802.00

Imagine that you would like to make use of the powerful information processing
capability of quantum devices but you are not yet equipped to implement the
necessary quantum operations. You may purchase quantum devices that come with a
classical interface. However, you may not necessarily trust the manufacturer's
claim on the inner-working of the devices. Even if you do, the devices may be
corrupted for many reasons. An important question thus arises: what can we do
through classically interacting with quantum devices that may deviate from the
ideal specification? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this question, the
researchers are developing a theory of untrusted quantum devices through this
project. Such a theory would be supported by two pillars:&lt;br/&gt;(a) Robust
self-testing of quantum states and quantum operations. That is, methods for
pinning down the quantum device (its state and measurements) through classical
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;(b) General principles for proving cryptographic
properties of untrusted quantum devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A successful
theory will identify the power and limitations of classical interactions with
quantum devices. In particular, it may provide new tools for designing and
analyzing the security of cryptographic protocols that rely on untrusted quantum
devices. This will bring the tremendous potential of quantum information
processing closer to reality. The project also serves as a training program for
both undergraduate and graduate students for cutting-edge research on quantum
information processing.