* 1318660
* Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2014
* Timothy Deering, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation for the R/V
Hugh R Sharp, a 146 foot Regional research vessel operated as part of the
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R/V Hugh R Sharp is a state-of-the-art, coastal
research vessel that is owned and operated by the University of Delaware. The
vessel can carry fourteen to twenty scientists on cruises up to eighteen days in
duration, and supports projects from all disciplines of oceanography. The vessel
is a regional asset, serving researchers from many institutions throughout the
mid-Atlantic. The vessel typically operates in the coastal waters from Long
Island, New York, to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, as well as the Delaware and
Chesapeake Bays. Projects occasionally require the vessel to work as far north
as the Gulf of Maine, as far south as Florida, and as far offshore as Bermuda.
In 2012, the R/V Hugh R Sharp completed 204 days at sea. NSF funded projects
accounted for 37% of the total sailing schedule. In 2013, R/V Hugh R Sharp is
scheduled for 216 days with NSF days accounting for 35% of the total sailing
schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic instrumentation requested in this
proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1) Chirp 3260 Dual Channel
Echo Sounder $63,200 &lt;br/&gt; 2) Scanfish Upgrade $66,000 &lt;br/&gt; Total
$129,200 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under criterion two
of the Proposal Guidelines. They provide infrastructure support for scientists
to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-
funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate
review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance
and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from
any US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.