* 1318883
* EDU: Collaborative: Bolstering Security Education through Transiting Research on Browser Security
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Wenliang Du, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 89,878.00

The Web browser is one of the most frequently used application by most people to
perform common tasks such as shopping, social networking, emailing, banking,
finding directions, and research on the Internet. Security threats and attacks
targeting browsers or browser-based applications are becoming sophisticated as
attackers are constantly developing innovative ways to exploit vulnerabilities
of browsers and browser-based applications. Researchers, though, are making
positive progress in mitigating risks from browsers to defend enterprise systems
and consumer devices. Therefore, it is imperative to bring research results on
browser security into education and integrate them into the existing IA
curricula. This project aims to (1) use typical topics in browser security as
the basis for transferable teaching objects containing lecture slides, lecture
videos, hands-on labs, quizzes, interactive visualization tools, and case
studies for adoption in many education settings; (2) integrate the developed
teaching objects in browser security into the existing curricula in three
participating institutes: Syracuse University, University of Tennessee at
Chattanooga, and North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University; and
(3) conduct faculty development workshops to disseminate the teaching objects
and build partnerships among institutions. The broader impacts of this project
include strengthened partnership and enhanced IA curricula among the
participating institutions as well as institutions from across the nation, and
improved IA research and education opportunities for minorities and females.