* 1318527
* FSML: Upgrading the Whitney Laboratory's capability for marine genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Barbara-Anne Battelle, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2014
* USD 343,111.00

The University of Florida (UF) is awarded a grant to purchase a state-of-the art
solid-state semiconductor DNA sequencer for the Whitney Lab for Marine
Bioscience and a new high bandwidth internet connection to the main UF campus.
Situated some 90 miles from the main campus in Gainesville, the Whitney lab is a
leader in utilizing marine biodiversity to address fundamental problems in
biomedical science. The new equipment will allow the nine resident research labs
as well as visiting scientists from around the world to utilize their existing
strengths in cellular and molecular approaches to understanding neural systems
and development. Researchers at Whitney utilize a variety of different animals
found in local waters to exploit their favorable properties (such as the large
size, optical properties, and fecundity) to address important issues in sensory
biology, the neural control of rhythmic activity, circadian behavior, and
embryonic development at cellular resolution. A number of pioneering molecular
techniques of individual cells and total genome sequencing have been initiated
by Whitney researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capacity to perform "third"
generation sequencing at the interface between marine and terrestrial
environments at the Whitney lab allows the ability to study organisms at the
molecular level in their natural environment. As a research facility of UF,
Whitney trains undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students throughout the
year, as well as REU students in the summer (for the last 26 years!). In
addition, Whitney has a number of STEM programs for K-12 students in the St.
Johns and Flagler county areas and a highly successful ?Evenings at Whitney?
adult seminar series in our 260 seat Center for Marine Studies building that
brings exciting benefits of scientific research to our local community. The high
bandwith "Lambda Rail" internet connection will allow us not only to share our
research data with colleagues around the world, but leverages the high
performance computing capabilities located at the UF main campus in Gainesville
for data analysis. More information about the Whitney Lab can be found on its
website (http://www.whitney.ufl.edu/).