* 1318227
* SHF: Small: Havoc: Verified Compilation of Concurrent Managed Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Sunil Prabhakar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 475,000.00

The goals of the Havoc project are to provide (a) foundational results on
verified compilation of important concurrency abstractions (e.g., locks,
monitors, stacks, queues, hash-tables, etc.) into efficient non-blocking
variants, (b) a precise memory model for reasoning about the correctness of
program transformations performed by the compiler in a shared-memory concurrency
programming model, along with detailed experimental validation on the impact of
the model's design on compiler transformations and optimizations, and (c) a
methodology to formally reason about complex concurrent interactions between
application threads and managed components like modern garbage collectors. The
primary artifacts of this effort will be formally certified tools, specifically,
compilers, and runtime components found in modern managed languages that can be
used to replace existing infrastructure, as well as new language-level memory
models that are both conceptually cleaner to reason about and deploy within a
verified optimizing compiler framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These artifacts
will dramatically change the safety-critical application landscape, which
increasingly contains concurrent components, relieving the need for costly
manual inspection of source and binary, and enabling a richer class of
optimizations. They will greatly assist engineers in the task of constructing
high-assurance, mission-critical software systems, such as avionics, medical
systems, and military communications systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research focus will be on the specification and verification of optimization
passes from Java bytecodes generated from a Java application to a low-level
intermediate representation (register transfer language), used in the
CompcertTSO certified compiler previously developed by the PIs. In addition, the
project will undertake the formalization of salient runtime components,
including memory management and threads. While patterned after the Java memory
model, the memory abstraction underlying the language semantics will be
carefully tailored to facilitate mechanized reasoning about program
transformations and will be cognizant of the relaxed memory features of the
underlying hardware. This project combines infrastructure engineering and
scientific advances in software verification.