* 1318249
* PFI:  BIC- Advanced SiC high temperature integrated circuits
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* John Williams, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 598,777.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from
Auburn University will be focused on building the basic foundations of a
silicon-based high temperature integrated circuit technology. The final goal is
to demonstrate a major polytype of silicon carbide (4H-SiC) metal-oxide
semiconductor field-effect-transistor (that is, a 4H-SiC MOSFET)-based
operational amplifier, operating at 250°C or higher. 4H-SiC is a wide-band gap
semiconductor with a high critical breakdown field, high thermal conductivity,
good bulk electron mobility, high chemical inertness, and mechanical hardness.
These properties make 4H-SiC an extremely attractive material for electronics
operating in harsh environments and at temperatures higher than 250°C,
conditions under which conventional silicon-based electronics are very
inefficient. In addition, the ability of SiC to oxidize to silicon dioxide, an
insulator, naturally makes for MOSFETs. MOSFETs are voltage controlled
electronic switches that are preferred over other devices as they offer a great
deal of flexibility for circuit design. An efficient 4H-SiC MOSFET-based
integrated circuit (IC) technology operating at high temperature will have a
positive socio-economic impact in a variety of industrial and military
applications. A limitation for employing 4H-SiC MOSFETs for this purpose is the
low mobility of electrons in the conducting channel. This is primarily
associated with a high density of traps at the oxide-SiC interface that results
in carrier trapping and reduction of channel mobility. Recently, the Auburn
group has demonstrated an advanced interface passivation process by
incorporating phosphorus at and near the oxide-4H-SiC interface. This process
results in a significantly reduced trap densities compared to the industry
standard processes and accordingly results in at least a factor of two higher
electron channel mobility compared to the state-of-the-art. The higher mobility
is expected to result in significantly superior SiC operational-amplifiers. The
intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the transfer of a fundamental
materials science discovery to advanced applications taking future
commercialization issues into consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research are increasing U.S. technological competitiveness,
increasing the business viability of small business partners, and developing
students capable of contributing to the semiconductor industry. A high
performance 4H-SiC IC technology has the potential to open a variety of new
applications areas and markets. Some notable application areas are sensing and
control circuits for geothermal, automotive and aeronautical sectors. Such
technologies will have significant positive impact on U.S. competitiveness. The
increased innovation capacity of the small business partners resulting from the
success of this program would set the stage for building commercial prototypes
to penetrate niche markets, increasing their business viability, and thus a
future role in the nascent silicon carbide semiconductor industry. The success
of such a technology would also create new possibilities for other end-user
application-oriented businesses. An important aspect of the program is related
to the education of graduate students. Students involved in this project will be
exposed to the "food chain of semiconductor technology", ranging from basic
semiconductor materials science to technology development and applications
during their master's or doctoral research. Hands-on training related to a wide
range of scientific and engineering problems will result in the development of
young, highly trained scientists for the U.S. semiconductor industry.
Additionally, the program will include workshops for high school students and
teachers. Finally, existing close interactions with Tuskegee University, a local
historically black university will be consolidated in this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are the
lead institution: Auburn University; and two small technology-based businesses:
CoolCAD Electronics LLC (College Park, MD), which performs analysis, design and
prototyping for cryogenic, SiC and infrared (IR) electronics; and United Silicon
Carbide Inc.(Monmouth Junction, NJ), which focuses on the design, fabrication,
and commercialization of SiC technologies.