* 1318655
* RAPID:  Consequences of extreme weather events for urban arthropod communities:  Effects of Hurricane Sandy on ecosystem processes and the spread of exotic species in New York City
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Robert Dunn, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2015
* USD 157,768.00

The frequency of extreme weather events is predicted to increase due to global
climate change. Hurricane Sandy devastated New York City (NYC) with high winds,
rain, and storm surge. The human and economic toll of this storm was record-
breaking but the ecological toll is unknown. Arthropods, such as insects and
spiders, are the most abundant and diverse animals in cities. They perform many
important services, such as decomposing human refuse, but they can also be pests
of buildings and plants. The goal of this work is to understand how Hurricane
Sandy changed arthropod communities in New York City and how these changes
affect the services or disservices they provide.

Urban arthropod communities consist of native and exotic species. They exist in
stressful habitats, such as road medians, but also in less stressful habitats
such as parks. Ecological theories predict that exotic species should become
more abundant and native species less abundant after big disturbances like
Hurricane Sandy. Other theories predict that animals living in stressful
habitats should be more resilient to disturbances than animals living in less
stressful habitats. Perhaps changes in insect species that occur in an area
after a hurricane will upset food webs and reduce the beneficial services they
provide. Likewise, disturbances may allow populations of some pest species to
explode because they are no longer kept in check by predators. This research
work will reveal what actually happens.

This work is important for understanding how plants and animals in urban
environments will respond to increased human populations and to potentially more
and stronger hurricanes associated with climate change. The work will be
conducted in in public areas, where the investigators will regularly interact
with the citizens of NYC and explain to them what they are doing. They will also
create a dedicated website and provide public presentations to increase public
understanding of urban ecology, global change, and related topics.