* 1318996
* AF: Small: Some New and Old Frontiers in Geometric Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kasturi Varadarajan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,853.00

This award addresses geometric optimization problems from three areas: shape
fitting, image segmentation, and geometric versions of combinatorial
optimization problems like set cover. The PIs will examine new problems that
have been unearthed by recent work, and will also attack some old problems that
have thus far eluded satisfactory solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shape
fitting problem is one of finding the best shape that fits a given set of points
from an implicitly given family of shapes. A well known example is: given a set
of points in the plane, find the best line that fits them. The PIs will examine
questions connected with the development of approximation algorithms for such
problems with near-linear running time. In a typical instance of the geometric
set cover problem, we are given a set of points and a set of disks in the plane,
and we wish to find the smallest subset of the disks that covers all the points.
In this example, we want to cover with disks, but in other instances we want to
cover with triangles, rectangles, or some other shape. Such algorithmic problems
are typically NP-hard, and the PIs aim to develop improved approximation
algorithms. One approach to the image segmentation problem views the image as a
weighted graph and seeks to find the subset of nodes in the graph with maximum
weight, subject to a shape constraint such as one that requires the subset to be
``star-shaped''. Here the PIs are interested in exact algorithms with polynomial
running time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consider the problems of (a) clustering or
identifying the linear trend in data; (b) cheapest placement of sensors to
monitor a given region; and (c) automatically identifying the lung portion of a
medical image of a lung. The research that this award supports views computer
programs for these problems as algorithms for geometric optimization, where we
want to maximize a certain quantity subject to several constraints. The research
investigates the existence of fast algorithms for such optimization problems.
Progress on the problems studied will enhance core knowledge within
Computational Geometry, and expand the reach of a graph theoretic approach to
medical image analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is a rich
training ground for PhD students who will be exposed not only to theoretical
computational geometry but also to some of its applications. The students will
also be enriched in a broader way by graduate courses on approximation
algorithms, computational geometry, and applications.