* 1318483
* EDU: Flipping the Online Security Classroom - Improving Retention of Security Student Pipeline through Early Intervention
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Sanjay Goel, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 298,197.00

This project is applying the concept of a 'flipped classroom' to cyber security
education using blended learning and online environments. Students participating
in this program work on virtual laboratory exercises collaboratively under
instructor supervision through various modalities, including individual video
chats, group video chats (e.g. Google Hangout), and simulated virtual
environments (e.g. Second Life). The project is also using cloud technology to
create a remotely accessible cyber security and forensics laboratory environment
that provides tools for students across multiple community colleges and the
University at Albany, SUNY. The project is also employing a train-the-trainer
program that allows instructors to share expertise and jointly develop
laboratory exercises. These activities are amortizing curriculum development
costs allowing multiple institutions to sustain and support a successful cyber
security and digital forensics program. There is a shortage of talent to meet
the economic and national security threats posed by cyber attacks, which is
expected to worsen as potential students migrate away from information
technology fields. This project is improving accessibility to state-of-the-art
tools to institutions that would otherwise lack the resources to obtain them; at
the same time, it is enriching cyber security and forensics education in
community colleges while creating a better pipeline to four-year colleges.
Successful development of cloud computing laboratories for this purpose is
resulting in best practices and lessons learned for other disciplines and
institutions.