* 1318469
* Sources of Particulate Organic Matter and Their Use by Suspension-feeders in New Zealand Kelp Forests
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Henry Page, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2016
* USD 58,354.00

The goal of this proposal is to catalyze a research collaboration between the PI
and Dr. Nicholas Shears, a Lecturer at the University of Auckland, to understand
trophic connections and the effect of resource variability on consumers. This is
necessary to predict how food webs may shift in the face of environmental
change. The PI proposes to extend prior work to examine the role of kelp
detritus in this very different kelp forest system. He will use stable isotopes
and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) to trace kelp carbon through the food
web, and test the hypothesis that kelp detritus represents a significant source
of carbon to suspension feeders living in the extensive Ecklonia kelp forests of
New Zealand. This award is supported by the Catalyzing New International
Collaborations program under OIIA/International Science and Engineering, with
co-funding by GEO/Ocean Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macroalgae and
phytoplankton support highly productive marine ecosystems on shallow coastal
reefs. The objectives of the proposed research are to determine: (1) the
contribution of phytoplankton and kelp detritus to the pool of suspended
particulate organic matter (POM) available to reef consumers, and (2) how
different components of the POM are used as food by reef suspension feeders.
Broader impacts of this project will include educational benefits to a graduate
student who is the first person in her family to attend college. The project
will serve to expand her research and perspective to include a very different
kelp forest system and introduce her to the value of international
collaborations through mentoring by Dr. Shears and his group. Results of this
research will be disseminated widely through scientific publications but also
through our undergraduate teaching and public lectures at venues such as the
Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History.