* 1318374
* AF: Small: Identifying sampling problems with efficient algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Daniel Stefankovic, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,703.00

Sampling problems are fundamental in many areas of science and engineering, for
example, statistics, artificial intelligence (machine learning and vision), and
biology (phylogeny). Efficiency of sampling has impact on other important
algorithms, for example, the speed of statistical tests and the reliability of
estimators and classifiers. This project seeks to characterize combinatorial
problems that admit efficient sampling algorithms. The research under this award
addresses both sides of the characterization for a broad class of ubiquitous
graphical models: 1) complexity theoretic obstacles to efficient sampling and 2)
efficient sampling algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent results established a
useful characterization for antiferromagnetic 2-spin models (for example,
weighted independent sets and Ising model) in terms of the behavior of the model
on regular trees. This created a connection to problems and techniques studied
in the statistical physics community. This project aims to use the connection to
the statistical physics and its techniques (for example, belief propagation
recurrences) to generalize the characterization to models with more than two
spins (multi-spin models, such as the Potts model, frequently occur in the
applications). As a first step towards this generalization a relation between
the efficiency of commonly used Markov chains (Glauber dynamics, Swendsen-Wang
algorithm) and the behavior of the models on regular trees will be explored.
Beside Markov chains the PI will also investigate other approaches to sampling
problems (for example, dynamic programming and utilizing strong spatial
mixing).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The product of the research will be efficient
sampling algorithms and an improved understanding of obstacles to efficient
sampling. The algorithmic problems, concepts, and techniques will be transferred
to both undergraduate and graduate teaching (in the form of guided problems and
implementation challenges). The award will support the training of two PhD
students in the area of sampling and counting algorithms at the University of
Rochester.