* 1318428
* EDU: Motivating and Reaching University Students and Professionals with Software Security Education
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Laurie Williams, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project involves the development and delivery of software security
education to university students and professionals, and the dissemination of
curricular materials to educators to enable effective security education
throughout their courses. A large intentionally vulnerable electronic health
record (EHR) application with associated artifacts to support the lessons is
provided to all student and educators. Instances of the EHR application are
hosted in a virtual environment such that students can get their own virtual
instance and practice attacks against the system whereby the attacks would be
contained/safe and not cause actual damages. All curricular resources are made
freely available to educators. Students are educated in a laboratory-based
course with learning objectives met through active learning exercises.
Professionals are provided with options for taking the course via a Massively
Open Online Course (MOOC) or by taking a course through an always-available
system. The educational practices (a) increase the knowledge level of
practitioners and students in issues related to software security; and (b)
increase the understanding of two forms of online education and on active
learning in the university classroom. The research enhances the infrastructure
by providing open resources and educational modules for software security. The
work improves the ability of practitioners to produce secure and reliable
software products so that people can justifiably rely upon computer systems to
perform critical functions securely.