* 1318802
* FSML: Enhancing Research Capacity in Appalachia: Research Facilities for Lilley Cornett Woods Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Walter Borowski, Eastern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,474.00

This action funds improvements to Eastern Kentucky University's field station
including construction of a 2200 square foot research center. The new centers
permits those who use the field station, both from EKU as well as visiting
scientists and students, to broaden the scope of research onsite and in the
region as well as strengthen research training, research-informed teaching, and
outreach capabilities.

EKU's field station at Lilley Cornett Woods (www.naturalareas.eku.edu/lilley-
cornett-woods-appalachian-ecological-research-station) has supported place-based
scientific research, environmental monitoring, research-informed training,
interdisciplinary collegiate education, K-16 environmental education, and
community outreach for over four decades. The site is composed primarily of old-
growth forest. Consequently, it is a reserve of biological diversity, is a
valuable resource for research and training, and provides a unique opportunity
for outreach and education within an ecologically distinct Appalachian landscape
partially degraded by coal mining and other land uses.

The longterm data collected at Lilley Cornett Woods is used for longitudinal
investigations regarding the integrated themes of environmental, ecological,
geological, and climatological change. Appalachian Kentucky is a recognized
"hotspot" of biological diversity. EKU's tradition of organismal studies is
ideal for investigating ecosystem structure and change, as modified by
anthropogenic pressures. Ongoing investigations (e.g., diversity studies,
biogeochemical characteristics of terrestrial and aquatic systems, invasive
species, carbon sequestration and cycling) are being expanded and diversified
across the spectrum of disturbed, modified, and old-growth ecosystems through
new collaborations made possible by the new facility. EKU is currently working
with external scientists through the NSF-funded Virtual Observatory and
Ecological Information Systems, and increased networking capacity permits
broader research collaborations outside the region.

EKU's long tradition of education provides a foundation in serving a spectrum of
educational needs. Undergraduate and graduate science classes at EKU currently
have strong experiential and field components. Student research by both
undergraduate and graduate students, mentored by faculty investigators,
underpins field research at the University as evidenced by the NSF REU site at
Lilley Cornett Woods. The new facility enhances outreach in K-12 education,
especially in fostering science literacy. The use of effective teaching
strategies such as field- and project-based experiences can open pathways into
scientific careers for many students.