* 1318381
* Portrait of a Community on the Threshold of Agriculture: The Late Natufian Zooarchaeological Assemblage from Nahal Ein Gev II, Israel
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Natalie Munro, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 95,896.00

This project applies a high-resolution zooarchaeological approach to reconstruct
the economic, social and ritual foundations of the forager-producer transition
at the Terminal Pleistocene site of Nahal Ein Gev II in the Jordan Valley
(Israel). Dr. Natalie Munro from the University of Connecticut will undertake
zooarchaeological research in connection with the excavation of Nahal Ein Gev
II, Israel by co-directors Prof. Ofer Bar-Yosef of Harvard University and Dr.
Leore Grosman and Prof. Anna Belfer-Cohen of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
Nahal Ein Gev II is a large Late Natufian village site occupied ca.
12,500-11,000 cal. BP and located about 2 km from the Sea of Galilee. The site's
unusual temporal position at the very end of the Pleistocene, its geographic
location in the productive Jordan Valley where farming communities first emerge
in the region, and the large size and permanence of the village provide an ideal
setting to investigate the interaction of human economy, community organization
and ritual activity in the early stages of the unprecedented forager-producer
transition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social theoretical approaches to agricultural
origins increasingly diverge from economic explanations. Nevertheless, research
increasingly shows that social, ritual and economic change are closely
integrated across this long transition. Instead of searching for which came
first, economic or social change, this research seeks to reconstruct and then
integrate ecological, social and ritual conditions using the zooarchaeological
record. The research focuses on six interrelated themes: environmental
reconstruction, human foraging strategies, the meat diet, intra-community
organization and the use of space, trash disposal practices, and ritual
practice. Carbon and oxygen isotope analysis of gazelle tooth enamel carbonates
will provide the environmental background to the site, while strontium isotopes
taken from the same teeth will refine data on human hunting strategies, herd
mobility and site seasonality. A detailed reconstruction of Terminal Pleistocene
socioeconomics provides an essential foundation for understanding the rise of
agricultural communities that followed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to foster international collaboration through research exchanges involving
faculty and students from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Israel and the
University of Connecticut in the United States. Exchanges are designed to deepen
long-standing research collaborations between Munro and the Israeli project
directors and extend these to the next generation of American and Israeli
scholars. The research will provide hands on zooarchaeological training for both
Israeli and American students who will engage in comprehensive zooarchaeological
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition from foraging to agricultural
communities marks one of, if not the foremost transformation in human history.
The impact of this change was felt in all dimensions of human life. This
research seeks to document the basal conditions and the societal transformations
that comprise this irreversible change at one well-positioned settlement in the
Jordan Valley.