* 1318501
* SBE: Small: Collaborative: Improving Security Behavior of Employees in Cyberspace through Evidence-based Malware Reports and E-Learning Materials
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Xiaohong Yuan, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 260,567.00

As the use of Web applications has increased, malicious content and cyber
attacks are rapidly increasing in both their frequency and their sophistication.
For unwary users and their organizations, social media sites such as Tumblr,
Facebook, MySpace, Twitter, and LinkedIn pose a variety of serious security
risks and threats. Recent studies show that social media sites are more in use
for delivering malware than were previously popular methods of email delivery.
Because of this, many organizations are looking for ways to implement effective
security policies. However, for many organizations, getting employees to comply
with a security policy can be a significant challenge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies show that the weakest link in a security chain is
user. Thus, organizations need to find innovative methods to increase their
employees? security awareness and their capabilities to engage in online
security behavior. This project aims to study the factors that affect cyber
security behavior, and use customized and evidence-based malware reports and
e-learning materials to help employees more deeply understand their security
risks and to improve their security behavior. The first stage of this project
will be a large-scale survey study to identify key factors that affect
organizational employees? security behavior. These data will be used to develop
a psychological decision-making model for cyber security compliance. The second
stage of this project will be a controlled experimental study to compare the
effectiveness of different evidence-based interventions designed to increase
employees? cyber security compliance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the understanding of cyber security behaviors of employees and the
development of more effective cyber security policies. The developed model will
explain and predict how various factors affect employees? cyber security
behaviors. Project results will contribute to the psychological, behavioral, and
educational theories relating to the basic processes by which people assess
vulnerabilities and threats, choose adaptive or maladaptive coping strategies,
and adopt new coping strategies. Through educational workshops, project portal,
journal publications, and conference presentations, the results of the project
will reach a broad audience that includes corporate IT directors, managers,
employees, researchers and practitioners in various industries such as real
estate, financial services, logistics &amp; supply chain, insurance and
education.