* 1318688
* CIF: SMALL: RUI: Novel Detection Approaches with Comprehensive Hybrid Intelligent Systems for Multimedia Forensics
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Qingzhong Liu, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,997.00

Multimedia forensics is increasingly becoming an important research area for
protecting public safety and enhancing national security; steganalysis and
forgery detection are becoming two active research areas, even as they are still
in their inception. The shortage of comprehensive detection systems has severely
impeded progress and practical applications in the field. This study will
facilitate the work of forensic practitioners in criminal investigations and
will deliver to the community benchmark datasets, performance evaluation
standards and models, software design and the analysis toolkit in order to
design and test new steganalysis/forgery detection system approaches.
Additionally, as part of the research education plan, undergraduate women,
minorities, and first-generation college students will be extensively involved.
A further contribution to an educational pipeline for computer science involves
local high school students through the creation of a multimedia forensics and
knowledge discovery laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves
designing comprehensive hybrid intelligent systems for steganalysis and forgery
detection with the capability to discriminate the operations of steganography,
general processing and forgery manipulation. This research will make
contributions to engineering by providing the optimal classification/regression
models associated with the identification of minimal optimal feature sets,
benefitting a broad range of applications. The scientific objectives of the
research involve validation of new paradigms, shift-recompression-based
derivative/wavelet differential pattern analyses on multimedia data, to merge
high dimensional rich models that were used for steganalysis, and apply
judicious feature mining and machine learning techniques to handle high
dimensionality and establish comprehensive hybrid intelligent forensics systems
to recognize different categories of multimedia data and reveal past processing
history.