* 1318798
* CSR: Small: Efficient Techniques for Modular Past State Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Liuba Shrira, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Retrospection is the ability of a data store to run ad-hoc programs over
consistent past states of a data store as if they were the current state.
Retrospection makes it easier to analyze past states providing a valuable tool
for auditors, historians, economists, social scientists and others with a need
to investigate historical data. Retrospection is also valuable to those who want
to analyze past states to predict the future, an increasingly in-demand feature
in modern data management applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most light-weight
data stores today do not support retrospection. The key reason is that existing
retrospection techniques, for performance, require invasive hard-to-adopt
modifications to data store internals. Without support for retrospection, it may
be hard for application developers to reconstruct the consistent states
corresponding to past events of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop an easy-to-adopt modular method and a set of associated techniques for
supporting retrospection in light-weight transactional data stores using
an&lt;br/&gt;embedded persistent consistent past-state system. The technical
challenges are:&lt;br/&gt;1) How to provide consistent past states without
harming data store performance? The past state system needs to be tightly
integrated for efficiency but extensive modifications to the internal data store
components are infeasible, requiring new modular techniques that operate at a
low-level in the data store software stack.&lt;br/&gt;2) How to run programs
efficiently over past state that spans large time intervals? past state needs to
be created incrementally to avoid disrupting the data store but running a
program over incremental state can be slow, requiring new clustering and caching
techniques optimized for incremental data.&lt;br/&gt;3) Can one avoid slowing
down programs that do not use retrospection? To evaluate any additional
overhead, the project will develop an experimental prototype in an industrial
strength data store, and conduct studies to answer this question experimentally
and analytically.