* 1318485
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Lithic Technological Organization during the Lower Magdalenian of Vasco-Cantabrian Spain
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Lisa Fontes, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 25,200.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Lawrence Guy Straus (PI), Lisa M. Fontes (co-PI) will
study stone artifacts from five Lower Magdalenian (c. 17-14,500 radiocarbon
years ago) archaeological sites in northern Atlantic Spain: Altamira, El Mirón,
El Juyo, El Rascaño, and Ekain. Data collected will be used to explore questions
of human technological adaptations to the harsh, cold, but variable climate in
the Cantabrian region immediately following the Last Glacial Maximum. This
project will expand archaeological understanding of prehistoric hunter-gatherer
behavior, specifically how people organized the collection and transport of raw
materials and the manufacture, use and discard of their tools as part of a
successful adaptive system. This research has two objectives: (1) to learn more
about how humans adapted their stone technologies to diverse environmental
circumstances during the Magdalenian, a time when a regional culture,
characterized by its distinctive stone and bone artifacts and art, flourished;
and (2) to widen the lens through which archaeologists understand human behavior
in the Stone Age by integrating a robust theoretical approach (human behavioral
ecology) and new analytic methods for analysis of stone artifacts (both tools
and manufacturing debris) with direct landscape-level comparisons. These methods
will build upon previous Magdalenian research that has provided a general
understanding of human behavior in this region and time period. The co-PI
hypothesizes that technological organization differed site-circumstantially
based on ecotonal variation, yet was adaptively stable overall. Through this
research, archaeologists will be able to explicate the relationship of stone
tool technology to overall human behavior during the Magdalenian.

This project will have a broader impact beyond its contribution to
anthropological knowledge of Magdalenian hunter-gatherers. Through year-long
study in Spain, the co-PI will foster international research collaboration among
researchers living in the US and Europe who study the Cantabrian Magdalenian.
The results of her work will be disseminated to the scientific and public
community through peer reviewed journal publications; presentations at local,
regional, and professional conferences; a project website written for the
general public; and tDAR (the Digital Archaeological Record), an online archive.
This research project will be the key to preparing the co-PI for a career as a
professional archaeologist. Additionally, the co-PI will apply the results of
her research to her future teaching in the US, a goal to which she is dedicated.
Data collected will be used to assist in training undergraduates in
archaeological methods. Through dissemination of project results, the co-PI will
endeavor to improve public understanding of anthropology, archaeology, and
methodology in social science.

This project will contribute to ongoing discussion of how prehistoric peoples
used technology as a critical means of adaptation; this is relevant to current
debates about how humans utilize their technologies in a globalized world.
Through studies such as this one, archaeologists can apply understanding of past
technological adaptations to current situations where humans must consider the
long-term effects of technology and resource management.