* 1318323
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Discovering Software Vulnerabilities through Interactive Static Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Emerson Murphy-Hill, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 249,854.00

Software development is a complex and manual process, in part because typical
software programs contain more than hundreds of thousands lines of computer
code. If software programmers fail to perform critical checks in that code, such
as making sure a user is authorized to update an account, serious security
compromises ensue. Indeed, vulnerable software is one of the leading causes of
cyber security problems. Checking for security problems is very expensive
because it requires examining computer code for security mistakes, and such a
process requires significant manual effort. This research project aims at
developing an interactive help system to warn software programmers about
potential security mistakes, similar to the way modern word processors warn
writers of spelling and grammar errors. This is likely lead to new functions for
software development tools that will significantly reduce security
vulnerabilities in software. The research is based on the concept of interactive
static analysis, a novel mixed-initiative paradigm for interacting with
programmers to aid in the detection and prevention of security vulnerabilities.
Static analysis is seamlessly integrated into the development environment in
such a way that programmers are not required to learn additional programming
language and analysis concepts beyond the use of the development environment.
Static analysis is performed in the context of development, allowing programmers
to utilize and influence such analysis during their program construction. The
goals of this research are to bring programmers into the security loop,
improving their ability to detect, understand, and prevent vulnerabilities; and
utilize the programmer's contextual knowledge to drive customized static
analysis, detecting software vulnerabilities that are difficult to detect using
current static analysis techniques.