* 1318091
* SHF: Small: Stochastic Computing Techniques for Real-Time Image-Processing Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* John Hayes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Many beneficial applications of computers cannot now be realized because they
demand excessively high performance and/or low power. An example of interest is
real-time image processing to restore sight to the visually impaired. This
project explores an unconventional and little-understood technology called
stochastic computing (SC) which is very well-suited to such applications.
Stochastic Computing processes numbers in the form of bit-streams that resemble
neural signals and are interpreted as probabilities. It can implement complex
arithmetic operations by small logic circuits. However, high accuracy may
require long bit-streams that can be difficult to interface with conventional
binary logic. The project aims to develop a comprehensive theory of SC leading
to practical methods for designing and applying stochastic circuits. It will
study the foundations of SC, especially speed, accuracy and hardware-cost trade-
offs, using various novel methods. Stochastic Computing will be applied to a
broad set of image-processing tasks, ranging from retinal implants for the
blind, to on-the-fly feature extraction. Prototype designs will be constructed
and evaluated using software simulation and hardware emulation via field-
programmable gate arrays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is a full
theoretical and practical understanding of stochastic computing in the context
of emerging integrated circuit technologies and applications. Its results should
interest research engineers and scientists in academe, as well as in the
microelectronics, computer, and bioengineering industries. They should also be
of direct practical value to designers and manufacturers in such application
areas as image-processing chips, implantable medical devices, and video
surveillance systems. The project's outputs will be distributed primarily via
peer-reviewed journal and conference papers. A key goal is to support the
training of graduate students in computer science and engineering, who will
participate directly in the research as part of their M.S. and Ph.D. programs at
the University of Michigan. A few undergraduates will also be invited to join
the project as interns to encourage them to pursue research-related careers. A
special effort will be made to involve women and minority students.