* 1318799
* EDU: Developing a "Protect", "Use" and "Analyze" Approach to Cybersecurity Competitions in the Healthcare Environment (PUNCCH)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Diane Murphy, Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 162,564.00

This project is addressing the question of why there are few women in the
growing cybersecurity profession. One of the first exposures to cybersecurity
for young people is often a cybersecurity competition, offered at the high
school and college levels. Most of these competitions have a "male" focus, based
on military "capture the flag" principles. As a result, very few females attend
them. The purpose of this project is to develop a female-friendly cybersecurity
competition, which is based on three concepts: (1) an alternative view of
cybersecurity, using "protect", "use" and "analyze" approaches; (2) systems and
data in the healthcare environment where security and privacy are increasingly
important; and (3) a competition designed by university students (male and
female) for high-school students. The project integrates the development of the
competition into existing courses. Marymount University is the location for this
project: it has both healthcare and information technology programs in the same
school and a diverse student body that is also 70% female. For the first
competition, students, and their teachers, are invited to attend a summer camp
to cybersecurity principles and practices, with the competition at the end of
the camp. University students act as mentors and invited speakers present
cybersecurity as a career. Student workers then act as mentors for local area
teachers providing them with gender-neutral materials as they prepare other
students for a second stand-alone cybersecurity competition. Assessment includes
the perceptions of students (male and female) to the cybersecurity field before
and after the competitions.