* 1318595
* AF:  Small: Topological Data Analysis for Big and High Dimensional Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Tamal Dey, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 496,321.00

The computing community is increasingly facing the challenge of processing and
interpreting huge amounts of data that is being generated all around us by
personal devices, digital sensors, data centers, scientific studies, and social
networks. The nature of this data is usually high dimensional, that is, when
interpreted as points, they reside in an high dimensional Euclidean space. The
curse of `dimensionality' together with `size' puts up a formidable challenge to
decipher knowledge from them in a principled way. Among the various approaches
proposed to `mine' this data, topological approaches are emerging as robust and
global methods that could complement the other approaches, be it statistical or
geometrical. How can one deal with the difficulty of `big' data by developing
new algorithms in computational topology and geometry is the focus of this
proposal. The proposed research aims to investigate three techniques, namely,
subsampling, localization, and simplicial collapse to handle the menace of
`size' and `dimension'. This requires developing innovative computational tools
grounded in algorithmic theory and mathematics from algebraic topology,
analysis, and discrete geometry.

The proposed topological methods would enhance the understanding of `big' data
in general which could originate from images in the medical fields, videos of
some events, trends in finance, or connectivities in social networks. The goal
is to produce practical algorithms that can be turned into usable software which
would be useful for both academia and industry. Other than standard academic
forums, there are plans to disseminate the results from this project through
course notes, tutorials, and web-pages to reach wider audience. The PI also
plans to develop course materials on topological data analysis that will include
results obtained in the project. The support from the project will train
graduate students. Efforts will be made to recruit students from under-
represented groups.