* 1318272
* FSML: Research Space for the Marine Biological Laboratory's Marshview Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Anne Giblin, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 344,038.00

The Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) is awarded a grant to expand its
facilities at the Marshview Field Station near Plum Island Sound, north of
Boston. Research in the Plum Island area includes research on the surrounding
watersheds, as well as the estuarine areas and extensive tidal marshes. The Plum
Island marshes are considered to be among the largest and most important salt
marshes left in New England. In addition to supporting major commercial and
recreational finfish and shellfish fisheries, the region is a world-renowned
habitat for migratory birds. The site attracts researchers from all over the
country and is home to the Plum Island Ecosystems Long-Term Ecological Research
site. The proposed project will build an addition onto an existing barn and
thereby increase the field laboratory space by 1,345 ft2 more than tripling the
space currently available, and also provide space that is ADA compliant. The
project will seal the shell of the existing barn to make it weather tight and
provide for improvements in the lighting, plumbing and the electrical service.
This will allow researchers to use the barn for dry storage, refrigerators, and
freezers. The improvements will also provide year-round heated space for the
computers that support automated instrumentation in the area. The server is
currently in unheated space off site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Completion of this
project will significantly improve the ability of researchers to use the site,
allow the MBL to continue to broaden its research base, and facilitate cross-
site comparisons by incorporating more scientists and students from other
institutions into research and education at Plum Island. The renovations will
also greatly enhance the educational and outreach components of our program by:
1) allowing undergraduate and graduate students from different programs to
interact; 2) providing laboratory space sufficient for University classes to use
the site for overnight field trips during the spring and fall; 3) providing
basic lab space for our educational activities, which include K-12 and high
school teacher training, 4) renovating in an environmentally sound manner,
thereby strengthening our outreach activities to the general public, which focus
on the impacts of human water use and sewage disposal in the watershed. For more
information about the Marshview Field Station, please visit http://pie-
lter.ecosystems.mbl.edu/content/research-facilities.