* 1318898
* Matched alternating direction implicit (ADI) schemes for solving the nonlinear Poisson-Boltzmann equation with complex dielectric interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Shan Zhao, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

The goal of the proposed project is to develop second order interface methods
embedded in the alternating direction implicit (ADI) framework for solving the
3D nonlinear Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) equation with complex dielectric interfaces.
Efficiency and accuracy are known to be the two major difficulties for solving
the nonlinear PB equation numerically. The efficiency concern stems from the
needs for solving the PB equation in demanding applications, such as one-time
solution to systems with large spatial degrees of freedom, and/or million-time
solutions in dynamical simulations. The accuracy concern is due to various
challenging features of the PB model, including piecewisely-defined dielectric
constants, a strong nonlinearity, singular point charges, and complex dielectric
interfaces. Without addressing these features, fine meshes have to be used for a
reliable simulation, which in turn impairs efficiency. In this project, a new
pseudo-transient continuation formulation will be constructed based on a
suitable regularization setting so that the singular charges are represented
analytically. The nonlinear term of the PB equation will be integrated exactly
with time splitting techniques. To deal with piecewise dielectric constants, a
tensor product decomposition of 3D interface conditions will be carried out to
derive essentially 1D jump conditions so that the dielectric interface can be
accommodated along each Cartesian direction in an alternating manner. Fast
algebraic solvers will be developed for solving matrices of each Cartesian
direction. Consequently, the proposed matched ADI approaches not only maintain
both the simplicity of Cartesian grids and the efficiency of the Thomas
algorithm, but also achieve spatially second order accuracy in resolving complex
dielectric interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrostatic interactions are
vital not only for the study of biological and chemical systems and processes at
the molecular level, but also for the design of semiconductor devices at the
nanoscale. The PB model, in which the electrostatic interactions are computed
implicitly via a mean force approach, can surprisingly well describe the
electrostatics of a charged system. This model finds broad applications in
science and engineering, such as modeling the charged polymers and surfactants
in interface and colloid science, studying transistors on very large scale
integration (VLSI) semiconductor devices in nanotechnology, and analyzing
structure, function, and dynamics of solvated biomolecules including proteins
and DNAs in molecular biology. The proposed mathematical modeling, algorithm
development, and numerical computations will address key scientific challenges
in interdisciplinary fields involving computational mathematics, chemistry,
biology, and electrical engineering. The planned research activities will bring
new advances to computational mathematics and lead to reliable simulation tools
for the electrostatic analysis of various physical, chemical, and biological
systems/devices. In addition, this project will provide interdisciplinary
research and training opportunities for students pursing careers in science and
engineering.