* 1318081
* FSML: Acquisition of an ICP-MS to Expand/Update Trace Element Analytical Capacity for the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Herbert Windom, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 191,543.00

A grant is awarded to the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography to acquire a new
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICPMS) for trace element analysis
of environmental samples. This new instrument includes technology far superior
to that of the existing ICPMS it will replace. The impact on research that this
will have is obvious. It is more cost efficient regarding operation and
maintenance and it is compatible with a number of sample introduction
methodologies, providing more versatility in trace element analysis and
expanding the number of analytes that can be quantified in coastal marine
matrices. Because of the more user-friendly nature of the instrumentation it
will enhance training of students, as well as technicians and colleagues, in its
application, which in turn, will improve their understanding of the technology,
and encourage their use of it.

The Skidaway Institute of Oceanography (SkIO) has provided facilities including
research vessels, well instrumented laboratories and housing to support marine
research for not only its resident faculty and staff, but also for visiting
scientists and students from state, regional and international institutions.
Over the past 45 years SkIO has provided logistical support for multidiscipline,
multi-institution collaborations in trace element research and education along
the southeastern Atlantic coast. The Institute's commitment to upgrading and
maintaining analytical instrumentation, as demonstrated by this award, assures
that it will continue to catalyze trace element research and education focused
on riverine, estuarine and continental shelf environments. These efforts address
both natural processes and human interventions that influence trace element
transport and cycling in coastal systems. More information about SkIO facilities
and research can be found at http://www.skio.usg.edu/.