* 1318532
* Collaborative Research: Demographic Transitions in Central California Prehistory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Jelmer Eerkens, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 175,399.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Jelmer Eerkens and Eric Bartelink
will examine how prehistoric populations in Central California responded to
environmental change and population growth. The research will reconstruct
ancient human health, diet, weaning practices, and mobility patterns using
stable isotope and paleopathological analyses of human burials from the
Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta region. The project is a collaboration between
faculty members, and graduate and undergraduate students from two institutions,
representing specialties in bioarchaeology, archaeology, archaeometry, stable
isotope ecology, and geochemistry. Central California is an area of significant
interest because the region experienced exponential population growth during the
late Holocene (~3500 years before present until Spanish contact in the 1700s).
The central issue focuses on the rate of demographic change, and uses multiple
lines of evidence to explore whether population growth was stable or if it
fluctuated in concert with environmental changes (e.g., extended periods of
drought reported in climatic records). In this respect, the research will
examine how ancient human populations responded to climatic change and social
stress such as warfare.

Human skeletons provide a unique window into the past because they represent the
life history of particular individuals. The study will merge those individual
life histories into a broader picture of cultural adaptation to population
growth, climatic fluctuations, nutritional stress, warfare, and disease. Based
on existing anthropological theory, the researchers expect to find three
patterns. First, they expect an increase in nutritional stress and disease
indicators over time, reflecting greater consumption of poorer quality diets,
especially during periods of environmental stress such as regional drought.
Stable isotope analysis of human bone and teeth will provide information
regarding the source of dietary protein, carbohydrates, and fats acquired from
different ecosystems (terrestrial, freshwater, and marine), which will be
compared with skeletal and dental indicators of stress and disease. Second, the
researchers expect that periods of increased social and environmental stress
will correlate with decreased parental investment in offspring, as measured by
earlier weaning of children and poorer childhood diet. This will be evaluated
using stable isotope signatures in serial sections of first molar tooth dentin,
which forms in infancy and early childhood. Third, the researchers expect
decreased residential mobility with increasing population growth, evaluated
using strontium and oxygen isotope analysis of early forming teeth vs. later
forming bone. To provide temporal control a large number of radiocarbon dates
will be obtained.

The broader impact of this research will provide a unique dataset documenting
hunter-gatherer transitions in prehistory. The study will shed light on how
changes in climate influenced health, diet, weaning, and mobility patterns. In
addition, Drs. Eerkens and Bartelink have worked closely with members of the
Native American community to ensure that the results of this research are widely
disseminated, including to the public and research communities. The research
will contribute toward educating and training archaeology and physical
anthropology students, and the research will be presented in both scientific and
public forums, including national and regional conferences, lecture series, and
museum exhibits.