* 1318306
* TWC: Small: Exposing Attack Vectors and Identifying Defense Solutions for Data Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Zhuoqing Mao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This project addresses several key emerging security challenges that arise due
to the wildly successful large-scale adoption of mobile devices with diverse
network capabilities. The novel approach focuses on to understanding how various
information that are legitimately and willingly provided by smartphone users due
to the requested permissions of downloaded applications can be potentially
abused. The second research focus is to identify improvements in the design of
cellular network middlebox (e.g., firewall) policies by detailed exposure and
explicitly defining the key requirements. Using insights from the two research
thrusts, support to detect abuse of network resources by mobile devices is
explored, leveraging both existing mechanisms and new improvements for
evaluation. There are three key areas of technical contributions from this
project: (1) Investigation of the construction of cellular botnets from non-
traditional means, (2) Discovery of the deficiency of cellular network policies
to resource abuse and targeted attacks, and (3) Misbehavior detection of mobile
devices in abusing infrastructure resources to gain unfair advantages in network
and energy usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have significant and
broad impact on both the networking security community and our society, as
effective reliance on mobile devices for information access is rapidly growing
and security assurance of cellular data network infrastructure is critical to
achieving robust and highly available mobile networks and network services. Any
software developed in this work will be available to the research community and
the network operator community. Associated experimental tools and specific
experimental configurations will be released through web venues.