* 1318971
* RI: Small: Hierarchical Feature Learning by Heterogeneous Networks with Application to Face Verification
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Thomas Huang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 408,612.00

Learning good features is a key to computer vision problems such as recognizing
human faces, and understanding scenes. Many computer vision researchers learn
features by providing a semantic label for each image in a large database,
limiting the amount of information per image to a few bits. Others learn
features by identifying common patterns found in images such as lines, blobs,
and more complicated shapes, but ignoring semantic information. This project
develops algorithms to learn features that are common in images and also predict
the semantics of images at various spatial scales using a new type of deep
neural network called Heterogeneous Networks. The developed algorithms allow the
incorporation of semantic information at intermediate layers. The algorithms
developed can not only change how features are learned but also indicate how to
scale feature learning to giant datasets of millions of images. The research
team addresses challenging problems in human face verification using NCSA's
petascale supercomputer, Blue Waters, and two large scale (millions of images)
image data sets.

The research of this projected is integrated with both undergraduate and
graduate education. The results obtained from this project are applicable to a
wide range of applications in computer vision and pattern recognition. The
research team plans to release algorithms and face data sets collected in this
project to research communities once they are finished.