* 1318495
* FSML: Facility Improvements for Gulf of Alaska Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Lisa Busch, SITKA SOUND SCIENCE CENTER INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2014
* USD 216,269.00

The Sitka Sound Science Center (SSSC) is awarded a grant to improve the
capability of scientists, especially those funded by the NSF, to conduct marine
biological research at a time when changes to the ocean in the Gulf of Alaska
will have dramatic impacts on world economies and local communities. These
upgrades will allow for the deepening of understandings in a critically
important geographic part of the United States where changes in the climate,
oceanography and biology are being monitored closely by a broad array of
scientists. In addition, the improvements will boost the Science Center?s
successful efforts in integrating education and research and diversifying
minority representation. The Sitka Sound Science Center is dedicated to
scientific education and scientific research and is uniquely qualified to carry
out this project. With formal and informal partnerships with high profile
organizations such as the University of Alaska, Scripps Oceanographic
Institution, the Smithsonian, Stanford, Duke, University of Washington, Alaska
Department of Fish and Game and NOAA, the Science Center has hosted many
researchers whose field work and scientific experiments require a reliable salt
water system. In addition, the Science Center staff has extensive experience
managing salt water systems and are ideally poised for the installation of these
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Located in Sitka, Alaska, a community that is
33% Alaska Native, SSSC provides research and educational opportunities for
minorities as well as rural coastal community members. Upgrades made to the
facility will allow those opportunities to help diversify science into the
future. The facility hosts many NSF-funded visiting scientists, and it conducts
its own research and science educational programs which are also supported by
the NSF. Additionally, it provides informal science educational experiences to
thousands of visitors each year. The visitors will have a better aquarium
experience and come away with better scientific understandings because of these
upgrades. In addition, SSSC hosts hundreds of local and non local students who
will have a better chance of conducting successful educational research projects
because of these improvements. For more information about SSSC, visit the
website at http://www.sitkasoundsciencecenter.org.