* 1318220
* Lattice Gauge Theory at the University of the Pacific
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* James Hetrick, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 270,000.00

This grant supports the research activities of the Pacific Lattice Group,
consisting of Professors James Hetrick, Kieran Holland, and Keisuke Juge at the
University of the Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns
computational field theory in particle physics. There are four strands in this
work, three involving theoretical study of strongly-interacting particles and
one managing a scientific data archive gateway. The thrust of the first strand
is to understand from basic principles how a few fundamental building blocks,
the quarks and gluons of QCD (Quantum Chromodynamics), generate the
experimentally observed hadrons, such as the proton, neutron and other exotic
particles, as well their properties and interactions. This work has significant
relevance for nuclear physics. The second and third branches of this research
program explore models of physics "Beyond the Standard Model", in particular
investigating the possibility that the newly discovered Higgs particle might be
a composite of "quark-like" particles, or even a manifestation of extra
dimensional physics. Finally, the fourth part of this research program is the
maintenance of a large, public, internationally accessible repository of lattice
gauge theory data, allowing researchers around the world to access and build on
the work of others, thereby significantly leveraging the investment in this work
and that of other similar researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
significance of this work is to advance our current understanding of the
fundamental constituents, structure, and interactions of matter and the
universe. The Standard Model of particle physics encapsulates the way that
quarks and leptons interact, and explains all known accelerator data. This Model
is much like the Periodic Table in chemistry at the turn of the 18th century: we
have the table and its mathematical description of the interactions of its
constituents, but we have no understanding of why the interactions take the form
and structure that they do. In chemistry, the deeper understanding of the
Periodic Table came with the next level of physics --- quantum theory,
explaining why atoms have the properties and interactions that they do. We are
at a similar crossroads now in our understanding of particle physics and the
Standard Model, poised to break through to the next level of understanding of
the structure of matter, and the results of this research project might
potentially be one step in that direction. On the other hand, the data archive
management component of this project uses the latest high-performance grid
technologies to make the results of this work and other researchers around the
world available to each other, greatly multiplying the return on the scientific
investment made by the public.