* 1318975
* A novel boundary integral formulation for dynamic implicit interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yen-Hsi Tsai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 209,945.00

This project involves a novel formulation for constructing boundary integral
methods to solve boundary value problems involving linear partial differential
equations on domains with oriented, piecewise smooth boundaries defined
implicitly by the corresponding signed distance functions. The proposed
framework will facilitate computations in a wide class of computational problems
that involve, e.g., the solutions of Poisson's equation or Helmholtz equation
defined on time dependent domains with irregular boundaries. Such computational
problems are found in multiphase viscous fluid flows, inverse scattering, shape
optimization problems, and gradient flows of surface energies modeling e.g.
solidification process of a fluid. The aim of our new formulation is to lift the
overhead of remeshing that is needed in finite element methods, and to avoid
delicate and possibly complicated formulas found in finite difference based
methods that depend on how surfaces "cut" through the underlying grids. The
formulation is based on averaging a one parameter family of parameterizations of
an integral equation defined on the boundary of the domain. By application of
the coarea formula, a novel boundary integral equation without any explicit
parameterization of the boundaries is derived. The resulting numerical algorithm
is simple and is applicable to a variety of meshing or grids. The proposed
research program consists of a systematic study of such new type of boundary
integral formulation, encompassing (a) numerical integration methods
(quadratures) for singular integrals, (b) analytical and numerical treatment of
corners and higher co-dimensional manifolds, (c) applications to nonlinear
interface dynamics and shape optimizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will contribute directly to a crucial mathematical and computational
part of many important applications in science and engineering, from multiphase
fluids, seismic imaging in petroleum engineering, inverse scattering in wave
propagation, high order nonlinear interface evolution found in the study of
solidification of fluids, to bio-mechanical applications. The training of
students and post-doctoral researchers provided by the proposed research program
will allow them to conduct research in highly inter-disciplinary projects and
bring state-of-the-art numerical analysis and computational algorithms to the
related areas.