* 1318281
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  The Collapse and Regeneration of the Meroitic State between the Fifth Cataract and Khartoum
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Stuart Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 25,187.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Stuart Tyson Smith, Mohamed Faroug Abdelrahman Ali
will investigate the collapse and regeneration of the Meroitic state through
archaeological research in Sudan. The Meroitic state was one of the earliest in
Africa, flourishing between approximately 300 BC to AD 350 in the Middle Nile
region of Sudan, at one time controlling the entire region from the Egyptian
border to Khartoum. There has been considerable debate as to whether the
collapse of central authority at Meroe was due to disruptions caused by tribal
movements into the area, an invasion by the Ethiopian Axumite kingdom, or
internal factionalism that caused the kingdom to split apart, resulting in
different outcomes when new kingdoms emerged in the post-Meroitic period.
Previous discussions have focused on historical texts and the capital at Meroe,
but lack support from archaeological data in the rural areas where very limited
or no excavation and survey have been conducted. This research project will
reevaluate these models through concentration of fieldwork in these little known
rural areas on the west bank and the east hinterland targeting Meroitic and
post-Meroitic period settlements, fortresses and cemeteries. These results will
be integrated with existing archaeological data in the core Meroe region to
reassess the causes behind the decline and the regeneration of the Meroitic
state.

This research contributes to larger anthropological and archaeological research
questions regarding the collapse of archaic states. Studies of the collapse of
states have resulted in a number of themes, starting with resource depletion,
competition over new resources, stress from catastrophes and an insufficient
response to social, economic and political challenges, along with competition
with other societies and the effects of intruders. Collapse is never total or
complete and regeneration results in the reappearance of social complexity
(states, cities, etc.) after a period of decentralization. Non-elite resilience
in rural areas plays a significant role in the reconstruction of complex
societies. This archaeological investigation will assist in the study of changes
in social identity of rural areas in the ancient African Meroitic state and how
locals developed autonomy, and regenerated one or multiple post-Meroitic
polities in the middle of the 4th century AD.

This study has broader impacts through its application of archaeological and
anthropological approaches to Sudanese archaeological research, a discipline
that has traditionally lacked a theoretical perspective. In particular, the
project can have important influence on the conduct of Sudanese archaeology by
introducing anthropological methods and theories to native Sudanese
archaeologists Undergraduate and graduate students from UCSB will be involved in
the analysis of materials brought back to UCSB for study, promoting a better
understanding of archaic states in sub-Sahara Africa. Additionally, the proposed
dams and expansion of agriculture in the study area at the 5th and 6th cataracts
of the Nile will have a serious impact on archaeological sites in the region,
lending the project some urgency.