* 1318603
* SHF: Small: Parasitics-aware Exploration of the FinFET SRAM Design Space
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Planar complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology scaling is
coming to an end with the adoption of FinFETs (a type of field-effect transistor
or FET) at the 22nm technology node and beyond. As a result of having multiple
gates wrapped around the fin body, FinFETs exhibit better control of the channel
potential with scaling, thereby alleviating the explosive leakage current
problem faced by planar short-channel devices. Since static random access memory
(SRAM) bit-cells are often the densest features patterned on an integrated
circuit, researchers have begun investigating the design and manufacturability
of FinFET SRAMs. Most of these investigations focus on enhancing/contrasting
SRAM direct current (DC) metric targets. However, such metrics are not an
accurate guide to FinFET bit-cell designers, as parasitic capacitances for two
topologically equivalent bit-cells can be very different (due to differing fin
pitches, etc.), resulting in widely varying transient characteristics. Thus, in
order to predict array-scale metrics through simulation, capturing transient
behavior accurately is absolutely essential. To accomplish the latter, SRAM
parasitic capacitances need to be extracted accurately from the layout. Using an
accurate parasitic capacitance extraction method that the principal
investigator's (PI's) group has developed, the project plans to explore the
FinFET SRAM design space from both DC metrics and transient behavior points of
view, under process-voltage-temperature variations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
SRAMs account for more than 50% of the area of modern microprocessors, it is
very important to base them on the best SRAM bit-cell design. A successful
conclusion of this work, hence, should be very beneficial to the semiconductor
industry. The designs/methodologies/tools that are to be developed will be
disseminated through the web. Technology transfer will be done through various
companies the PI interacts with. The material will be included in a course on
Design with Nanotechnologies that the PI teaches. Princeton has a tradition of
undergraduate independent research. Many seniors are expected to do their
research project on this topic. Female and minority students will be attracted
to this research through Princeton's Presidential Fellowship Program. The PI has
supervised 10 female Ph.D. students so far. Further outreach activities are also
planned for high-school students. The PI has supervised the research of four
high-school students in the last two years, including a female student.