* 1318885
* SBE: Option: Small: Safety for the Ages: Generational Differences in Motivations to Use Security Protections in an Online Banking Context
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Nora Rifon, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 656,395.00

How does the average user cope with the threats they encounter while engaged in
the most sensitive of all online activities, online banking? Online Safety for
the Ages (OSA) examines generational differences in motivations to use risky
online services and self-protective measures in the context of online banking.
An influx of older adults attracted to the Internet by social media but at times
unfamiliar with dealing with the hazards of online life, as well as younger
users who are sometimes oblivious to those dangers, pose distinct challenges to
the preservation of online safety.

A partnership with the Michigan State University Federal Credit Union will
provide access to both users and non-users of online banking services of various
ages to explore these issues. OSA will work from group interviews and
observations of users in their homes to understand the risks that ordinary users
perceive when attempting to use online banking, how they cope with risks
currently, and the gaps that they see in their own abilities to bank safely
online. In-depth analysis of surveys administered to credit union customers will
reveal the factors that drive and the barriers that prevent adoption of online
banking and online consumer safety measures. Finally, OSA will create and test
online tutorials designed to help credit union customers become more confident
in their abilities to protect themselves while banking online and to understand
how their banking institution can assist them.

Thus, OSA will contribute new knowledge about how to motivate average users to
play their part in making the Internet safer for themselves and for the online
community at large. In public discussions of online security, user education is
often mentioned as a priority, but too often only in passing, and with self-
canceling lamentations about the difficulty of achieving it. The present project
will contribute by developing scientifically grounded, evidenced-based knowledge
about effective approaches to consumer education. The project focuses on a
vulnerable group of older Americans whose lives can be improved through secure
access to financial services. Older Americans, however, are also vulnerable to
online scammers and are too often uninformed about online dangers and
inexperienced with effective protections. OSA provides a model through which
bank customers and their financial institutions can work together to improve
online security, a model that will be disseminated widely in the banking
community with the assistance of a banking industry partner and to the computer
security community through professional publications. Finally, the project will
support doctoral students who will pursue careers in academia and government and
further the goal of online safety through their own students and constituents.