* 1318059
* CNIC: US-Croatian-French Research on the Digestive Anatomy and Physiology of Herbivorous Populations of the Lizard Species,Podarcis sicula
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Donovan German, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 07/31/2015
* USD 46,902.00

An animal's digestive tract is a dynamic physiological system that supplies
nutrients to the body and, to ensure survival, it must respond to changes in
diet and environmental conditions. What an animal is capable of digesting, or
not digesting, tells us how an animal lives in its environment and how it
contributes to nutrient cycling in that environment. Recent studies have shown
the value of using experimental evolution to reveal how the digestive tract
responds to diet changes over different time scales. In this preliminary study,
researchers from the University of California-Irvine and expert international
counterparts from the University of Zagreb, in Croatia, and the French Museum
National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris will begin a collaboration to investigate
the nutritional physiology of Podarcis sicula, a lizard species that has shown
rapid evolution of feeding and digestive tract
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together, the US-Croatian-French
team led in the U.S. by Donovan P. German of U.C.-Irvine will examine the
results of a manipulative study that transferred breeding pairs of Podarcis
sicula from the island of Pod Kopiste to another Croatian island, Pod Mrcaru,
which had lacked this species. Interestingly, after 30 generations the
transferred pairs became more herbivorous on Pod Mrcaru (~36 years), resulting
in marked differences in body morphology compared to the insect-eating parent
population from Pod Kopiste. The goal of this new collaboration is to initiate
an investigation of the digestive physiology (including digestive enzyme
activities and microbial diversity) and the gut structure of P. sicula from Pod
Kopiste and Pod Mrcaru to better understand "what it takes to be an herbivore?"
and how such changes in an animal's gut can occur so quickly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work may include contributions
to the medical field of gastroenterology (e.g., what happens when people
suddenly become vegetarian?). Thus in the long run, this effort should benefit
society by adding to our fundamental knowledge of nutritional physiology and
dietary specialization, both, in animal models and potentially in humans.
Furthermore, because U.C.-Irvine and Croatian students will be involved in the
joint work, broader impacts also include publication and direct outreach by the
researchers and these students in schools and other public fora, as well as
educational benefits for the U.S. student participants through early career
training in scientific techniques and inquiry-based research abroad.