* 1318136
* PFI:  BIC - Microfabricated Electrochemical Sensors for Combustion Application
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Prabir Dutta, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 12/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This PFI:BIC project from the College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering-
University at Albany seeks to develop cost-effective oxygen sensors for
combustion applications. Oxygen sensors are currently the most extensively used
sensor in the combustion industry. These sensors are used for controlling fuel
injection in gasoline-powered vehicles (cost of sensors ~ $100) and optimizing
combustion in coal-fired power plants (cost of sensor ~ $5000). Currently, the
dimensions of these sensor systems range from ten centimeters to meters in size
and require access to ambient air, thus limiting their use in a wide range of
industries. Miniaturization of existing sensor designs only will be advantageous
if new designs no longer need access to ambient air. The recent discovery of an
oxygen sensor by Argonne National Laboratory and The Ohio State University with
unsurpassed oxygen-sensing capabilities and no need for access to outside air,
provides a unique opportunity to further adapt miniaturization for designing
innovative chemical gas sensors. The intellectual merit of this program is
realized in filling the technology gap related to the development of
microfabrication techniques for producing millimeter- sized oxygen gas sensors
with the necessary technical and cost attributes required for widespread use
within combustion applications. To meet this objective, manufacturing practices
for macroscopic ceramic objects will be translated to the nanometer length
scale, which will increase the innovation capacity of the research team.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research will be realized in
the commercial impact of microfabricated oxygen sensors. Use of these
miniaturized sensors will increase the combustion efficiency of energy systems
in industries that include transportation, energy generation, and manufacturing.
An increase of just 1% in combustion efficiency will provide energy savings of
160 TBtu with a subsequent CO2 reduction of 93 million tons, saving billions of
dollars in the long run with a major impact on a cleaner environment. For the
small business collaborator, Makel Engineering, Inc.( MEI), these sensors can be
used immediately in low volume/high cost industrial applications. In the long
term, mass-produced sensor dies will allow for a reduction in production costs
that will then open up low cost/high volume chemical sensor applications. For
the small business collaborator, MicroAdventure Technologies LLC (MAT), the
successful completion of the MEMS oxygen sensor project will allow MAT to
participate in the subsequent development phases needed to bring this sensor
technology to market. Longer term, MAT intends to participate in the supply
chain for this sensor by providing custom-designed and tested die to
application-focused companies. For the academic members of the research team,
the translation of laboratory discoveries into research initiatives aimed at
building the innovation capacity of small businesses will in turn provide new
educational opportunities for both the academic investigators and students. The
entrepreneurial spirit of this research program will provide a unique
opportunity for training of graduate and undergraduate students and the
groundwork for future success in both academic and business-related
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
as follows: 1) Lead Institution: College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering-
University at Albany-SUNY, 2) Primary Small Business Partners: MEI, Chico, CA,
and MAT, Pittsford, NY, and 3) Other primary partner: The Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University