* 1318490
* Grant Transfer: Contributions of astrocytes to metabolic modulation of memory
* BIO,IOS
* 11/07/2012,08/31/2017
* Paul Gold, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2017
* USD 717,281.00

Although neurons receive most of the attention in brain research, a second cell
type, glial cells, comprise as many or more of the cells in the brain.
Astrocytes are a major type of glial cell. These cells function to regulate
brain metabolism, including the energy use of neurons. Past findings from this
laboratory and others indicate that glucose provision to the brain enhances
memory functions. Adult mammalian brains use glucose as the major source of
energy. This project will determine whether and how astrocytes regulate memory
formation by controlling energy use in the brain. The general hypothesis is that
ECF glucose levels are sufficient to meet energy requirements under low-need
conditions. But when the need is greater, for example during activation to
support more intense cognitive functions, astrocytes break down energy reserves
stores to provide neurons with a rapid energy boost. These experiments use new
methods to measure brain energy substances in awake rats during memory testing,
together with pharmacological treatments that identify the necessity of
different metabolic routes during memory processing. The role of brain energy
metabolism in making new memories identifies a new set of biological processes
that regulate the highest functions of the brain, opening new avenues for
investigation of brain processes with potentially high impact in scientific
investigations of the brain and its functions. In addition to the scientific
impact, the project will have direct impact on science education and training at
the postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate and K-12 level. The PI has mentored
students at all these levels and, relatively uniquely, includes high school
students in the research team. The PI will bring information from this research
project to the public through regular participation in outreach programs to
secondary school students and education forums for the elderly.