* 1318343
* III: Small: Extending and Automating Dynamic Specialization of Database Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Saumya Debray, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 496,830.00

Database management systems (DBMSs) are ubiquitous in industry and their
performance and functionality are crucially important in commercial IT
infrastructure. There has been a lot of work on improving the performance of
these critical systems. This project adopts a complementary and orthogonal
approach to substantially increasing the performance of DBMSs. This is done by
exploiting runtime information about the DBMS to specialize the DBMS code on the
fly in order to eliminate as much unnecessary work as possible. This dynamic
code optimization, which we term "micro-specialization", is highly aggressive
and goes well beyond what can be achieved using existing compiler optimization
technology. This focus on runtime code optimization is also very different from
most of the current research on DBMS performance improvement. The project
investigates algorithms for automatic identification of code sequences where
micro-specialization may profitably be applied; algorithms that can micro-
specialize such identified target code sequences; and techniques for ensuring
the correctness of the resulting code. Preliminary studies on disparate DBMSes
suggest that micro-specialization offers significant performance improvements
when applied to mature, high-performance DBMSs and to industry-standard
benchmarks, and that there are rich opportunities for other substantial
performance gains, with minimal impact on the DBMS
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include
increased efficiency of the IT infrastructure used by a wide variety of
companies, leading to improved overall productivity. Graduate and undergraduate
students are involved in all aspects of the research activities as an integral
part of the project. The PIs have an established track record of integrating
research activities into the undergraduate curriculum and involving
undergraduates, including women and members of underrepresented minorities, in
research; this project continues this tradition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
further information see the web site at
http://www.cs.arizona.edu/projects/microspecialization/ .