* 1318143
* HCC: Small: Prompting Intentional Social Media Use Among Children and Parents
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Sarita Schoenebeck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2018
* USD 469,519.00

This research will develop new ways to (1) prompt intentional behavior and
reflection among children when they become new social media users; (2) support
parents in taking a proactive, rather than reactive, role in guiding their
children's social media use; and (3) develop theoretical insights about
prompting self-awareness among users with and through social systems. Parents
are concerned about the content, context, and frequency of their children?s
social media use and struggle to cope with these facets. Unfortunately, many
parenting approaches to date are reactive and are focused on tracking, logging,
or cutting off access to social media. Furthermore, the lack of empirical
research in this area has left parents ill-equipped to try alternate strategies.
Trying to cut off access to social media could lead to psychological reactance,
where children engage in risky behaviors secretly instead of communicating
openly with their parents. If we expect parents to raise their children
effectively in a complex and rapidly changing digital world, we must develop new
tools, approaches, and theories to help them do so. To address this gap, this
research casts a new perspective on social media design that focuses on the
study and development of social systems that prompt proactive and reflective
behavior based on context-dependent cues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will use a mixed-methods approach with four phases: (1) conduct parent-child
interviews to understand why parents worry about social media and how their
worries relate to children?s behaviors; (2) conduct a mobile phone experiment to
prompt intentionality and reflection with mobile phone use among children and
parents; (3) conduct a web-based experiment to prompt intentionality and
reflection with laptop use among children and parents; and (4) synthesize
results and develop new theories about ways of prompting reflection and self-
awareness in social media systems. Mobile phones and laptops were chosen because
they are widely adopted among youth and they are personal and portable, which
introduces new parenting challenges. Effectiveness will be evaluated by
comparing experimental and control group outcomes using a variety of measures
including mobile phone logs, browser logs, self-reports, and validated
behavioral scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how to prompt regular,
real-time reflection with and through social media can guide the design of new
kinds of social systems that prompt increased self-awareness and competency. The
project will disseminate mobile phone and web-based tools to local parents,
schools, and community organizations and will make them publicly available
online. It will also disseminate research outcomes for a non-technical audience
in the form of presentations, media outputs, and short reports. This research
can have a vital and potentially transformative impact on early social media use
among children and their parents, addressing a challenge that almost every
parent in the U.S. now faces.