* 1318594
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Enabling Robust Communication in Cognitive Radio Networks with Multiple Lines of Defense
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Peng Ning, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2018
* USD 249,901.00

Opportunistic spectrum access (OSA) is at the core of the cognitive radio
technologies with the focus on improving spectrum utilization efficiency and
reliability. Despite the benefits, existing OSA protocols suffer from their
deterministic nature and cannot prevent an ill-intended jammer from disrupting
legitimate communications. A cognitive jammer can always effectively jam the
idle channels by exploiting public-available channel statistics and causes
serious spectrum underutilization. This project addresses the challenge of
establishing robust anti-jamming communication in cognitive radio networks
(CRNs) through a multiple-line of defense approach. The research considers a
variety of network environments and integrates defense technologies from
different dimensions, including adaptive uncoordinated frequency hopping (AUFH),
power control, and signal processing. The defense approach enables both reactive
and proactive protections, from evading jammers to competing against jammers,
and to expelling jamming signals, and thus ensures robust user communications in
CRNs.

The research in this project has a potential to significantly advance the state-
of-the-art and develop innovative and sophisticated defense strategies using the
proposed multiple lines of defense approach. The proposed solutions will
contribute towards eventually building robust and dependable CRNs that are
critical to the future communication systems. The project will also contribute
directly to the curriculum development, teaching, student supervising and future
security engineer training. Major results of this project will be disseminated
through presentations, publications, as well as online materials in the forms of
tutorials and software packages.