* 1318303
* Collaborative Research: Correlated Superfluids and Insulators of Ultracold Fermionic Atomic Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Marcos Rigol, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

Ultracold atoms in optical lattices provide an ideal set up for realizing some
of the most pristine pseudogap states currently known from theoretical studies.
Those states could be fundamentally different from the poorly understood
pseudogap state of high-temperature superconductors, while exhibiting a similar
phenomenology due to significant quantum fluctuations. This project focuses on
the theoretical investigation of unconventional superfluid and insulating states
of ultracold fermions in optical lattices. The idea is to identify and
characterize those states in resonantly paired fermions and systematically
explore the phase diagram of pair-density-wave and Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-
Ovchinnikov states in realistic lattice potentials. One of our main goals is to
unveil the minimal microscopic ingredients required for the existence of those
states so that they can be realized in experiments. The research will mostly
rely on the unique combination of numerical methods that the two PIs have
advanced in their recent work: exact diagonalization and quantum Monte Carlo
simulations (M.R.), and order-parameter-dependent free energy minimization
(P.N.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will incorporate a broad outreach
effort taking advantage of the location of George Mason and Georgetown
Universities. Opportunities such as science fairs and public lectures will be
used to attract high school and undergraduate students from Northern Virginia to
pursue higher education and careers in science and engineering, as well as
participate in the funded research projects. This grant will further facilitate
the building of advanced research programs in atomic and condensed matter theory
at George Mason and Georgetown Universities. Graduate students at both
universities will receive training in high performance computing, and will gain
experience performing highly parallel calculations in high performance computing
centers within the US. We will encourage the participation of members of
underrepresented groups in Physics and the results of this research will be
reported in the joint conferences of the National Society of Black Physicists
and the National Society of Hispanic Physicists.