* 1318377
* Data-Driven Time-Frequency Analysis via Nonlinear Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Thomas Hou, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 11/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This investigator proposes to develop a new data-driven time-frequency analysis
method to study nonlinear and non-stationary data. The key idea is to look for
the sparsest time-frequency representation of a signal over the largest possible
dictionary using nonlinear optimization. Such a method is motivated by physical
applications and the need to extract instantaneous frequency and trend from
multiscale data arising from many scientific and engineering applications.
Although several methods have been introduced to extract instantaneous frequency
from a multiscale signal, these methods suffer from various limitations and do
not have a solid mathematical foundation. The data-driven time-frequency
analysis method developed by this investigator and his colleagues provides a
mathematically rigorous definition of instantaneous frequency. This investigator
and his colleagues have developed an efficient nonlinear matching pursuit method
based on L1-regularized nonlinear least squares to decompose the signal. This
method can be used to extract physically meaningful information of the signal
such as instantaneous frequency and trend. The preliminary results show that
this method can decompose a wide range of physical signals accurately and
efficiently. Applications of this method to some real world data from geo-
science and biomedical applications have led to some new discoveries. One of the
main objectives of this proposal is to carry out a rigorous convergence study of
this method and apply it to solve some challenging real world problems in
biomedical and geo-science applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Developing
effective data analysis methods is an important path to understand some hidden
patterns such as trend and cycles from the massive amount of data. So far, most
data analysis methods use a predetermined basis to process data. Most of these
methods can handle only linear and stationary data. To better understand the
physical mechanisms hidden in data, one needs to develop effective methods that
can handle the non-stationarity and nonlinearity of the data. Such methods
require the use of a data-driven basis that is adaptive to the data instead of
being determined a priori. The data-driven time-frequency method developed by
this investigator and his colleagues has a solid mathematical foundation and
uses a novel nonlinear optimization technique. Application of this method to the
9 year AMSU data over tropical oceans has led to the discovery of a new near-
annual trend. This method has been applied to analyze blood pressure wave data,
leading to a completely new way of diagnosing patients with cardiovascular
diseases. The proposed method could provide a completely new way to analyze real
world data. The proposed research will help train students and postdocs in this
emerging research area. The knowledge, techniques and tools developed in this
project will be disseminated through publishing in the open literature, and
making available as open-source the software tools that are developed.