* 1318641
* A computational framework for atherosclerotic plaque growth simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Benjamin Seibold, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2016
* USD 86,277.00

The investigators develop a computational framework for the growth of
atherosclerotic plaques in large arteries. Specific emphasis is placed on the
nonlinear constitutive models for the arterial wall, including residual
stresses, and on the bridging of the highly separated time scales that govern
this process. This study focuses on the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations
that describe the blood flow, coupled with nonlinear elasticity equations that
govern the response of the diseased arterial walls. The actual plaque growth
process exhibits a large separation of time scales between the growth of the
plaque, which takes place over a course of years, and the heart rate, which is
in the order of seconds. The investigators develop a methodology to couple a
growth model with the fluid-structure interaction problem in a way that the
fundamental challenges incurred by the separation of time scales are resolved.
In addition, the computational framework allows for the incorporation of
variable behavioral factors, such as physical activity and cholesterol
concentration in the blood.

While it is known that the rupturing of an atherosclerotic plaque can cause a
heart attack, the actual growth process of plaques in arteries is far from well
understood. In this project, a computational framework is developed that bridges
the highly separated time scales between the plaque growth and the heart rate,
and that allows for the incorporation of accurate models for the elastic
arterial walls. This new framework can yield fundamental insights into the long-
term causes of atherosclerosis, and the dependence of the disease on behavioral
factors such as physical activity, cholesterol intake, and tobacco use. In
addition, the methodologies developed in this project can find applications in
the modeling of damage in elastic materials, other diseases that develop over a
large time span such as abdominal aortic aneurysms and intimal hyperplasia, and
biological phenomena such as the growth and transport of algae in channel flows
and the growth of biofilms. This project involves a collaboration with engineers
who measure residual stresses in arteries experimentally.