* 1318678
* TWC: Option: Small: Automatic Software Model Repair for Security Policies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Sandeep Kulkarni, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 448,789.00

Increasing cyber security depends on our ability to guarantee that the system
will provide the expected functionality under normal circumstances as well as if
the system is perturbed by some random events or security threats. Providing
such guarantee is often complicated due to several factors such as changes in
system requirements caused by user demands, exposure to a new threat model that
was not considered (or not relevant) in the original design, or identifying bugs
or vulnerabilities during a system life cycle. The purpose of the project is to
develop automated techniques --that provide justifiable confidence about
correctness-- to transform an existing software model into a new model that
satisfies both the existing functionality and the desired security requirements.
Developing algorithms that generate models that satisfy existing functionality
and new security requirements poses new challenges due to the fact that existing
trace-based properties do not suffice for several security properties. A
characteristic of trace-based properties is that if a model satisfies a trace-
based property and it is restricted by removing some undesired behaviors then
the revised model still satisfies that trace-based property. Hence, adding a
trace-based property can be achieved by removing behaviors that violate it.
Since trace-based properties cannot express several security properties, this
project will utilize a new formalism, hyperproperties, that generalizes trace-
based properties and can be used for modeling security requirements. In
particular, a hyperproperty consists of a set of trace-based properties and to
satisfy that hyperproperty it is required that the repaired program exhibit
`all? behaviors in one of these properties. To develop algorithms that
justifiably provide assurance about models developed by them, this project will
first focus on formalizing commonly used security requirements using
hyperproperties. It will perform complexity analysis to evaluate the complexity
of adding different security properties to an existing model. To mitigate cases
where the complexity is high, it will develop heuristics and algorithms that (1)
identify whether adding the given hyperproperty can be achieved via adding a
related stronger trace-based property, and (2) identify a subset of
hyperproperties where adding the given property is more efficient. This work
will also result in the development of efficient algorithms and tools that
utilize the complexity bottlenecks. Thus, the results of the proposed project
will enhance assurance of software systems by repairing security flaws and
vulnerabilities in an automated fashion.