* 1318633
* Accurate and Efficient Algorithms for Computing Exponentials of Large Matrices with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Qiang Ye, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 189,971.00

Matrix exponential is an important linear algebra tool that has a wide range of
applications. Its efficient computation is a classical numerical linear algebra
problem that is of considerable importance to many fields. This research project
is concerned with numerical algorithms for computing exponentials of large
matrices. The main objectives are: (1) to develop efficient preconditioning
techniques for computing the product of the exponential of a matrix with a
vector, and (2) to develop accurate and efficient algorithms to compute some
selected entries of the exponential of an essentially nonnegative matrix. The
proposed research will advance theory and algorithms for matrix exponentials in
the setting of iterative methods for large scale problems. It will systemically
address the problems of preconditioning and entrywise relative accuracy that are
critically important in certain applications. The resulting algorithms will
improve the existing ones in computational efficiency and/or accuracy. At the
conclusion of this project, robust MATLAB implementations of the algorithms
developed will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms
proposed in this project will provide new computational tools that are
sufficiently efficient and/or accurate to meet the challenges posed by many
large scale application problems. A fully developed efficient preconditioning
technique would significantly advance the state of the art in solving large
scale initial value problems, which are used to model and solve a large number
of practical problems in science and engineering. The proposed algorithms for
accurately computing selected entries of the exponential of a large essentially
nonnegative matrix would remove the numerical accuracy issue that may present a
significant challenge to the traditional algorithms. The need for entrywise
accurate computations arise in continuous-time Markov chain models, where the
entries represent transition probabilities, and in large complex networks, where
the entries define various network properties such as connectivity. Thus, the
new algorithms will be applicable to a wide range of problems that involves
continuous-time Markov chains or complex networks. They include problems from
genetics, sociology, neurology, biological networks, social networks and
homeland security, telecommunication networks, and computer networks.