* 1318563
* TWC: Small: Semantics Aware Approaches to Automated Reverse Engineering Unknown Application Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Alex Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 455,000.00

Many application protocols on the Internet, especially those used by malware,
are proprietary and have no publicly released specifications. According to the
Internet2 NetFlow weekly reports on backbone traffic, more than 40% of Internet
traffic belongs to unidentified application protocols. Therefore, it is critical
for network security solutions to understand the specifications of these unknown
application protocols. For instance, protocol specifications are needed for
parsing unknown application protocol in advanced intrusion prevention systems.
Protocol specifications are also useful for many other applications such as
vulnerability discovery and system integration. Furthermore, even for some
application protocols with known specifications, protocol inference is also
needed sometimes for identifying implementation details and bugs that are not
unambiguously specified. Inferring protocol specification for unknown
application protocols is therefore fundamental to network security.

The objective of this project is to develop schemes for automatically inferring
the protocol specification of unknown applications from their network traces.
The PI proposes a semantics aware approach that takes network traces as the
input and automatically outputs the inferred protocol message format. This
project represents the first effort towards developing semantics aware
approaches to protocol inference, a fundamental building block of many network
security solutions. This project is potentially transformative research with
high-impact. It will enable a spectrum of new network security applications and
solutions. The proposed project is interdisciplinary in nature as it applies
natural language processing techniques to network security problems.