* 1318278
* FSML Improvements: Provision of a molecular ecology laboratory at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Stephen Sulkin, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 180,659.00

Western Washington University is awarded a grant for is the development of a
molecular ecology laboratory at the The Shannon Point Marine Center (SPMC). The
lab currently hosts extensive ecological research programs including field
ecology, oceanographic research, experimental ecology, chemical and
physiological ecology. The lab will extend existing research capacity to
molecular mechanisms in marine organisms. Scientists at SPMC will be able to
link environment to physiology and molecular mechanisms and to link phylogeny
and evolutionary history to ecological function in the Salish Sea and other
ocean systems. Accordingly, SPMC proposes to purchase a benchtop genome
sequencer whose specifications will assure affordability, flexibility and
provide for the rapid turnaround of results that can support short term projects
that involve student research as well as the longer term needs of faculty.
Equipment to provide for on-site sample preparation and documentation as well as
data storage and analysis will be obtained to satisfy the requirements of
resident and visiting scientists and students.

Maintaining effective facilities to support both training of the next generation
of marine science professionals and research in the marine environment is
essential to program success, particularly given that many students visiting
SPMC come from institutions that have no access to marine environments. SPMC
trains faculty from local community colleges in incorporating marine science
into the curricula of introductory courses, populated by students who typically
will not pursue degrees in marine science or science of any discipline.
Workshops will incorporate the use of molecular tools in marine science as part
of the training. SPMC's Public Education Initiative brings local marine biota to
classrooms and public events and demonstrates the tools and techniques that
ocean scientists use to study the marine environment. The proposed molecular
ecology laboratory and its outcomes will permit us to add this important element
in the study of ocean science to the information that we share with public
audiences. For more information about Shannon Point Marine Center, visit the web
site at http://www.wwu.edu/spmc/.