* 1318734
* EDU: CPS-CDC - A framework for Cyber-Physical Systems based Cyber Defense Competitions
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Douglas Jacobson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a framework for integrating critical
infrastructure cyber-physical systems (CPS) into an effective and well
established Cyber Defense Competition (CDC) model created at Iowa State
University (ISU). The resulting framework will enable others to replicate cyber-
physical CDCs providing an avenue for producing more CPS security professionals.
Cyber defense competitions across the nation have solidified and enriched
student understanding and competency in defending computer and network systems.
This proposal addresses the need for additional professionals to be trained to
protect other critical infrastructures such as cyber-physical systems. ISU is
uniquely position to design and run the new cyber-physical CDCs using the model
established and improved over the last 15 years. Their Cybersecurity outreach
programs focus on high school, community college, and four-year university
students and help not only master concepts, but also thoroughly understand
Cybersecurity as a theoretical construct and a practical, hands-on approach. The
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program funds proposals that address
Cybersecurity from a Trustworthy Computing Systems perspective; a Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences perspective; and proposals focusing entirely on
Cybersecurity Education.

There are four clearly defined objectives of the project: enhance the knowledge
of students studying security to include the protection of CPS; develop a
framework to integrate cyber-physical components into an existing cyber defense
competition model; develop scenarios, scoring rubrics, real-time anomalies, and
other materials to allow other groups to host their own CPS- CDC; create a set
of effective inquiry-based laboratory exercises and assignments that support the
CPS-CDCs. The addition of the cyber-physical CDC will increase the overall
numbers of students to protect the critical infrastructure and intellectual
property. The experienced project team has been conducting workshops on cyber
defense competitions, high school outreach programs, undergraduate club
activities, and Cybersecurity literacy for more many years at national
conferences. These efforts will continue with this award activity. Additionally,
a website will be established to share cyber-physical CDC learning materials,
exercises, and information, as well as instructions to setup their own cyber-
physical CDC. Help will be provided to other institutions on how to incorporate
these programs into developing cyber-physical CDCs at their institutions.