* 1318826
* SHF:Small:Boosting Sustainability in NoC Architectures Through a Proactive Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Sanghamitra Roy, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 531,948.00

Rapid technology scaling has fueled an unprecedented growth in the
semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;industry, transforming the face of modern society.
Commodity systems have&lt;br/&gt;undergone a sea change from the uniprocessor
era of past decades to the current&lt;br/&gt;many-core era. With numerous on-
chip processing cores, the communication fabric&lt;br/&gt;in many-core systems
becomes a critical design component. Network-on-Chip
(NoC)&lt;br/&gt;architectures are widely regarded as the most promising design
for the&lt;br/&gt;communication platform for many-core systems, primarily due to
their&lt;br/&gt;scalability. Many-core systems such as Intel 80-core and Tilera
have already&lt;br/&gt;used NoCs as the backbone of communication between their
on-chip processors. To&lt;br/&gt;maintain fault-free execution in these many-
core systems, it is imperative to&lt;br/&gt;ensure sustained lifetime in both
NoCs and processing cores. This research&lt;br/&gt;embarks on boosting
sustainability in NoC architectures through a proactive&lt;br/&gt;design
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using a cross-layer collaborative
venture, spanning from the device layer to the&lt;br/&gt;architecture layer,
this project establishes a transformative framework to&lt;br/&gt;design
sustainable NoC architectures. Existing techniques for NoCs tackle
the&lt;br/&gt;sustainability design challenge in a reactive way by triggering
corrective&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms after a component failure. The investigators
explore an orthogonal&lt;br/&gt;proactive strategy, recognizing the need for
device level aging awareness during&lt;br/&gt;the entire life span of an NoC.
This project demonstrates that sustainability&lt;br/&gt;can be improved in NoCs
without sacrificing power-performance, by considering&lt;br/&gt;the criticality
of packet transmission. By playing a central role to facilitate&lt;br/&gt;long
term sustainability in NoCs, this research can substantially improve
the&lt;br/&gt;cost efficiency in building large data centers supporting our
modern compute&lt;br/&gt;intensive society. Major research insights will be
disseminated through teaching&lt;br/&gt;to develop relevant skill sets, lead to
more sustainable future computer&lt;br/&gt;systems, and benefit the community at
large.