* 1318416
* Phased Testing at Sea of the Son-O-Mermaid Prototype
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Frederik Simons, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 45,001.00

A fully autonomous, long-lived marine geophysical instrument, the Son-O-Mermaid,
was developed and with this grant, it will be tested at sea in three month-long
deployments offshore the Bahamas, where deep water is easily accessible and
ocean conditions generally favorable and well-characterized. Son-O-Mermaid is a
freely drifting buoy that (1) derives energy from wave action, enough to power
(2) a vertical array of hydrophones suspended from a compliant cable connected
to a damping plate below the waves, (3) a full-ocean-depth echo sounder, (4) GPS
for location and timing accuracy, (5) an IRIDIUM satellite communication unit
for near real-time data transfer, and an (6) on-board digitizing and processing
unit. No similar instrument exists. The predecessor instrument, MERMAID, differs
in fundamental aspects from our Son-O-Mermaid. MERMAID is wholly lacking (1),
(3) and the array aspect of (2). The Son-O-Mermaid capabilities (4)-(6) are
always "on": the instrument is self-powered and as a whole never completely
submerged at depth. The Son-O-Mermaid is to be deployed by untrained personnel
from ships of opportunity, which gives it an extra advantage over conventional
(e.g., ocean-bottom, tethered,moored) approaches. Son-O-Mermaid was first and
foremost designed for whole-Earth seismological (tomographical) applications.
The hydrophone array configuration eliminates non-propagating noise and
suppresses surface multiples. The fathometer helps in determining the travel
time of teleseismic waves with maximal accuracy. It will also deliver data for
the high-resolution study of Earth's global bathymetry, and because Son-O-
Mermaid is a drifting instrument, surface currents will be another
byproduct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geophysical measurements made in (not just of)
the oceans are rare because of accessibility, logistics, and costs. While the
continents are densely covered with sophisticated instrumentation, there are few
alternatives, if the data need to be collected in the oceans, other than
visiting the ocean floor or using shipboard measurements. For global seismology,
the paucity of oceanic data is extremely detrimental, and to many other branches
of Earth sciences, oceanic data are simply essential. Physical, chemical and
biological oceanography will all be served by the availability of low-cost,
autonomous, and global data collection strategies. Other than hydrophones and
depth sounders, many other instrument types can be envisaged as payload. It also
goes without saying that hydrophones will detect a whole range of acoustic
signals in the oceans, from the crackling of glaciers and calving ice sheets to
the calls of whales and other marine fauna, from the faint rumble of large,
rare, and distant earthquakes to the swarms of ridge or transform-fault events.
Lastly, while we are after geophysical signal, the study of acoustic noise in
the ocean is a discipline with many intrinsically interesting scientific
questions as well as practical and societal applications.