* 1318814
* TWC: Small: Develop Fine-Grained Access Control for Third-Party Components in Mobile Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Wenliang Du, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Fen Zhao
* 07/31/2017
* USD 532,362.00

Smartphones and tablets are being used widely, and with such a pervasive use,
protecting mobile systems is of critical importance. One of the unique features
in mobile systems is that many applications incorporate third-party components,
such as advertisement, social-network APIs, and the WebView component (that runs
third-party JavaScript code). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With third-party components,
the code developed by application developers and the code from third parties are
executed within the same context and with the same privilege. No access control
system is developed to separate the privilege of the first-party application
code from that of third-party components. This has resulted in over-privilege
issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop
adequate access control systems to remedy the risks introduced by third-party
components. The development is based on a systematic study of various third-
party components, how they interact with applications, what features are
desirable, and what their protection needs are. The project meets this objective
using a three-pronged approach: (1) add new access controls to WebView to
control the interactions with third-party code; (2) add package-level access
controls within apps to prevent over-privilege; and (3) isolate third-party
components with visual elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project can offer
mobile system developers a deeper understanding of the security problems in the
systems, suggest to them how better to design into mobile systems desired
security properties, and eventually improve the security of mobile systems.