* 1318086
* FSML Planning for the Future of the Darling Marine Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Robert Steneck, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 24,993.00

The University of Maine is awarded a grant to carry out strategic planning for
the Darling Marine Center (the Center), located in mid-coast Maine. The Center
is in transition with recent major shifts in the composition of resident faculty
members, funding sources and leadership. The goal is to develop a decadal vision
for the Center with concrete implementation plans for the first five years. It
will be inclusive of the broad groups of present and potential future users,
with the goal of enhanced research, training and educational uses of the Center.
Planning activities will include internal discussion among faculty members
resident at local university campuses, an in-depth review and analysis by a
Committee of Visitors, local stakeholder workshops, and visits to other marine
labs. Data management policies, fee structure, and marketing strategies for the
Center will be evaluated. A report, with actionable and prioritized items, will
be produced based on information gathered during the strategic planning
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center enables access for visiting and
resident researchers to a wide diversity of microenvironments along the estuary
and to the open Gulf of Maine waters through its capable vessel, the R/V Ira C.
The research carried out at the laboratory by visiting and resident researchers
addresses a broad range of topics, spanning ecological studies of coastal marine
ecosystems, the physiology and reproductive and developmental biology of key
species, and the interactions among species including humans. Planktonic studies
include time-series measurements of plankton and their responses to a changing
climate. The proposed planning activity, with its review of research programs
and infrastructure, will enhance the Center's capacity for research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the species studied at the Center are of high
economic value (e.g., lobster and aquacultured bivalves) and of direct relevance
to Maine's economy. The impact of humans on the ecology of the Gulf of Maine has
a direct feedback to the social fabric of Maine's coastal communities. The
Center currently educates and trains students from K through graduate school
through its various formal and informal programs. The COSEE-OS program provides
professional training opportunities and webinars that reach far beyond the State
of Maine. A goal of the proposed planning process is to expand our educational
and training activities and establish new links to institutions serving
underrepresented minorities in New England. The Center is an ideal classroom for
the next generation of students and a microcosm for determining how we can best
use Earth's resources sustainably in the future. For more information about the
Center, please visit the website at http://www.dmc.maine.edu.