* 1318234
* Planning Grant: Upgrading laboratory facilities and experiential education at the Cape Eleuthera Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Joseph Louda, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 24,226.00

Florida Atlantic University (FAU) is awarded a planning grant that will enable
marine scientists and students to collaborate with the Cape Eleuthera Institute
(CEI) and The Island School (IS) on the island of Eleuthera in the Bahamas for
research and teaching purposes. CEI and IS are supported by the Cape Eleuthera
Foundation (CEF), a U.S. 501c3 organization. This planning effort will bring
together a broad and representative External Panel of marine scientists to join
with the PI and Co-PIs in detailing changes in and additions to the existing
laboratory and teaching facilities of CEI/IS to serve as many research and
teaching interests of U.S. scientists as possible. Planning efforts will
emphasize the infrastructure requisite to the study of marine ecosystems and to
enhance experiential education. The collaboration with CEI/IS, a stable marine
research and teaching campus, will free FAU from having to purchase lands and
create facilities anew. U.S. scientists will have access to modernized research
/ teaching facilities at a reduced fee schedule according to our current
Memorandum of Understanding.

This award is a significant step toward expanding and strengthening the
infrastructure and training for societally relevant STEM research and
undergraduate / graduate student training in South Florida and across the
nation. Florida Atlantic University is an extremely diverse institution, and
underrepresented minority students from South Florida and future US citizens
from the Bahamas and the greater Caribbean will be involved in this training.
The infrastructure development plan made possible by this award has the
potential to provide the facilities to recruit and train a highly diverse cohort
of students who can then add their unique perspectives to STEM areas important
to the nation. For more information about CEI and IS visit their websites at
http://www.ceibahamas.org and http://www.islandschool.org.