* 1318833
* AF: SHF: Small: Compartmentalized circuit architectures for real-world biocomputing applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Darko Stefanovic, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 495,836.00

In recent years there have been great advances in nucleic acid technology, such
as the development of biomolecular circuits that compute logic functions,
mimicking the behavior of semiconductor circuits. Biomolecular logic circuits
consist of DNA or RNA molecules that react with each other and with particular
target molecules. The goal of the circuit is to detect whether the target
molecules are present and decide on an appropriate response. For example, a
biomolecular logic circuit might instruct a particular cell to self-destruct, if
that cell contains particular molecules known to indicate
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because molecules are continually colliding with
each other, special care must be taken when designing biomolecular logic
circuits to ensure that only the desired reactions actually take place. As
circuits grow in size and complexity, it will become increasingly difficult to
prevent unwanted reactions between different molecules within the circuit. In
real-world applications we must also guard against interference caused by
unwanted reactions with other molecules that are present in the solution but are
not part of the circuit. Unwanted reactions introduce noise into the system,
preventing the circuit from computing reliably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will tackle these challenges by designing biomolecular logic circuits
using distributed computational modules that are physically separated, to reduce
non-specific molecular interactions. Each module will contain specific computing
components inside a lipid membrane, and collections of communicating modules
will be designed to carry out distributed computations. Putting modules inside
membranes will reduce unwanted reactions between different parts of the circuit,
which will increase the reliability of the system. It will also enable identical
DNA sequences to be reused within multiple modules, which is an important step
towards standardization of biomolecular computing components. Standardization
will make it easier to build larger and more sophisticated circuits that are
capable of more complex decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The project will develop new designs for biomolecular logic circuits
based on distributed, communicating modules, and investigate the advantages of
this approaches to molecular computing, for example in terms of reliability.
These advances will be directly applicable to many biomedical problems of
interest, including detection of viruses and the development of autonomous smart
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will have a broad impact
on medical technology by developing a new biocompatible platform for the
implementation of biomolecular logic circuits for medical applications. This
will improve access to rapid diagnoses, particularly in underserved communities.
Community outreach in New Mexico will be achieved via internship programs,
enabling high school and undergraduate students to experience interdisciplinary
scientific research.