* 1318338
* CIF:Small:  Aspects of the Interplay Between Information Theory and Signal Processing:  Extremal Problems and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Erchin Serpedin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2016
* USD 248,700.00

Many key problems in signal processing and wireless communications can be
formulated as extremal optimization problems, whose solutions require a careful
integration of results located at the interface of different fields such as
information theory, signal processing, statistics, and optimization. This
project addresses extremal optimization problems located at the interface
between information theory and signal processing. This project focuses on two
major research problems: extension of De Bruijn's identity and development of
extremal information theoretic inequalities. Successful completion of this
project helps to advance the state-of-the-art results in the optimization of
communications networks performance and security of communication channels
(evaluating the secrecy capacity of wiretap channels, designing of energy
efficient secure transmissions), design of robust communications systems
(designing min-max optimal training sequences for channel estimation and
synchronization), and robust signal estimation and detection algorithms (for
smart grid, radar, sonar, and wireless communications applications). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of two closely intertwined research thrusts:
developing new extensions and applications of De Bruijn's identity, and
development of novel extremal information theoretic inequalities with
applications in the design of wireless communications systems with improved
performance. At a broader scale, this project will impact positively the economy
and society through the development of more efficient technologies for
communication networks, power grids, wireless sensing and monitoring devices,
biomedical devices, and radar and sonar systems. This project will be also
integrated with the educational mission of investigator's university and will be
largely disseminated to the community through journal papers, conference and
workshop presentations, and editing of journal special issues.