* 1318251
* Improving Ceramic Provenance Determination through Multitechnique Analyses: A Case Study in the Basin of Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Wesley Stoner, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 39,449.00

National Science Foundation funds will support Dr. Wesley D. Stoner in analyses
that will improve methods of pottery sourcing and chemical characterization
using a well-known case study in the Basin of Mexico. Through chemical and
mineral analyses, archaeologists can trace ceramics used and discarded during
the human past back to the source of production. Connecting consumers and
producers essentially reconstructs economic exchange, which normally remains
invisible in the archaeological record. The exchange of goods among human groups
has provided data to better understand the foundations ancient civilizations,
the accumulation of power into the hands of the few, and the collapse of some of
the most powerful states and empires to have ever graced this earth. The Basin
of Mexico is no exception, trade reconstructions there have contributed to
knowledge of Mexico's very first exchange systems and the flows of trade and
tribute commanded by the Aztec Empire. In the past, most of these analyses have
been undertaken through neutron activation analysis (NAA).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While NAA is among the most commonly applied ceramic
compositional techniques, it is not always the best tool to answer all research
questions. Recent ceramic studies using laser ablation-inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) have demonstrated that targeted analysis of
components within the ceramic paste can augment, and sometimes supersede, the
utility of bulk NAA data. The principal purpose of the proposed study is to
determine whether data for specific components of the paste (i.e. temper choice,
mixing of temper and clays, natural aplastic inclusions) can potentially surpass
the provenance capabilities of bulk chemical data garnered from NAA. I will
employ LA-ICP-MS to collect data on both clay and aplastic (temper and natural
inclusions) fractions within tempered ceramics from the Basin of Mexico.
Petrography, undertaken through image analysis with a digital microscope, will
serve as a tool to interpret the chemical data in this study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists have not commonly used LA-ICP-MS to study
ceramic pastes, so method development is still largely in an experimental phase.
Image analysis of petrographic thinsection photographs is also a relatively
recent technological advancement for use in characterizing archaeological
ceramics. The combination of these two techniques provides detailed information
on individual components of the paste so that behavioral stages of pottery
production - from raw material procurement and mixing of pastes to decoration
with slips and paints - become visible to the analyst. The proposed research
promises to identify methods for more efficient and detailed provenance
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will produce standard protocol
manuals to guide LA-ICP-MS and petrographic studies at the University of
Missouri Research Reactor (MURR). These manuals will be reduced for broad
dissemination through international journal publications and perhaps a book
manuscript. This project will also serve as the basis to train students and
staff at the University of Missouri in both LA-ICP-MS and petrographic methods.
Additionally, a Mexican student will travel to MURR to assist in all data
collection. Through this student, knowledge of the techniques will spread
internationally.