* 1318680
* TWC: Small: A Choice Architecture for Mobile Privacy and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* David Wagner, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anita  Nikolich
* 07/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Mobile devices (e.g., smartphones and tablets) allow users to execute rich
third-party applications that are capable of making extensive use of device
hardware and personal data. This poses security risks, as applications may
perform undesirable operations such as deleting data, damaging hardware, or even
directly incurring charges on the user's phone bill. Mobile devices also pose
privacy risks, as they store sensitive personal information that may be accessed
and shared inappropriately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empowering users to decide how
resources on their mobile devices are accessed (i.e., "granting permission") is
an important challenge for the future of mobile computing. Our research has
shown that existing mechanisms are ineffective: users frequently grant
permissions because they either do not understand them, are habituated to them,
or feel that they have no other choice. This research project aims to identify
and study potential solutions to these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a user-centered approach to mobile device permission requests.
The project is conducting human-subjects experiments to design and validate more
effective mechanisms for regulating privacy- or security-sensitive actions. The
research agenda involves minimizing habituation to security warnings by
substituting them with protected widgets (i.e., "trusted UI") or audit
mechanisms, when possible; improving the design of security warnings, because
alternative permission-granting mechanisms are sometimes inappropriate; and
integrating these mechanisms into a platform that improves system security by
taking a user-centered approach to granting permissions. If successful, this
project could help develop a secure foundation for future generations of mobile
devices.