* 1318427
* Computation of crowded geodesics on the universal Teichmueller space for planar shape matching in computer vision
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Alfa Heryudono, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 10/31/2015
* USD 198,300.00

Quantifying the (dis)similarity between two shapes is a central problem in
computer vision. One distance metric on the space of planar shapes is realized
by identifying this space as a subset of the Universal Teichmueller Space, and
equipping it with the Weil-Petersson metric. This results in a metric that is
scale- and translation-invariant on shapes, and has unique geodesic flow between
two shape endpoints. The work of this proposal develops robust computational
methods for the computation of metric distances and geodesics between shapes on
this space. The major difficulty lies in computations involving "crowded"
shapes, i.e., those with elongated, winding, or extended protrusions. Such
shapes stymie finite-precision computations because direct algorithms suffer
from severe roundoff error. The major thrusts of this proposal develop
algorithmic methodologies to address roundoff error and related issues: The
Zipper conformal mapping algorithm will be augmented to produce accurate
conformal maps for crowded shapes. The velocity field representation on a
geodesic will be rewritten into a form that is resistant to roundoff error. The
geodesic equation will be transformed into a expression that takes advantage of
the aforementioned velocity field transformation, and can effectively flow
between crowded shapes. The final phase of this project will demonstrate
accurate geodesic flow and distance computations between crowded shapes. The
methods developed under this project can be applied to several related problems
in scientific computing: solutions to differential equations on irregular
geometries through conformal mapping, conservative integration methods with ill-
conditioned particle systems, and moving-mesh kernel
approximations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work of this project can contribute to
far-reaching applications in scientific and computer vision problems: automated
object recognition (e.g. projectile identification), outline classification
(determination of an animal's species), medical imaging (usage of MRI to
diagnose dementia and related diseases), and artificial intelligence (visual
recognition and interpretation) to name a few. All computational deliverables
(computer code, example simulations, documentation) will be made publicly
available. Through the engagement of students in related research tasks, this
project will contribute to the educational development of future engineers,
mathematicians, and computer scientists.