* 1318260
* CIF:Small:RUI: Mathematical Problems in Space-Time Block Codes for MIMO Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* B Sethuraman, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,975.00

The investigator studies mathematical problems that arise in coding and decoding
for multiple-input-multiple-out (MIMO) wireless communications systems. Such
communication systems promise much higher rates of data transfer with much
higher fidelity than traditional single input/output systems, and the problems
that the PI studies are of direct relevance to the design of such multiple
input/output systems.

There are three broad classes of problems the research will focus on. The first
class deals with issues in fast decoding of space-time block codes. One can
speed up decoding by incorporating decoding considerations directly into the
design of the code, or, one can also design approximate decoding schemes that
will take advantage of the algebraic nature of the codes. Both routes throw up
challenging mathematical issues, and the investigator studies various solutions
to these. The second class of problems deals with the design of coset codes for
slow fading channels. This project studies several problems that arise in this
context, including determination of all possible quotients, appropriate choice
of codes over finite rings, and importantly, appropriate choice of metric on the
code over the quotient ring. The third class of problems deals with the design
of codes for the wiretap channel. Here, the investigator studies a lattice
conjecture for the Gaussian channel, then moves on to consider the design of
codes for the MIMO wiretap channel.