* 1318169
* RAPID: Collection of Water Level, Scour and Structural Damage Data from Extreme Storm Surge for the Future Improvement of Structural Systems and Their Resistance to Natural Hazard
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Thomas Herrington, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 01/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

This Rapid Research Grant (RAPID) project will collect perishable storm surge
and structural damage data in three communities caused by Hurricane Sandy that
made landfall on October 29, 2012. Hurricane Sandy affected large areas of
coastlines of New York and New Jersey. The storm was judged to be Category 1
based on its wind speed. However, the hurricane affected millions of people
living along the east coast of the United States. The research will document
storm surge and structural damages in three communities in the New Jersey
coastal area that are located within 12 km along the coast. The three
communities are selected on the basis of different levels of damage experienced
by each of the communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of this research is
in its focus on three coastal communities. The communities are located within 12
km along the coast; however they experienced different levels of damage. The
collected data will improve our fundamental understanding of surge propagation
over a developed coast and can produce effective coastal hazard mitigation
strategies. High-resolution GPS-based surveying methods will be employed to
capture the location and elevation of high water marks and any scour or
sedimentation adjacent to structures. Elevation and location data will be
supplemented with digital images of measurement location, local topographic
changes, and a description of structural failure mode. The collected data will
provide modelers an opportunity to investigate the development of overland wave
and surge propagation through the built environment. In addition, this will
provide engineers fundamental insights into the hydrodynamic loads on coastal
structures.