* 1318761
* Moorea Coral Reef Scientific Diving Upgrade
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Neil Davies, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 173,485.00

The University of California Berkeley is awarded a grant to increase its
scientific diving capabilities at the Richard B. Gump South Pacific Research
Station, including two new research boats with trailers, a higher capacity
compressor, and expanded dive lockers to accommodate additional divers. The
upgrade will serve the needs of strong research and instructional programs in
tropical marine ecology, biodiversity, ocean acidification, conservation
biology, and oceanography. The reefs of Moorea are among the best studied in the
world, as a result of a long history of research initiated by French scientists
and other international researchers, including a growing involvement from the
U.S. The new infrastructure will support a diverse group of researchers and
their students, building on the NSF-funded Moorea Coral Reef LTER and other NSF-
funded research in the marine sciences on Moorea. Coral reefs of the islands of
the Pacific are hotspots for biological diversity and are sources of great
societal significance and economic value. They represent some of the best-
preserved coral reefs remaining anywhere on Earth. Local and global processes,
often associated with human activities, however, increasingly threaten the
continued health of these exceptional natural systems. Thus, new research on
population dynamics, ecosystem processes, biodiversity and resilience of coral
reefs is critical to their successful management, conservation, and restoration.
This project will enhance the ability to understand and sustain these systems
and the services they provide society through process-oriented research and
long-term studies.

The upgrade will promote advanced training in marine science at the graduate and
undergraduate level, benefiting students from universities and colleges from
across the United States. Located in French Polynesia, the project will have the
added benefit of providing international and multi-cultural experience for
American scientists and students. The Gump Station has a strong outreach program
through collaborations brokered by its partner local community organization:
Association Te Pu Atitia. The upgrade will strengthen marine science research
and education on Moorea enabling the Gump Station and Te Pu Atitia to
communicate these findings to the local community - particularly K-12 schools -
and to further develop programs that reach out to historically underrepresented
groups in science (including Polynesians and other Pacific Islanders). For more
information about the Gump Station see their website at
http://moorea.berkeley.edu/.