* 1318080
* Genetic Testing, Forensic Practice, and Changing Cultures of War Dead Commemoration
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Sarah Wagner, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 42,867.00

Dr. Sarah E. Wagner (University of North Carolina, Greensboro) will undertake
research on changing forensic practice and the commemoration of war dead. The
research will be carried out in the United States. With some 88,000 missing
soldiers from the previous century's wars, the United States stands alone in its
pursuit of repatriating remains and identifying its missing men and women of
uniform. The military's forensic anthropology laboratory dedicated to this task
is the largest facility of its kind in the world. The DNA extraction and
analysis procedures developed to reattach individual names to unnamed remains of
American soldiers have led to advancements in forensic genetics across the
globe. The efforts, simply put, are unprecedented and
unparalleled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will examine why such
extraordinary resources have been brought to bear to recover and identify
American war dead and, in turn, how having such material and intellectual
resources has affected the ways in which Americans mourn lost soldiers.
Specifically, the project focuses on how the increased capacity to account for
the missing influences the social contracts between the government and families
of the missing, members of the military, and the general public; and the social
construction of commemorative symbols around death and
war.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be gathered through in-depth ethnographic
research among surviving relatives, veterans, and the three governmental
agencies responsible for "full accounting" of the missing: the Joint POW/MIA
Accounting Command; the Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory; and the
Defense POW/Missing Personnel Office. Comparative cognitive modeling will be
carried out using cultural consensus procedures. The project will also analyze,
through archival research and participant observation, major events and spaces
associated with memorializing US war dead, including the Tomb of the Unknowns in
Arlington National Cemetery and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington D.C.
The researcher will document and analyze procedures, DNA testing, the history of
such efforts, family expectations, and public commemorations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it will be the first
ethnographic account of the wide-ranging influence that forensic practice,
specifically genetic science, has had on the identification of missing soldiers.
This will contribute to theorizing the relationship between technology, culture,
and society, from a new and important perspective. The research will further
public understanding of new forensic practices, as well as official
understanding of what families and the public expect, and why.