* 1318309
* From Galactic Centers to Galactic Fringes:  Control of Star Formation in the Dynamic Interstellar Medium
* MPS,AST
* 12/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Eve Ostriker, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 08/31/2014
* USD 157,855.00

Observations are increasingly probing the relationship between star formation
rates and local conditions in disk galaxies, but the mechanisms that set these
rates are not well understood. In particular, while it is widely believed that
energetic feedback self-regulates star formation, detailed models of this
process have not yet been developed. H II regions and supernovae in giant
molecular clouds (GMCs) can both trigger star formation and truncate it (by
cloud destruction), and feedback-driven diffuse-interstellar medium (ISM)
turbulence can both enhance and suppress the creation of new GMCs. Additional
elements that control star formation include: gas self-gravity, which gathers
the ISM into massive clouds; the stellar component's gravity, which confines the
ISM vertically; heating and cooling processes, which separate the ISM into dense
and diffuse thermal phases; sheared orbital rotation and Coriolis forces, which
suppress converging flows; and magnetic fields, which mediate angular momentum
exchange. Dr. Eve Ostriker (University of Maryland College Park) and
collaborators will study how these processes interact to regulate large-scale
star formation, identifying the dominant effects and developing quantitative
predictions in terms of common observables. The research will involve a series
of focused numerical simulations, separately targeting three regimes of star
formation: galactic center, mid-disk, and outer disk. The approach to be taken
is distinct from other recent numerical work in that the simulations will
concentrate on local (1 to 1000 parsec) rather than global (30 to 30,000 parsec)
scales, directly following processes that are often treated using sub-grid
prescriptions in galaxy evolution models. Each simulation domain will be large
enough to capture the important galactic environmental effects, but small enough
so that the turbulence and density structure of the gas is well resolved by the
numerical grid. Preliminary studies have shown that vertical resolution of the
ISM disk is crucial to correctly estimating the surface density of star
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this work will have broader
impacts on workforce, education, and research infrastructure. They include (1)
training and mentoring of students, including a PhD student working on modeling
and analysis, and additional graduate students (co-)advised by Dr. Ostriker in
related observational and scientific computation projects, (2) integration of
scientific research results and computational modules in instructional curricula
for undergraduate and graduate courses. (3) outreach activities for the public,
including creation of visually-rich web pages and presentations at open house
events, and (4) development, implementation, and testing of new tools for
computational hydrodynamics/magneto-hydrodynamic simulation, to be shared with
the community as part of an established code package.