* 1318341
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Shear Dependent Reaction Kinetics in Particulate Electrochemical Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Ying Sun, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 01/31/2014
* USD 42,000.00

Lithium-ion batteries are considered the pre-eminent storage device for portable
electronics, emerging green technologies, and electric vehicles. However,
additives that are used to boost electronic and ionic conductivities of the
electrode materials comprise about 1/3 of the battery volume, undermining both
energy and power density of the cell, as well as impairing the cycle life of the
system. Redox flow batteries on the other hand have shown great advantages on
their scale-up flexibility, but their energy density is limited by the
solubility of metal ion redox couples in liquid solvents. Recently, a new
concept of flowing ion-storing semi-solid electroactive materials into and from
a battery assembly to create a high energy and power density redox flow battery
has been proposed. Realizing the tremendous potential of this new concept
requires a fundamental understanding of the effects of moving electrode
particles and flowing electrolytes on ion/charge transport as well as
charging/discharging kinetics compared with those in static battery
configurations. This collaborative project brings together Dr. Steingart
specializing on electrochemical energy storage systems and Dr. Sun on complex
fluids physics, integrating expertise on rheology, reaction chemistry, materials
processing, and battery performance for the realization of semi- solid flow
battery concept. The objective of this EAGER project is to create a baseline
methodology for characterizing and predicting the electrochemical-mechanical
coupling behavior of large mass fraction flowing slurry electrodes through
integrated modeling and experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;In the semi-solid flow battery configuration, positive and/or
negative electrode slurries are usually non- Newtonian and their stability is
extremely challenging. Using an optically transparent flow cell and rate shear
viscometry, the effect of interpacticle packing and flow on conductivity, and
reaction rate are directly determined. By running conductivity experiments in
parallel with overall reaction experiments, the PIs can decouple the electrical
conductivity. Through the insights provided by our particle transport mechanism-
resolved, electrochemistry-coupled model, PIs will be able to understand the
coupled behavior of flow, viscosity, ionic conductivity, electrical
conductivity, particle size, particle size distribution and electrode kinetics
in semi-solid electrode flow systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The development of more cost-effective, long lasting, and high
energy/power-density battery solution is a crucial step toward the
electrification of the nation?s personal transportation and more stable and
efficient electrical grids. Semi-solid flow batteries enable high energy density
storage while removing lifetime concerns from the reacting material. This
project builds a new exciting collaboration between chemical and mechanical
engineers at Princeton and Drexel to enable efficient, reliable flow batteries.
Both graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from the interdisciplinary
nature of the proposed project.