* 1318392
* RI: Small: Robust and Long-Term Visual Mapping and Localization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Leonard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2017
* USD 373,293.00

This project develops robust and persistent algorithms for mapping and
localization using low-cost visual/depth cameras and inertial sensors. New map
representations and algorithms are developed to provide computationally
efficient long-term 3D mapping and navigation. Topics of investigation include
incremental non-Gaussian inference techniques, dense mapping, change detection
in dynamic environments, and semantic understanding. A lack of robustness has
been a key shortcoming of previous techniques for localization, and thwarted the
development of persistently autonomous mobile robot systems. Extension to
multimodal distributions poses significant intellectual difficulties. Dense
methods are transforming robotic perception, enabling sophisticated physical
interaction with objects, traversal of stairs, and safe maneuvering in cluttered
and confined spaces. Whereas most past research in robotic mapping has assumed a
static world, the approach being developed in this grant exploits the dynamics
of the world to discover information about objects and places. These advances
are being tested for robotic and man-portable sensing systems operating in
indoor, outdoor, and underwater environments. The expected impacts span a broad
range of applications, from robotic manufacturing, medical robotics,
agriculture, and space and underwater exploration, in which perception is a key
requirement. Other potential spin-offs include human-portable mapping
applications in real estate, construction, and facility maintenance, health and
safety. MIT Online Robotics Education provides a set of online course materials
for core topics in robotics, targeted to a broad audience for high school and
college education. Open source software modules provide positioning capabilities
for low-cost robots for education and service robotics applications.