* 1318292
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Efficient Spectrum Access for Gbps WLANs in a Crowd of Legacy Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Xinyu Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 09/30/2016
* USD 177,045.00

Next-generation WLAN protocols will rely heavily on spectrum aggregation to
achieve Gbps throughput. But the aggregated wideband spectrum may be severely
underutilized and even starved when it overlaps with legacy narrowband channels.
As WLAN protocols continue their expansion and diversification, such
heterogeneous spectrum sharing becomes increasingly prevalent, raising
coexistence as a fundamental problem and practical problem. The objective of
this research is to gain insights into coexistence of Gbps and legacy WLANs
through measurement studies, develop optimization-driven protocols to enable
efficient spectrum sharing between them, and validate the protocols in a medium-
scale software-radio testbed. The proposed solutions improve the MAC layer's
awareness of heterogeneous spectrum sharing, and enforce intelligent control
over the PHY layer through fine-grained spectrum access and opportunistic
spectrum aggregation. They have the potential to realize Gbps wireless
networking even in a crowd of low-rate legacy
networks/devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By addressing the key issues of
heterogeneous spectrum sharing, the proposed research helps accelerate the
deployment of Gbps WLANs which will, in turn, improve the quality of experience
for billions of WiFi end-users. It will also train graduate students with a
balanced mix of theory and hands-on experiences, and synthesize their knowledge
in both computer science and communications engineering. Undergraduate students
will also participate in this project, with the complementary support from the
undergraduate research programs in the PIs' institutions. The PIs will interact
closely with industry for possible transitioning of the research results.