* 1318593
* Generalized Transport Models in Earth Surface Dynamics: Novel Experiments for Demonstrating and Quantifying Non-local Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

Generalized Transport Models in Earth Surface Dynamics: Novel Experiments for
Demonstrating and Quantifying Non-local Transport&lt;br/&gt;Vaughan Voller, Efi
Foufoula-Georgiou, Kimberly Hill, Chris Paola&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota&
lt;br/&gt;EAR-1318593&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
transport of environmental fluxes, such as sediment, tracers, particulates, and
pollutants, on the Earth?s surface is paramount for building accurate models of
geomorphic transport, quantifying landscape evolution under natural and human-
induced changes and for inferring past surface conditions from interpretation of
the stratigraphic record. Historically, geomorphic transport models have
expressed particulate or sediment flux in terms of instantaneous local
properties, such as gradients in the surface elevation or local velocities.
Accurate models of sediment and particulate transport in rivers, hillslopes, and
deltaic systems are at the heart of Earth surface Dynamics research as well as
of practical significance in guiding environmental management based on accurate
predictive models. The increasing awareness of the heterogeneity and
connectivity of Earth systems has led to new theoretical constructs which
embrace non-locality and collective behavior in geomorphic transport. The
proposed novel and simple experimental systems promise to provide the first
unambiguous evidence of the role of non-local transport in sediment and
particulate regimes. Linking the results of these experiments to the evaluation
of non-local and anomalous diffusion properties will allow researchers to more
confidently predict when to use non-local models and which parameters to use in
these models. This information will have a transformative impact on our ability
to understand the transport of sediment particles that shape and control the
evolution of the Earth-surface environment. The proposed experiments are novel
and will be constructed using 3-D printing technology. PIs also propose to
prototype ?toy experimental? systems that will provide zero set-up time desktop
demonstrations of anomalous diffusion behaviors. Their plan is to disseminate
these systems through the current NCED educational and museum contacts, and
specifically advance the development of a prototype exhibit at the Science
Museum of Minnesota, a long-time partner of NCED.