* 1318759
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Learning Causal Structure from Complex Time Series Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Sergey Plis, The MIND Research Network
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 280,559.00

In many important domains, one must learn the causal structure of a dynamical
system in order to design appropriate interventions, policies, and experiments.
This project develops a well founded theory and practical algorithms for such
learning when scientists cannot measure the system quickly enough and/or omit
causally important variables. Moreover, the theory and algorithms will focus on
the most challenging case, when scientists do not know how much information is
missing because of lack of either speed or breadth. For example, fMRI
measurements in cognitive neuroscience experiments occur roughly every two
seconds, but communication between neural regions happens much more quickly
(though exactly how much more quickly is unknown). In addition, neuroscientists
are almost certainly unable to record all causally significant variables, such
as other bodily states. Similarly, many climatological studies omit important
variables (e.g., land use) and yield only monthly (or slower) measurements, even
though the underlying phenomena presumably proceed on a faster timescale.

This project will first focus on the challenge of learning from an undersampled
time series (with unknown undersample rate), which will require (a) extending
the formal framework of causal graphical models to represent such possibilities;
(b) providing a set of theorems characterizing how causal structures change
under undersampling; (c) developing algorithms that infer constraints on the
"true" timescale causal structure from the causal structure learned from the
undersampled data; (d) implementing these algorithms in a pre-existing, open-
source causal learning environment; (e) testing these algorithms in silico
through extensive simulations; and (f) applying them to real world datasets,
including large-scale neuroimaging data. This last step is particularly
important as it will enable real-world validation of the theory and algorithms
developed earlier. In parallel, the project will address the same six challenges
for situations in which data are correctly sampled, but causally significant
variables are missing. Finally, these two pieces will be merged into an
integrated framework and algorithms for situations in which both challenges
arise simultaneously. The resulting set of theorems, algorithms, and
applications will both extend the current theory of causal modeling and causal
structure learning, and also address the practical needs of researchers engaged
in causal learning from complex, real-world time series data.