* 1318597
* AF: small: Numerical Linear Algebra Methods for Efficient Data Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yousef Saad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2017
* USD 348,386.00

The amount of information that is becoming available every day is expanding at
an exponential rate and this is starting to render ineffective standard
techniques for data exploration. Though high-dimensional datasets present great
mathematical challenges, in practice the related difficulties are mitigated by
the fact that not all the measured variables are important for an understanding
of the underlying phenomenon. The "dimensionality reduction techniques"
considered in this project address this issue. Their principle is to combine the
variables into a smaller set onto which the data is projected before attempting
a solution of the original problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of
dimension reduction gives rise to many interesting mathematical and algorithmic
challenges to linear algebra specialists. In particular, one of the difficulties
faced by current techniques is that existing algorithms are often too costly
when dealing with very large data sets. For example, a number of methods are
based on a form of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) which becomes exceedingly
expensive as the number of variables (features) and the number of samples
increase. A similar calculation is also required for graph-based approaches such
as the Locally Linear Embedding (LLE), or Laplacean eigenmaps. In addition, in
many applications data sets are frequently updated, e.g., by adding or deleting
data items, a situation for which standard matrix algorithms are not adapted.
The proposed work will tackle a few of these challenges. It will focus on the
development of computationally efficient dimension reduction methods and related
techniques, by exploiting ideas from computational linear algebra. Multilevel or
divide and conquer techniques are quite common in other areas of scientific
computing but have received relatively little attention in data mining. The
proposed work puts methods of this type at the forefront.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the broader impacts of the proposed work is that it
will help promote interest in problems related to the current information
revolution because its research theme blends mathematical methods, good
algorithmic practices, and applications requiring effective numerical methods.
The applications under consideration in this work are all of great relevance to
many of the new challenges of society (social networks, commerce, and security).
Finally, the software resulting from this research will be broadly disseminated
to join an excellent pool of existing web sites that provide tools and
repositories related to data exploration.