* 1318242
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Graph Routing, Drawing and Partitioning
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Julia Chuzhoy, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 12/31/2017
* USD 472,136.00

This project will study three broad families of optimization problems: graph
routing, graph drawing, and vertex sparsification. Graph routing problems
typically aim at connecting pairs of graph vertices with disjoint or nearly
disjoint paths. Routing problems are central to combinatorial optimization, and
arise in many different applications. Algorithms for graph drawing assist with
visualizing a given graph, by appropriately drawing it in the plane. Graph
sparsifiers allow us to replace a given graph by a much smaller one, that
preserves the routing properties of the original graph. Optimization problems
can then be solved on the smaller graph, thus obtaining faster algorithms. This
project aims at developing better approximation algorithms for graph routing and
drawing problems, and constructing better and smaller vertex sparsifiers. The PI
will also study graph partitioning problems, that play a central role in
designing algorithms for many problems in the areas of graph routing, drawing,
sparsification, and beyond.

Graphs are among the most basic combinatorial objects, and are often used to
model various applications, or to represent data. Algorithms for graph
partitioning, routing and drawing are central tools for manipulating graphs and
solving optimization problems on them. Designing better approximation algorithms
for such problems will require developing new algorithmic paradigms, that will
most likely find other uses across the field of approximation algorithms and
beyond. The problems the PI studies have interesting connections to other areas,
including Graph Minor Theory, Fixed Parameter Tractability, and VLSI Design.
This project presents an opportunity for collaboration with these areas, with
the goal of combining their diverse technical tools and insights. This research
offers a broad range of opportunities for student projects, and will involve
graduate students from TTIC and University of Chicago, as well as students from
other institutions who participate in TTIC's summer internship program. The PI
will also participate in activities aimed at encouraging a broader involvement
of women in theoretical computer science, including participation in workshops
and mentorship programs whose target audience is undergraduate and graduate
female students.