* 1318694
* SHF:Small:Graph Sparsification Approach to Scalable Parallel SPICE-Accurate Simulation of Post-layout Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Zhuo Feng, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,701.00

Unlike traditional fast SPICE simulation techniques that rely on a variety of
approximation approaches to trade off simulation accuracy for greater speed,
SPICE-accurate integrated circuit (IC) simulations can truthfully predict
circuit electrical behaviors, and therefore become indispensable for design and
verification of nanoscale ICs. However, for post-layout nanoscale circuits,
using traditional SPICE-accurate simulation techniques to encapsulate multi-
million or even multi-billion devices coupled through complex parasitics can be
prohibitively expensive, and thus not applicable to large IC designs, since the
runtime and memory cost for solving large sparse matrix problems using direct
solution methods will increase quickly with the growing circuit sizes and
parasitics densities. To achieve greater simulation efficiency and capacity
during post-layout simulations, preconditioned iterative solution techniques
have been recently proposed to substitute the direct solution methods. However,
existing preconditioned methods for post-layout circuit simulations are
typically designed with various assumptions and constraints on the circuit and
systems to be analyzed, which therefore cannot be effectively and reliably
applied to general-purpose SPICE-accurate circuit simulations. In this research
project, the PI will study efficient yet robust circuit-oriented preconditioning
approaches for scalable SPICE-accurate post-layout IC simulations by leveraging
recent graph sparsification research. By systematically sparsifying
linear/nonlinear dynamic networks originated from dense parasitics components
and complex device elements of post-layout circuits, scalable, and more
importantly, parallelizable preconditioned iterative algorithms will be
investigated and developed by the PI to enable much greater speed and capacity
for SPICE-accurate IC simulations in both time and frequency
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this work will
immediately benefit the semiconductor industries. The algorithms and
methodologies to be developed through this project will be integrated into
undergraduate/graduate level VLSI design/CAD courses, while the research results
will be broadly disseminated to major semiconductor and EDA companies for
potential industrial applications. The CAD tools developed under this research
plan will also be exchanged with collaborating industrial partners. The acquired
experience in the proposed research plan is also likely to contribute to
computing advances in other science and engineering fields, impacting broader
research areas that are related to large/complex system modeling and simulation.