* 1318385
* FSML-Enhanced Cooperative Radiochemistry Research and Education at the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Beth Orcutt, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 111,649.00

Bigelow Laboratory is awarded a grant to outfit their new Radiochemistry
Facility with 1) a Liquid Scintillation Counter (LSC) for low-level counting, 2)
two dedicated, stackable incubators for maintaining radiochemistry experiments
at different temperature and light conditions and 3) two photosynthetron
incubators with dedicated water baths for measuring photobiological rates of
phytoplankton as a function of light intensity. Indeed, this equipment is
critical to the functionality of the facility as well as the very mission of the
laboratory. The ability to accurately measure radio-tracers has been at the very
core of Bigelow Laboratory?s primary goal, "to understand key processes driving
the world's ocean ecosystems, their evolution, and their fundamental
relationship to life on Earth." This FSML request for radiochemistry equipment
will allow the PIs to maintain preeminence in the measurement of microbial rates
in the sea. Bigelow Laboratory's senior research scientists work with ocean
viruses, bacteria, phytoplankton, zooplankton, and lower invertebrates. They no
longer study just the processes of the euphotic zone but have added major
research programs including atmospheric chemistry, hydrothermal vent
communities, and microbes of the deep geosphere. What unifies all these groups
is the need to measure rates: biological rates (uptake, assimilation, growth,
mortality, grazing) and chemical rates (oxidation, reduction, gas exchange/
equilibration). Radiotracer technologies still represent one of the best ways to
quantitatively (and directly) measure such rates in the sea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
equipment will be involved in the training of current and future Bigelow
postdoctoral researchers, working at the interface between microbial ecology,
physiology, molecular biology, and biogeochemistry. A significant part of
Bigelow Laboratory's mission is education and it has a strong outreach program.
Co-PIs in this proposal are involved in teaching the Colby semester-in-residence
program as well as Colby's January Program ("Jan-plan"). Specific details and
scientific results from the LSC will be incorporated into the curriculum of our
undergraduate students so they can learn the fundamentals of tracer experiments
and the technology associated with the LSC. Bigelow Laboratory's Café
Scientifique lecture series promotes public engagement with cutting-edge
scientific research, of the sort made possible by this equipment, making science
more accessible to a broader audience. All PIs on this project will participate
in this increasingly popular program. Finally, the ability of Bigelow Laboratory
to perform radiotracer research on society-relevant research in fields such as
harmful algal blooms, ocean acidification, eutrophication, carbon cycling, etc.,
has completely relied on an aged LSC that is no longer serviceable and data that
cannot be accessed electronically. Thus, this new LSC and associated equipment
for the Bigelow Radiochemistry Facility will further the continuation