* 1318161
* A Novel Probabilistic-Based Approach to the Simulation of Disperse Two-Phase Flows with Application to Atmospheric Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Carlos Pantano-Rubino, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,604.00

The investigator will develop and study a new computational approach for the
simulation of turbulent droplet-laden flows rooted in the probabilistic-based
description of particle transport. This requires the determination of the
evolution of the particle-density function in space and time, coupled with the
turbulent flow of the carrier phase (gas or liquid). Knowledge of this function
enables consistent coupling with the flow through mass, momentum, and energy
sources in the governing equations of the carrier gas flow. The main
mathematical difficulty that has prevented this approach from progressing in the
past is the high dimensionality of the space of independent variables of the
distribution function, which renders traditional computational techniques
ineffective with current or foreseeable computational resources. The main idea
of the research is the use of a new non-linear global basis function projection
approach that condenses several of the extra dimensions of the problem. The
transformative nature of the proposal is in (i) devising a methodology for
integrating the transport equation for the distribution function that is
computationally amenable, (ii) implementing the numerical methodology in an
efficient predictive and modular tool, and (iii) extending the knowledge of the
currently inaccessible aspects of the microphysics interaction with the carrier
gas in atmospheric cloud simulations. Furthermore, collaboration with a team at
Max-Planck Institute for Meteorology will ensure the effective transfer and
dissemination of the technology that is proposed to the area of physical
meteorology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prediction of multi-phase flows,
particularly solid or liquid particles dispersed in a host-gas, is challenging
and computationally onerous. These flows arise in natural phenomena;
encompassing cloud dynamics, dust storms and grassland fires; and industrial
applications such as food and chemical processing as well as chemical synthesis
and propulsion. The interactions between a highly turbulent flow and the
extremely large number of particles (millions-to-billions and beyond) of
different shape and size, moving in different directions with different
velocities, that undergo phase transformation and/or chemical reactions, lead to
a complex mathematical problem. The proposed research will make a significant
impact in the understanding of a wide range of science and engineering phenomena
involving flows with dispersed particles that are currently inaccessible. The
research will enable high-fidelity computations that incorporate phenomena at
the small and large scales consistently. Enhancement in the prediction of these
flows has numerous scientific and societal benefits; e.g., because atmospheric
flows are critical to improve weather prediction and to better understand the
global energy balance of our planet.