* 1318924
* Planning proposal: Strenghtening Research and Academic Opportunities at the Robert J. Bernard Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Lucinda McDade, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 23,521.00

The Claremont Colleges is awarded a planning grant to develop an integrated and
collaborative research network focusing on the biomonitoring and conservation of
Southern California ecosystems. The centerpiece of this effort will be the
Robert J. Bernard Field Station (BFS; http://bfs.claremont.edu/). The grant will
support two workshops to bring together Southern California researchers and land
managers to achieve the following goals: (1) develop a network of collaborators
focusing on the ecology, biodiversity and conservation of Southern California
ecosystems; (2) design a biological and climate monitoring program at BFS that
provides a foundation for future research and educational activities; and (3)
improve the ability to collect, access, archive and disseminate ecological and
climatic data sets. A product of this effort will be a 10-year strategic plan
that will outline the implementation of bio- and climate monitoring programs and
a data management program at the BFS and describe how these programs can be
incorporated into curricula at the Claremont Colleges and collaborating
institutions. These planning efforts will have a regional research focus to
provide diverse research opportunities for students at the Claremont Colleges
and exploit the unique location of the Claremont Colleges to play a leadership
role in regional ecology and biodiversity research.

This planning effort will facilitate communication among researchers interested
in Southern California ecosystems and enable new science and knowledge creation
through universal access to data about the biota in Southern California and the
environment that sustains it. The Claremont Colleges expect that collaboration
among researchers and land managers will also result in the development of new
regional multi-disciplinary projects. As such, this planning effort will
indirectly enhance opportunities for underrepresented groups by encouraging the
collaboration among regional colleges and universities, many of which are less
than 100 miles from each other and have their own local field stations or
preserves.