* 1318191
* SHF: Small: VeriF-OPT, a Verification Framework for Optimizations and Program Transformations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Elsa Gunter, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 466,000.00

The modern world runs on software, and software runs on compilers, programs that
bridge the gap between human-readable high-level programming languages and the
low-level machine code that computers execute. Every year, millions of dollars
and countless hours of effort go into ensuring that software is correct and
reliable. However, the bulk of this analysis is applied at the high level,
leaving the compiler as a potential weak link in the verification chain. Errors
in a compiler are particularly insidious because they are difficult to isolate
and reproduce, and potentially affect every program processed by that compiler.
The VeriF-OPT project aims to make it feasible to verify compilers by providing
a user-friendly and reusable framework for constructing rigorous mathematical
proofs of compiler correctness, thus removing a source of error that potentially
undermines the verification of high-level programs.

The VeriF-OPT project will use formal methods tools, including the Isabelle
proof assistant and the K Framework for programming language specification, to
develop a general, reusable framework for specifying and verifying compilers for
any language, lowering the high barrier to entry for compiler verification. The
framework will be designed to work particularly well for optimizations for
parallel programs, which are often more complex and poorly understood than their
sequential counterparts. The core components of the framework are a domain-
specific language for the specification of program transformations, an
executable semantics for this language that allows compiler designers to test
and refine their designs before committing to verification, and a formal
semantics for the language that serves as the basis for proofs of correctness.
Every verification in VeriF-OPT will produce code fragments, lemmas, and other
intermediate results that, thanks to the modular design of the framework, can be
reused in future projects. By helping compiler designers, testers, and verifiers
work together to create compilers with strong guarantees of correctness, the
project will raise the standard for software reliability and help prevent costly
and dangerous failures due to undetected and unexpected bugs.