* 1318103
* SHF: Small: Memory Consistency -- Hardware, Compiler, and Programming Support
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Rajiv Gupta, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2017
* USD 539,999.00

The advent of multicore machines has enabled delivery of high performance via
parallelism for a wide range of applications. While such machines have become
ubiquitous, they pose significant challenges for software developers. One
challenge is dealing with the relaxed memory consistency models supported by
commercial multicore machines. Simultaneously delivering high performance and
ensuring program correctness requires careful introduction of fence instructions
in the code. Excessive use of fence instructions leads to poor performance while
their omission of can lead to incorrect program
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate means for
constraining the scope of a fence instruction to minimize its impact on
performance while preserving desired program behavior. In existing systems the
hardware is unaware of the scope and hence fence implementations enforce a
strict ordering of memory accesses across a fence that leads to unnecessary
stalls. Alternative means for inferring the scope information will be developed
for constraining the memory orderings enforced by the hardware. In particular,
development of hardware, compiler, and programming support will be carried out.
The software and hardware techniques developed in this research will be made
available so other researchers are able to experiment with them. The subject of
research is relevant to commercial processor manufacturers. The students
involved in this research will receive valuable training in the design and
programming of multicore systems.