* 1318345
* EXP: RUI: Exploring Spatial-Temporal Anchored Collaboration in Asynchronous Learning Experiences
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Kevin Ball, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 448,698.00

The researchers on this project are developing and studying a web-based multi-
media platform that will allow special-temporal annotations intended for
collaboration in post-secondary courses. The use of digital web-hosted media is
becoming increasingly commonplace and important in postsecondary educational
environments. Instructors routinely post large collections of images, audio
clips, and videos for student use. As instructors continue to adopt innovative
pedagogies using these multi-media materials, the need to deliver multimedia
content online, outside of the typical class setting, becomes even more
important. Hybrid, distance learning, and massive open online courses place
additional demands on the delivery of digitally-mediated
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current hosting solutions for the large amount of
educational media lack tools to foster rich collaborative discourse and social
learning. Student-to-student interactions that would be trivial in face-to-face
settings are not easily reproduced in online environments. In part this is due
to the lack of support for spatial-temporal collaboration within media playback
systems. In order to address these limitations, this project explores the
implementation of novel techniques to support spatial-temporal collaboration
over a variety of web-hosted media including video, audio, and still images. The
researchers will design, deploy, and evaluate TrACE - the Transformative
Anchored Collaboration Environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the project lies in the potential transformation of how educational content is
addressed in asynchronous environments - in particular massive open online
courses (MOOCs). MOOCs have the promise of transforming undergraduate education
making it available to traditionally underrepresented populations.