* 1318364
* Closest Point Methods for Eigenvalue Problems from Inhomogeneous Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Chiu-Yen Kao, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 219,276.00

The goal of this project is to develop forward eigenvalue solver based on
closest point method and efficient algorithms for shape optimization for
inhomogeneous structure with (1) general constrains and boundary conditions, (2)
fourth order equations (e.g. BiLaplace Operator) and integro-differential
equations, and (3) general surfaces. The closest point method is a new numerical
technique to solve PDEs on a surface based on standard Cartesian grid
discretization via the closest point extension. It will be extended to solve
general eigenvalue problems. The approach for extremum eigenvalue is based on
Rayleigh formulation and an efficient rearrangement algorithm to achieve optimal
configuration. Two types of rearrangement approaches will be investigated: full
rearrangement and partial rearrangement. The full rearrangement approach looks
for the optimal rearrangement at each iteration while the partial rearrangement
approach takes moderate changes to have the satisfactory result. The approaches
based on shape derivatives and topological derivatives are examples of partial
rearrangement. To demonstrate the capability and efficiency of the numerical
approach, it will be applied to problems from inhomogeneous materials and
population dynamics.

The broader impact of the work arises from its wide ranges of applications. The
PI will apply the numerical approaches to problems including (1) identifying of
composite strings and membranes with frequency control, (2) finding composite
materials with optimal conductivity, (3) designing composite plates with desired
extremum frequency, and (4) investigating eigenvalue optimization in population
biology and shape identification in images from different modalities including
magnetic resonance images and optical coherence images. Moreover, the techniques
will open a new door to compute spectral information on general surfaces without
meshes on surfaces and provide an improved understanding of shape optimization
on general surfaces. Software developed as part of this work will be
incorporated into numerical courses in graduate study and will be freely
available to the public. In the coming three years, the PI will organize mini
symposiums on closest point method and shape optimization in the coming SIAM and
international conferences to interest more scientists and invite more speakers
in the underrepresented groups to broaden the field.