* 1318148
* X-Band Dual-Polarization Phased Array:  Calibration and Performance
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Stephen Frasier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 05/31/2017
* USD 548,139.00

The advent of phased array technology for meteorological applications has been
realized recently with the development of research platforms such as the
National Weather Radar Testbed and mobile Doppler phased array radars for rapid
scanning such as the Rapid-DOW, MWR-05XP, and Atmospheric Imaging Radar. With
these and initiatives such as the Multi-mission Phased Array Radar and the
Center for Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere (CASA), there is
growing interest in the potential for use of phased array radars in weather
surveillance and measurement. However, because the operational weather radar
networks in the U.S. are now adopting dual polarization, it is anticipated that
it will be necessary for future phased-array systems to support polarimetry for
improved hydrometeor identification and rainfall estimation, with the same
fidelity as is possible with today's reflector
antennas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Microwave Remote Sensing Laboratory in
collaboration with the CASA Engineering Research Center, has recently developed
a mobile, dual-polarization, solid-state, X-band active phased-array weather
radar. With this award, experiments will be performed with this active phased-
array radar to study its polarization performance, calibration and stability,
biases, and other uncertainties particular to phased-array weather radar
antennas. This array will be used in specific deployments and experiments of
opportunity to gain experience in the practicalities of phased-array radar
polarimetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of calibration experiments will
be performed locally as well as deployments to the Great Plains. In particular,
the radar will be deployed during two successive spring seasons to the
Dallas/Fort Worth Urban Testbed, a quasi-operational/research radar network
initiated by the CASA Engineering Research Center and primarily sponsored by the
North Texas Council of Governments. Here, the phased-array radar will observe
severe weather in tandem with other similarly sized, X-band, mechanically
scanned dual-polarization radars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the research is experimental investigation of the impacts of polarization
imperfections and projection errors and their compensation with a real dual-
polarization phased-array radar, as well as characterization of the beam quality
(sidelobes, precise matching of H- and V-polarized beams, cross-polarization)
with a low-cost phased array. The performance will be benchmarked both via
calibration targets and observations of weather with companion mechanically
scanned antennas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research are
improved understanding of the kinematics and dynamics of severe storms and their
formation, ultimately leading to improved predictions of severe weather events.
The incorporation of new technologies in weather observation will also inform
users' interpretations and expectations of radar measurements for these
purposes. In addition, the project includes strong involvement of graduate
students from UMass working with investigators and users of the DFW Testbed. The
phased-array radar will also serve as a teaching tool at UMass and at U. of
Texas Arlington during deployments.