* 1318294
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Cost-Competitve Analysis - A New Tool for Designing Secure Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Seth Pettie, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2016
* USD 248,480.00

Consider a network where each node is either good or bad. The good nodes all run
an algorithm that attempts to achieve a specific goal. The hidden set of bad
nodes are controlled by an adversary who uses them to thwart this
goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Informally, cost-competitive analysis considers the
resource cost of each good node as a function of the total resource cost of the
adversary. The goal is to design algorithms that achieve their objectives, while
minimizing this cost. Critically, when bad nodes suffer higher costs than good
nodes, it is expected that they will eventually cease their attack, as their
resources become depleted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals of this project are to
design cost-competitive algorithms for: communication in wireless networks;
tolerating distributed denial-of-service attacks; secure routing in peer-to-peer
networks; and enabling nodes to come to agreement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cost-
competitive analysis offers a novel approach for making progress on challenging
attacks that cannot be adequately addressed in models that ignore the costs of
the attacker. By adopting a more realistic attack model, this approach more
accurately quantifies the limits of efficient attack resistance. It is thus
expected that a cost-competitive approach will yield more compelling solutions
to security challenges in many domains. In particular, this project may have
high impact in security challenges involving open environments such as: wireless
sensor networks, overlays, reputation systems; and aspects of contemporary
problems in industry such as: public cloud computing, reliable versions of
MapReduce, and robust distributed lock managers like Google's Chubby lock
service.