* 1318074
* RAPID:   Weathered Storms and Following Seas:  Fisheries in the Wake of Hurricane Sandy
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Bonnie McCay, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2015
* USD 24,998.00

Drs. Bonnie McCay (Rutgers), Patricia M. Clay and Lisa L. Colburn (both of NOAA
Fisheries) will study what factors help people to be "resilient", that is, to
recover from disasters more or less easily. Studies of disasters drawn from
geography, anthropology, and psychology suggest that resilience differs based on
experience, knowledge, tradition, and socio-political context, but also whether
a hazard is perceived as caused by the natural environment or by human errors
(for example, inadequate city planning or technological breakdown).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will further explore how Hurricane Sandy has
impacted the daily routines, social life, and work life of coastal communities
in the two hardest hit states, New Jersey and New York. Qualitative data will be
collected by interviewing a broad cross-section of affected individuals, to see
how and how much they have been able to recover from the storm so far and
whether they think they can continue where they are or will need to move their
homes and/or businesses to new locations. Interviews will clarify these
perceptions and the potential influence of changing views of climate change.
This study will add data to two other already completed studies funded by NOAA
Fisheries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policymakers and researchers who are involved in
disaster preparedness and relief efforts will benefit from the outcomes of this
anthropological study of the New York and New Jersey coastal communities
severely damaged by Sandy. The results of this research, together with the
efforts of the National Marine Fisheries Service to document the infrastructural
effects of the storm, should assist in providing appropriate assistance to
fishing ports and communities. In addition, graduate students will gain valuable
experience conducting qualitative research.