* 1318415
* TWC: Small:  Virtual Private Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Angelos Keromytis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 07/31/2019
* USD 498,332.00

Social networking services have been transformed from one-stop websites, to
social interaction platforms deeply integrated with third-party websites,
applications, and even operating systems. As prominent examples, social plugins
such as Facebook's Like and Google's +1 buttons enable websites to offer
personalized content and allow their visitors to seamlessly share and interact
with their social circles, while Facebook and Twitter support is already
integrated in iOS 6. These social features offer multifaceted benefits to both
users and content providers, and have driven their widespread adoption across
the web and the mobile application ecosystem. However, this increasing
integration has raised concerns about the implications of these social features
to user privacy, as they enable social networking services to track a growing
part of their members' activity, including their browsing histories, locations,
and communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project seeks to
address these privacy concerns by exploring a novel design for privacy-
preserving virtual private social networks, which fulfills two seemingly
contradicting requirements: it protects user privacy by minimizing the
transmission of user-identifying information to the social networking platform,
while preserving all existing functionality by delivering the same personalized
content. The main insight of this approach is to shift content personalization
from a server-side to a client-side process, by decoupling the retrieval of
potentially sensitive social information from the presentation of personalized
content that uses that information. The PIs are developing a personalized
"information overlay" that prefetches information from a user's social circle
independently of third-party accesses, and keeps this information consistent
across the user's devices. The outcomes of this research effort are expected to
significantly improve the privacy of members of social networking services,
without degrading the current personalization experience to which they have
grown accustomed.