* 1318396
* NeTS: Small: Automated Diagnosis and Root Cause Analysis of Internet Problems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Arvind Krishnamurthy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,351.00

Reliable Internet performance and availability are essential for many existing
and future network applications. While the Internet works well enough most of
the time for most people, nearly everyone has experienced outages and service
degradation that make the network unusable, and we are far from five nines of
reliability that critical services require. Improving Internet connectivity
requires action against all sources of unavailability and poor performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research community has made substantial progress
toward understanding and developing technologies to address short-term outages
due to BGP (border gateway protocol) routing convergence. However, much less
progress has been made at reducing the impact of long-term outages and route
misconfiguration. Despite being rare, these events have a large impact on
overall network availability because repairs happen on a human timescale.
Additionally, many users suffer from the use of sub-optimal (high latency or
lossy) paths to network services due to misconfigurations and ineffective route
selection. Operators at an affected ISP or service often encounter stumbling
blocks at each step: identifying that a problem exists, localizing the root
cause of the problem, and affecting a repair. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers on this project will develop a system to transform this largely
manual troubleshooting process into a fully automated one. The goal of the
research is that persistent outages and performance problems can be identified
in real-time, rather than today's matter of hours. While automated diagnosis and
identification of root cause is fundamentally hard, the project will benefit
from dramatic recent progress in Internet measurement technologies, specifically
reverse path measurement that provides a much more complete picture of the
Internet topology than ever before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
goal of the research project is to change the paradigm of network diagnosis on
the Internet -- from blind to informed. The state of art with network
troubleshooting is to use ad-hoc techniques. For instance, it is common
occurrence on the NANOG (North American Network Operators? Group) mailing list
for operators to post requests asking other operators to manually issue
traceroutes and report them in order to identify network anomalies. The network
could thus benefit from a continuously operated service that can not only detect
network problems in realtime but also identify misbehaving network elements at
the granularity of routers. There are also a number of challenges to deploying a
functional diagnosis system, and the researchers will address them using the
following key components. First, the project will produce a scalable measurement
system that will synthesize measurements from different techniques to provide
snapshots of routing behavior in real-time. Second, the research will focus on
developing a general theory of Internet path changes that will help model the
propagation of routing events and identify the candidate set of responsible ASes
(autonomous systems). Third, the researchers will develop inference techniques
that will operate on measured data and identify the origin of failures and path
changes in the wide area even when the measurement data is incomplete or subject
to transient dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Our society is
increasingly relying on the Internet for critical telecommunications services,
such as home health monitoring, e-911, smart grids, and so forth. It is no
longer simply an inconvenience when the Internet is unavailable or inefficient.
If this project is successful, it will help operators address the major sources
of unavailability and misconfigurations in the Internet, benefiting all of its
users. In addition, because of a lack of automated tools, operators currently
spend huge amounts of time chasing down individual outages and performance
misconfigurations; this raises the barrier to entry for small ISPs, ultimately
raising the costs of Internet service for everyone.