* 1318808
* SHF: Small:  Reverse Engineering Variability Implementations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Christian Kastner, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 419,522.00

Variability in software systems is very common and important to
tailor&lt;br/&gt;the system to user needs and to use the system flexibly in
different&lt;br/&gt;contexts without developing a new system from scratch for
each context.&lt;br/&gt;For example, embedded systems with resource
constraints,&lt;br/&gt;high-performance optimizations, and end-user customizable
systems all&lt;br/&gt;exploit variability. However variability in software
systems creates a&lt;br/&gt;fundamental tension between (a) reuse and (b)
development and&lt;br/&gt;maintenance costs. On the one hand, planning
variability upfront enables&lt;br/&gt;systematic reuse and promises to
significantly reduce development&lt;br/&gt;effort, costs, and time to market. On
the other hand, variability&lt;br/&gt;requires an upfront investment and causes
long-term maintenance costs,&lt;br/&gt;because variations give rise to an
exponential number of configurations&lt;br/&gt; with potentially intricate
interactions. Especially if introduced in&lt;br/&gt;an ad-hoc fashion and not
managed appropriately, variability can&lt;br/&gt;increase maintenance costs to a
level that outweighs the expected&lt;br/&gt;benefits. This research develops and
integrates reverse-engineering&lt;br/&gt;techniques for variability to lower
upfront investments for variability&lt;br/&gt;and to reduce the costs of long-
term maintenance caused by accidental&lt;br/&gt;complexity of existing ad-hoc
variability implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project revisits how
variable and reusable software is implemented&lt;br/&gt;by encouraging
lightweight and incremental implementation mechanisms and&lt;br/&gt;providing
migration mechanisms for all ad-hoc legacy implementations&lt;br/&gt;common in
practice, including conditional compilation (#ifdef),&lt;br/&gt;branches,
clones, textual patches, command-line parameters, and&lt;br/&gt;plug-ins. It
integrates research from different communities, including&lt;br/&gt;product-
line analysis, static analysis, refactoring, concern location,&lt;br/&gt;and
architecture recovery toward a common goal of reverse
engineering&lt;br/&gt;variability implementations . This integration will allow
scaling&lt;br/&gt;research and practice of analyzing and migrating variability
from core&lt;br/&gt;calculi to real-world systems of the size and complexity of
the Linux&lt;br/&gt;kernel.