* 1318414
* Planning the Development of the Santa Rosa Island Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Daniel Wakelee, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2015
* USD 24,992.00

California State University Channel Islands is awarded a grant to plan the
development a research station on Santa Rosa Island in Channel Islands National
Park. The station will serve as a platform for multidisciplinary research on and
stewardship of the unique natural and cultural resources within the park. The
facility includes a four acre parcel and several existing buildings that are
being renovated to accommodate visiting researchers, as well as undergraduates
engaged in research projects on the island. The project will rely heavily on the
experience of individuals associated with field stations and existing
institutional partners, including the National Park Service, the U.S. Fish &amp;
Wildlife Service, and the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration.
The grant will support travel and consultation with key individuals at other
institutions that have experience developing and operating field research
facilities (particularly those located in island settings). The project will
allow CSU Channel Islands to develop a long-term strategic plan to guide the
research facility?s physical development, its organizational structure, and its
programmatic activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Santa Rosa Island supports a
diverse array of terrestrial animal and plant species. The waters surrounding
the island are cold and nutrient rich, with an array of marine life including
kelp forests, pelagic fish and numerous marine mammals. Isolation from the
mainland fostered allopatric speciation which has yielded numerous endemic
species and subspecies. Many of Santa Rosa Island?s endemic species have become
endangered over the past century. The current understanding of the earliest
colonists to the Americas is based on finds such as the Arlington Man on Santa
Rosa Island. The field station will serve as a platform to enable work by
researchers and students from a range of disciplines and institutions. Being
part of the California State University system, CI is well positioned to foster
research and educational partnerships with many of the CSU's other 22 campuses,
as well as nearby University of California campuses. As a Hispanic Serving
Institution, CI has a special opportunity to use the Santa Rosa facility to
engage underrepresented minority students in field-based undergraduate research
experiences.