* 1318211
* PFI: BIC-  Visible-Light Semiconductor Nanolithography
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* John Fourkas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2016
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from the
University of Maryland, College Park, promotes the development of Resolution
Augmentation through Photo-Induced Deactivation (RAPID) into a viable commercial
strategy for semiconductor nanolithography. In conventional photolithography, a
single wavelength (color) of light is used to expose an imageable material
called a photoresist, and finer features are created by using light with a
shorter wavelength. RAPID represents a new approach to photolithography in which
one color of light exposes a photoresist causing a desired photoreaction that
ultimately results in a developed image of a semiconductor circuit and a second
color of light inhibits that exposure. This technique has been demonstrated to
be able to create features that are far smaller than the wavelength of light
employed. However, the underlying mechanisms of initiation and deactivation in
RAPID photoresists are still poorly understood. The proposed research will
elucidate the photochemistry and photophysics of RAPID and will provide the
knowledge necessary to create RAPID photoresists that are suitable for the
semiconductor industry. The ultimate goal of the proposed research is to create
photoresists that are capable of creating features of 10 nm or less with a
spacing of 20 nm or less, all using visible light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are far reaching. The continued progress in
increasing the number of transistors that can be fit into a given space on an
integrated circuit, which is embodied by Moore's Law, has been a major
technological and economic driver over the past five decades. However, current
approaches to improving the resolution of semiconductor nanolithography involve
the use of radiation or charged particles with ever shorter wavelengths, which
goes hand in hand with ever-increasing technological challenges and cost. These
approaches have also reached road blocks that may prove insurmountable. The
ability to perform semiconductor nanolithography using visible light, which is
inexpensive to generate, propagate and manipulate, could be a game changer for
the semiconductor industry and could give a major boost to U.S. competitiveness
in this field. However, RAPID is a disruptive technology that is vastly
different from the approaches currently being pursued in the industry and
requires more development before it will be given serious consideration as an
alternative to these approaches. The goal of the proposed research is thus to
develop RAPID materials to a state in which they are compatible with the needs
of the semiconductor industry, so that the industry can further transition them
from the research laboratory to the factory. The proposed research will increase
the viability of both participating small businesses, Period Structures, Inc.
(PSI) and Lithoguru. The proposed work will position these businesses to play a
leading role in the transition of RAPID into semiconductor nanolithography and
other markets. PSI will be at the forefront of tool design and development for
RAPID, while Lithoguru will have developed all of the simulation tools essential
for modeling virtually any industrial implementation of RAPID. The graduate
students who will perform the proposed research will work hand-in-hand with PSI
and Lithoguru, gaining invaluable experience not just in small business and its
culture but also in moving a research-laboratory discovery toward a marketable
technology. By participating in this project, they will develop broad skill sets
that will benefit their careers and will put them in a unique position to
facilitate the ensuing transition of RAPID into the foundry or to develop tools
and materials with further advanced capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners
at the inception of the project are the University of Maryland, College Park and
two small, technology-based businesses: Periodic Structures, Inc. (Los Gatos,
CA, Austin, TX and Albuquerque, NM) and Lithoguru (Austin, TX).