* 1318511
* TWC: Small: New Advances for Efficiently-Searchable Encryption
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Alexandra Boldyreva, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2017
* USD 499,796.00

Current worldwide trends towards remote data storage solutions such as cloud
storage, in which large stores of data on insecure networks must be efficiently
accessible, and increasing security requirements emphasized the need to support
efficient search functionality on large encrypted databases. Searchable
encryption is a balancing act of efficiency, functionality, and security. The
solutions either require extensive interaction and computation, linear data scan
on each query, which is prohibitive for large databases, or knowing all data in
advance. This research advances the state of the art of efficiently-searchable
encryption (ESE) by focusing on three key areas: new security guarantees for
order-preserving encryption, searchable encryption for fuzzy queries, and
seeking a general definition of ESE.

The PI has conducted a cryptographic study of order-preserving encryption for
supporting efficient range queries on remote encrypted data. This project
clarifies the security guarantees of the previous definition and studies the
alternative settings in order to develop new secure solutions. This research
focuses on fuzzy queries which return database elements that correspond to
messages which are close to the underlying queried message. This work initiates
the first formal cryptographic study of fuzzy searchable encryption (FSE). In
particular, the work focuses on developing appropriate security definitions and
building provably-secure FSE schemes. This research seeks a general definition
that will cover all known types of ESE, and investigates related impossibility
issues. The research extends security definitions for various ESE to security of
the database as a whole.