* 1318160
* SHF: Small: Associative Memory based on Ovenized Resonator Exchange
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Gianluca Piazza, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 516,000.00

Today's computing systems that are capable of processing at phenomenal speed and
efficiency are based on an architecture that was first proposed by John Von
Neumann in 1945, before computers existed. Researchers who have searched for
better ways to perform computing have been inspired by the human brain
"architecture" that represents the ultimate in processing efficiency for
applications such as image processing and pattern recognition. Attempts to
create neurocomputers and associative memory circuits that mimic the brain via a
network of coupled artificial neurons and synapses have been proposed. However,
such implementations based on conventional silicon technology have largely been
viewed as impractical and inferior to traditional computing hardware in terms of
complexity and power consumption. This project will demonstrate a novel
neurocomputing system based on the co-design of the system architecture and the
nanoscale aluminum nitride (AlN) resonator devices that act as thermally-tunable
elements for implementation of artificial neurons and synapses. The goal of this
project is to demonstrate the functionality of such a system for a pattern
recognition problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines two exciting
technologies, namely, modeling the function of the brain and piezoelectric
materials, both of which are of interest to a broad community. Piezoelectric
materials, such as crystals, are an exciting demonstration of converting
mechanical energy into electrical energy. The same materials used in this
project will be incorporated into the CMU undergraduate course 18-220, which is
an introduction to circuits, to demonstrate energy harvesting and the important
concept of resonance. A lab assignment based on converting vibrational energy to
electrical energy will encourage the students to explore techniques for
harvesting energy to support future electronic systems. Simpler samples of
piezoelectric materials that react to being squeezed and vibrated will be used
to light LEDs for demonstration to the C-Mite K through 10th classes at Carnegie
Mellon (http://www.cmu.edu/cmites/ ). The brain-inspired electronic systems will
be incorporated into graduate course projects for digital integrated circuit
design at Carnegie Mellon. The results of this research will also be
collaboratively exchanged with researchers from industry, specifically Intel and
Qualcomm, to explore the benefits of neurocomputing-based associative memories
for use in portable electronic systems.