* 1318747
* FSML: A Regional Hub for the EON's at Lacawac Sanctuary
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Craig Williamson, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 354,063.00

Miami University is awarded a grant for infrastructural and equipment
improvements to Lacawac Sanctuary. This project will create a year-round Aquatic
Optical Analysis Laboratory by: 1) renovating Lacawac Sanctuary's Visitor Center
with the addition of an analytical lab (600 square ft.) and 2) acquiring two
critical core optical instruments: a UV-Vis scanning spectrophotometer and
benchtop fluorometer. Both research instruments are integral to the innovative
optical sensor research at Lacawac. The addition will include a chemical fume
hood, a water purification system, two laboratory sinks, laboratory benches, and
cabinets. Lacawac has a long history of supporting research on ultraviolet
radiation impacts to lake communities and ecosystems, the development of novel
aquatic optical metrics, and as a site to test emerging sensors, sensor
platforms, and sensor techniques. The improvements, together with the existing
expertise and goals of the Lacawac staff and its research community, will enable
Lacawac to serve more effectively as a regional research and training hub for
ecological observatory networks (EON). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lacawac Sanctuary
(http://lacawac.org/) is an independent, non-profit field station and nature
preserve founded in 1966. Lacawac is located in the Pocono Mountains of
Northeastern Pennsylvania and is within 100 miles of 140 institutions of higher
education. Without a field station of their own, many of these institutions
depend on Lacawac as a field site for research. Lacawac also serves as a site
for weekend field trips in ecology and environmental science classes for many
institutions of higher education. Lacawac Sanctuary is 206 ha in area, including
a 21 ha pristine natural lake (Lake Lacawac) and nearly all of its watershed,
wetlands, 2 small impoundments, and stands of mixed hardwoods and hemlock.
Visiting classes and researchers have access to long-term databases of physical,
chemical and biological lake data, and weather and solar data. Analytical
laboratory space and the two core optical instruments will allow Lacawac to
increase its leadership in training students and faculty on emerging sensors,
sensor deployment platforms, and other EON approaches. Through active research
programs, training workshops, and websites facilitated by Lacawac, hundreds of
students and faculty are reached each year in person or in the virtual world.
Lacawac's large public user base and member base is reached through: 1) public
programs 2) general audience articles in a quarterly newsletter, 3) website and
social media sites, and 4) informational outdoor display panels and pamphlets.