* 1318899
* HCC: Small: Understanding and Supporting Communication Across Language Boundaries
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Susan Fussell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 544,039.00

Computer-mediated communication (CMC) tools and social media have the potential
to allow people to interact fluidly across national boundaries but linguistic
boundaries still pose challenges to communication. Advances in machine
translation (MT) and other technologies have resulted in new tools that could
allow people to communicate with one another using their native language, but
translation errors create sizeable misunderstandings when MT is used in
conversational settings. The goal of the proposed research is to better
understand and support communication between people who speak different native
languages by enhancing MT output with other information, such as keyword
highlighting or pictorial representations. To achieve this goal, the project
will (a) explore how the use of MT vs. English affects inter-lingual
communication and coordination; (b) iteratively develop and test new tools that
provide additional representations of meaning to smooth gaps in MT output; and
(c) assess the value of these enhanced MT tools for communication and
collaboration in a series of carefully controlled laboratory studies. The
results will help delineate the design and technical space for new tools for
inter-lingual communication.

The project will contribute to the fields of computer-mediated communication and
computer-supported cooperative work by developing new theories and
understandings of how people use technology to communicate and collaborate
across language boundaries. It will contribute to human-computer interaction and
related fields through the development of new techniques and tools for enhancing
the output of machine translation. The annotated inter-lingual dialogues
generated in experiments will also enrich the development of machine translation
systems. Finally, the work will explore new technical issues around real-time
keyword highlighting and multilingual picture retrieval. The project will also
provide new tools and knowledge for communication across language boundaries
that will be made widely available to the research community and general public,
thus improving people's ability to engage with others across language
boundaries, in global organizations and at the personal level, on social network
sites and other international forms of new media.