* 1318347
* CIF:Small:Low-rank matrix and tensor methods for higher-dimensional MR image reconstruction
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Joshua Trzasko, Mayo Clinic Rochester
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 10/31/2017
* USD 487,355.00

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an important medical imaging modality widely
used clinically to visualize soft-tissue structure and function in the human
body. However, acquiring diagnostic quality MR images is a relatively slow
process, and shortening MRI scan times is an important goal for reducing motion
artifacts, improving clinical efficiency and patient comfort, and reducing cost.
The long duration of MRI also forces a tradeoff between image spatial, temporal,
and contrast resolution, and there are many potential applications where
clinical requirements cannot be met by current protocols. Sparsity-driven
reconstruction techniques are being increasingly employed to try and address
these needs. However, MRI data commonly has auxiliary non-spatial dimensions
(e.g., time, receiver channel), and sparse methods only efficiently exploit
intra-dimensional redundancies. Calibration or training procedures are
consequently used to identify and incorporate inter-dimensional redundancies
into the reconstruction model. This comes at the expense of prolonged scan
duration, error propagation, and limited experimental freedom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of a robust,
efficient, flexible, and totally calibration- and training-free framework for
higher-dimensional MR image reconstruction. It is hypothesized that totally
training-free MRI can be achieved by structuring image reconstruction as a low-
rank matrix or tensor estimation problem that: 1) actively exploits inter-
dimensional redundancies; 2) works complementarily with existing sparsity-based
strategies; and 3) naturally generalizes for advanced imaging scenarios like
non-Cartesian imaging. The first stage of the research focuses on building the
mathematical foundation for this framework. The second stage focuses on
practical realization, through development of efficient optimization strategies,
high-performance code implementations, and automated parameter selection
methodologies. These developments may lead to improved diagnoses, faster
scanning, cost reduction, and the enablement of novel clinical MRI applications.