* 1318552
* Research Vessel for Everett Community College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Ardi Kveven, Everett Community College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2015
* USD 218,147.00

Everett Community College (EvCC) is awarded a grant to acquire a research vessel
to enhance undergraduate research experiences for community college students and
other educational partners in the North Puget Sound region. This research vessel
provides the platform to conduct basic biological research relevant to two local
community college education agendas, leveraging new levels of academic and
scientific collaboration. Providing opportunities for students to explore the
intersection between research and education while dissecting the biological
connections to physical and geological dynamics in an estuary represents
powerful teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vessel will be equipped
with a drop down bow for beach landing and swing through davit access for a CTD
array and sediment dredge, as well as electronic interface for real-time display
of water column profile and benthic surveys. The vessel will expand and enhance
the research capacity on longitudinal research conducted by students, increasing
research cruises from monthly to weekly, while providing greater research
training opportunities for more students. A dedicated research vessel provides
flexibility to adjust to weather conditions, allows for anchoring, provides
shallow water access for eel grass surveys, increases data collection as well as
accessibility, increases collaboration between community colleges, universities
and state agencies and provides increased opportunities for community
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging partnerships expand the research
opportunities beyond EvCC, through the partner institutions of the Community
College Undergraduate Research Initiative. Ongoing partnerships with local
universities, state agencies, K-12 institutions and community partners provide
rich opportunities for increasing the sense of place and the connection to the
local ecosystem which helps students make more informed decisions about the
environment in which they live. By providing the tools and access, this vessel
represents an innovative platform for teaching and training emerging scientists,
many of whom are underserved in STEM fields. For more information visit
www.everettcc.edu/orca