* 1318843
* Meeting:   EU-US Training in Marine Bioinformatics, June 16-28, 2013 Newark, Delaware USA
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Jennifer Biddle, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,996.00

Modern molecular and genomic approaches have enabled biologists to ask and
answer questions that had previously been intractable. These modern approaches
yield vast volumes of data, which require the use of computational tools for
effective and efficient analysis. Marine microbiologists are increasingly
employing such methods to interrogate complex marine microbial communities,
which have defied greater understanding by use of other approaches. However,
most marine science educational programs are not prepared to offer the
computational training needed to utilize the most modern tools. A course in
marine bioinformatics will be offered to train today's marine scientists in
these modern computational tools to enhance their ability to gain novel
understanding and insights about these marine microbial systems. These training
needs are recognized in the US as well as in the European Union. The training
course will be held for the second year, this time at the Delaware Biotechnology
Institute in Newark, Delaware in June 2013. The main aims of the Marine
Bioinformatics training course are to bring together young scientists in a forum
that will set the groundwork for future international collaborations. This
course aims to provide a resource for graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers and faculty to acquire the skills-set necessary to develop relevant
experimental designs and for analysis of diversity, (meta)genomics,
(meta)transcriptomics and associated environmental contextual data from the
marine environment. The course will train 30 participants, with 15 participants
from the US and 15 participants from the European Union. This award will support
the participation of individuals from the US. Participants will be recruited
from a range of backgrounds such as computer science, bioinformatics, marine
microbial ecology, molecular microbiology, environmental science and
oceanography. The course will be organized by scientific chairs: Jennifer F.
Biddle, School of Marine Science and Policy, University of Delaware, Lewes DE,
USA and Frank Oliver Glöckner, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology,
Bremen &amp; Jacobs University, Bremen, Germany. This course will impact early
career scientists by providing them broad interdisciplinary training to expand
their research skills. Each participant will be required to report on their
efforts to disseminate course material after the course ends. The course website
can be found at http://www.microb3.eu/events/workshops/eu-us-training/2013.