* 1318994
* FSML: Expansion of Small Boat Dockage Facility at the Center for Marine Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* John Morrison, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 279,435.00

University of North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW) Center for Marine Research. UNCW
is awarded a grant to expand and update the current dockage facilities at the
Center for Marine Researh (CMS). Major pieces of equipment or shared use
equipment that are provided by CMS are operated as CORE Facilities. Each
facility has an identified faculty member as the facility leader, with technical
support and service contracts maintained by CMS. These facilities are regional
resources available to faculty and students from any UNC constituent campus (for
the cost of expendables) at a fraction of the costs that would be charged
elsewhere. The Research Vessel Operations Core Facility was formed to manage and
maintain the University's research fleet. CMS operates 22 vessels ranging in
size from 4 meters (13 feet) to the 11 m (35 foot) R/V Seahawk to the 21-meters
(68-foot) R/V Cape Fear. CMS's only direct access to the field is via a 235
meter (770 ft) long dock with a large platform directly on the Intracoastal
Waterway with only one permanent berth for support of research vessels up to 25
meters long (80 feet), normally occupied by the R/V Cape Fear, and 2 small
floating platforms for staging research. This grant will expand the current dock
by adding a 72 ft (21 m) extension to the existing dock that will include 8
small boat slips, 4 slips with boat hoists and 4 without, 1 - 35 ft (11 m) berth
with hoist for the R/V Seahawk, a well as space for additional research projects
and shellfish culturing. This expansion/extension will greatly ease access to
the boats for the ever expending scientific, educational and outreach needs of
the marine science at program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A credible marine science
program needs reliable, well-equipped vessels with easy access to the marine
environment. In addition, UNCW and its flagship marine science program has a
goal of increasing experiential learning in marine science at all levels, K to
Gray. CMS provides laboratory and field access for &gt;100 faculty, ~ 500
undergraduate students (Marine Biology, Oceanography and Physics with option in
Physics Oceanography), ~ 100 M.S. students pursuing marine science degrees; ~ 20
students pursuing Ph.D. degrees in Marine Biology, and 60+ staff. with dedicated
space for research, education and public outreach. With the recent tying of the
University's accreditation to a Quality Enhancement Plan focused on Experiencing
Transformative Education through Applied Learning (eTEAL) built upon the
University's mission as the state's coastal university, projected use of our
small boat fleet in the next decade for "applied learning inspired by
explorations across academic disciplines and pedagogies" to increase
dramatically. In addition, in partnership with MarineQuest and Watson School of
Education, the Center offered experiential learning opportunities for K to 12
students for 30 years; providing exciting academic enrichment opportunities for
over 18,000 young people (entering 3rd generation) interested in the marine
environment, with over 8,000 just in the last year. Virtually every student in
New Hanover County has at one time participated in a MarineQuest program, many
of which have need of easy access to vessels. Last summer alone, more than 500
students ages 10 to 17 from across the country and abroad who participated in
summer boarding camps made use of CMS research vessels. For more information
about CMS visit http://uncw.edu/cms/.