* 1318201
* PFI: BIC-  The Roosevelt Island Tidal Energy Project: Optimizing Novel Hydro-Kinetic Renewable Energy Systems via State-of-the-Art Computational Fluid Dynamics Research
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Michele Guala, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2016
* USD 599,541.00

This Partnership for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from the
St. Anthony Falls Laboratory-University of Minnesota (SAFL) seeks to 1) leverage
novel computational fluid dynamics algorithms and experimental techniques
developed by SAFL, the unique marine and hydrokinetic (MHK) energy field
facilities and industry-leading expertise of Verdant Power, Inc. (VPI), and
advances in material science and manufacturing of composite blades by Energetx
Composites, Inc. (ECI) to tackle major technological and environmental
roadblocks hindering commercial development and wide-spread deployment of
technologies for harnessing MHK energy resources; and 2) contribute toward
educating the next generation workforce for the MHK industry with emphasis on
Native American students. A three-pronged research plan is proposed aimed at 1)
Designing and testing via fluid-structure interaction computational tools the
next generation of MHK turbine rotor blades optimized for reliable and efficient
operation in real-life aquatic environments; 2) Optimizing via site-specific
computational modeling the layout of VPI's pilot-scale 30-turbine, 1.05MW array
to be developed in the Roosevelt Island Tidal Energy (RITE) site in the East
River in New York City; and 3) Developing and demonstrating the utility of the
computational tools for quantifying and mitigating environmental effects due to
coupled MHK array-geomorphology interactions. At the core of the educational
plan of this project is the collaboration with Salish Kootenai Colleg (SKC),
which will seek to enrich the 4-year degree program of this college with
technological and entrepreneurial content focused on MHK energy. The
computational framework to be used in this project is able to carry out high-
resolution simulations of turbulence in arbitrarily complex waterways with
embedded natural and/or man-made hydraulic structures and/or MHK turbines and
multi-turbine arrays, taking into account hydro-elastic effects of turbine
blades, and the interactions between turbines and waterway morphodynamic
processes. This computational framework will be further developed and
demonstrated in a real-world MHK project by leveraging the industry-leading
expertise and unique field facilities of the two small business partners. The
resulting simulation-based toolbox will be translated to the business partners
to provide them for the first time with in depth mechanistic understanding of
how turbines perform in and interact with real-life aquatic environments; and a
powerful simulation-based engineering science toolbox for site-specific
optimization of turbine arrays for efficiency and environmental
compatibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technologies for harnessing clean and
renewable energy from MHK resources are currently at the pre-commercial stage of
development and a number of technological and environmental challenges need to
be overcome for this emerging industry to impact the nation's economy and
renewable energy portfolio. Today, the U.S. MHK industry is at a stage similar
to the early days of wind power technology prior to the emergence of a viable
industry. Due to market pressures confronting small businesses in a nascent
industry sector, the innovation capacity of companies like VPI and ECI is
seriously impaired. The proposed PFI will enable both industry partners to
leverage unique state-of-the-art simulation tools and emerge as international
leaders in the MHK industry. Furthermore, the success of VPI's highly visible
RITE project in New York City will provide a major boost to the entire U.S. MHK
industry sector and help accelerate the wide-spread deployment of MHK energy
technologies throughout the nation. The PFI educational plan will provide pilot
content for the SKC Hydrology degree program that will uniquely link a Native
American reservation with promising new technologies at a point where technology
and entrepreneurial development are happening simultaneously; open-up a new
potential marketplace for MHK technology in rural communities on a Native
American reservation; and pilot this effort as a model for implementation in
other rural communities in the U.S. and in third-world
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are the
1) Lead Institution: St. Anthony Falls Laboratory at University of Minnesota-
Twin Cities (College of Science and Engineering); 2) Small Business Partners:
Verdant Power, Inc. (Roosevelt Island, NY) and Energetx Composites, Inc.
(Holland MI); and an 3) Academic Institution: Salish Kootenai College (Pablo,
MT).