* 1318455
* FSML: Enabling the next generation of cell analysis at Horn Point Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Alyson Santoro, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2015
* USD 268,638.00

The University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences is awarded a grant
to establish a cell imaging and analysis center at the Horn Point Laboratory
(http://www.umces.edu/hpl) to support research and training on the ecology and
physiology of phytoplankton and bacterioplankton. Visualizing and counting
microorganisms are fundamental to microbial ecology research and discovery. HPL
will update and expand its capacity to count and visualize microbial cells to
support and enhance existing molecular biology and microbial ecology facilities.
Funds will be used to acquire a benchtop high-throughput flow cytometer, an
inverted light microscope, and an epifluorescent microscope with a modern
imaging system. This equipment will build the capacity for high-throughput
cultivation experiments and single-cell substrate uptake analysis using
microautoradiography and allow HPL to offer an intensive winter-term course on
phytoplankton physiology for graduate and advanced undergraduate students from
around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beautiful images of cells are some of the
most important tools microbial ecologists have to communicate and disseminate
their research and engage the general public. The cell analysis center will
become an integral part of graduate education at HPL, where it will be available
to the entire Chesapeake Bay and Mid-Atlantic Bight research community. Summer
undergraduate students will use the equipment as part of their research
projects, as will students enrolled in a winter term short course on
phytoplankton physiology and ecology, allowing HPL to train the next generation
of microbial ecologists in phytoplankton physiology and identification. Cell
staining and counting protocols will be made available via a newly constructed
website for the cell analysis center, ensuring broad dissemination of our
findings.