* 1318997
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Power-Efficient and Reliable 3D Stacked Reconfigurable Photonic Network-on-Chips for Scalable Multicore Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Ahmed Louri, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2015
* USD 362,739.00

As power dissipation on a single-chip is increasing at an alarming rate due to
massive integration of digital circuits, multicore design has become the only
technique to scale performance. Multicores with tens to hundreds of cores are
already available in the marketplace and future projections call for thousands
of cores on the chip. To achieve scalable computing performance from the
multicores, the communication between cores should also scale in bandwidth while
significantly reducing the power consumption. Scaling the performance of the on-
chip communication fabric, called the Network-on-Chip (NoC), has proven to be a
significant challenge with traditional metallic interconnects due to fundamental
signaling issues such as power dissipation, electromagnetic interference,
crosstalk and reflections. Several studies and roadmaps have indicated that
disruptive technology solutions such as photonics have the potential to
alleviate the critical bandwidth, power and latency challenges of future
multicores. This research seeks to exploit the unique advantages of photonic
interconnects and 3D stacking technologies to develop scalable, energy-
efficient, bandwidth-reconfigurable and reliable NoCs for future multicores.
There are three goals of the proposed research; first, it will investigate and
develop 3D stacked photonic NoC architectures and topologies that maximize
performance and improve energy-efficiency. Second, it will develop runtime
reconfiguration techniques that can adapt the network to the communication needs
of the application, thereby improving performance on a per-application basis.
Third, it will result in an extensive modeling and simulation framework to be
used for designing and validating future photonic NoC
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has far reaching broader
impacts. This research is uniquely positioned to leverage two emerging
technologies namely photonics and 3D stacking to meet the multicore challenge
and will significantly benefit society. The proposed research is essential to
continue the growth of computing performance that our society depends upon, and
will result in digital devices ranging from smartphones to laptops with faster
response time and improved reliability. By investigating the design of energy-
efficient and high-bandwidth photonic-3D NoC architectures, this proposal
describes a transformative and viable approach to combine technology, algorithm
and applications? research to enable building scalable multicores. The cross-
cutting nature of this research will foster new research directions in several
areas, spanning technology/energy-aware NoC design, novel computer
architectures, and cutting-edge modeling and simulations tools for emerging
technologies. This research will also play a major role in education by
integrating discovery with teaching and training. Several graduate students will
be directly involved with all phases of the project from which the core parts of
their dissertations and theses will be derived. It will also benefit a wider
audience of graduate and undergraduate students by incorporating the new
research into several courses on computer architecture and parallel processing
taught by the PIs. Finally, the results and findings of the proposed research
will be disseminated to researchers, engineers and educators through technical
publications and presentations.