* 1318259
* PFI:  BIC- Comprehensive Carbon Metric Tools and Integrated Architecture for Environmental Product and Building Declarations
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Brian Dunbar, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 07/31/2016
* USD 599,999.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
from Colorado State University will develop a state-of-the-art system
integrating greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions modeling, energy modeling, and life
cycle assessment (LCA) for the built environment. This new Carbon Footprint
Metric (CFM) system will mesh seamlessly with existing design and construction
management tools that are widely used by architects, engineers and builders. The
system will provide dynamic, real-time, 'on the-fly' carbon footprint
measurements, all the way from the building concept stage through to
construction and building completion and operation.

The broader impacts of this research begin with the opportunity to help reduce
the environmental footprint of buildings and the built environment, which
currently produce about 50% of total U.S. GHG emissions. A key element to
changing behavior on the part of both building professionals and consumers are
better environmental impact measurements. The availability of easily used yet
rigorous and standardized tools for quantifying GHG metrics can dramatically
change architectural and construction best practices. Once validated for each
class of building, the CFM system will permit architects and construction
practitioners to evaluate and alter building design in order to reduce energy
use and GHG emissions over the life cycle of the building. Moreover,
constructors can better evaluate construction methods and materials and building
managers can exploit improved efficiencies to reduce GHGs. This will help the
competitiveness and performance of the many small businesses that are among the
pioneers in the "green" building industry. The system could further serve as a
platform for urban planners and environmental managers to evaluate and plan
improvements in a given built environment which encompasses many buildings and
building types. The research and product development also have the potential to
help transform the education and training of the next generation of architects,
engineers, and product designers, who will be called upon to help build a more
sustainable urban environment.

Partners at the inception of the project are Colorado State University, with
participants from four Colleges (Agricultural Sciences, Health and Human
Sciences, Engineering, and Natural Sciences), along with three small business
partners: 1) Living Homes (Santa Monica, CA) that has as its mission the design
and creation of homes and communities which set a standard for the positive
impact on soil, water, energy and health; 2) The Neenan Company (Fort Collins,
CO) that has as its mission the design and building of highly sustainable
commercial buildings, schools, and hospitals; and 3) Nemetschek Vectorworks
(Columbia, MD) that has as its mission the production of versatile, intuitive,
and affordable Building Information Modeling (BIM) software for professional
design solutions to the architecture, engineering, and construction industries.
Other partner: The National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) is a non-business
partner that has as its mission research and development of alternative clean
energy technology. Supporting institutions, which are leaders in advancing a
more sustainable built environment, include the following: the American
Institute of Architects, the U.S. Green Building Council, the National Institute
for Building Science, Architecture 2030, and the Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI).