* 1318465
* Modeling and Simulations of Complex Fluids and Atomistic Strain
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Young-Ju Lee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 10/31/2013
* USD 144,816.00

The main objectives of the project is to build an integrated mathematical and
computational research program that includes coherently interconnected
mathematical disciplines, targeting, but not limited to, some challenge
applications in modeling and simulation of complex fluids and atomic strain. The
major goal in the project is to understand the flow instabilities in worm-like
micellar fluids such as the oscillating falling sphere and jumping bubbles.
Using the three species model that takes into account long and short micelles
and the shear-induced structure, the conjectured relation between the flow
instability and the shear-induced structures will be investigated. The project
will introduce the regularization techniques in the complex-fluid models for
robust and stable simulations and will integrate them with a fast multigrid
solver in the framework of massively parallel computing techniques. Such
integrated modeling and computational method is anticipated to make a
rheological modeling software. The project is also aimed at developing the new
strain modeling and simulation of nano-crystalline materials. The atomic strain
model will be developed by applying the finite element methodology for the
continuum linear elasticity. Unlike the conventional strain models developed by
using the finite difference approximations, the newly proposed model will mirror
and take into account the real atomic structures such as the diamond and zinc
structures. The model developed in this project will then be used to investigate
a sample strain-related nano-structure formation as its application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex fluids are ubiquitous in nature and industry and
they are used in many important areas, including the pharmaceutical, food,
military, bio-materials, printing, and oil industry, just to name a few. Strain
in nano-crystalline materials is central in materials science research and
understanding the strain is critical to provide guidance for the real-life
device design applications such as light emitting diodes, injection lasers and
solar cells. Yet, the modeling and simulation of complex fluids and strain in
nano-crystalline materials remain formidable and grand challenges, even with
modern supercomputers. Among others, the inherent deficiency of existing
mathematical models and the inefficiency of conventional numerical techniques
are the major bottlenecks, which defeat scientists' attempt to understand and
design materials. It is anticipated that the modeling and computation methods
developed in this research will remedy both the deficiency in the models and the
inefficiency in the computation, thereby drastically eliminating the
mathematical and computational bottlenecks and eventually providing valuable
guiding tools for scientists to better understand the materials of interest
within the scope of this project as well as in a number of other neighboring
areas of research where the technologies developed in this project can be
applied.