* 1318881
* EDU: Enhancing and Broadening Computer Security Education with Stepwise and Reusable Problem-solving Challenges
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Kang Li, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 314,854.00

This project explores methods for enhancing computer security education through
the use of practical problem-solving challenges. The investigators are building
step-wise and parametrized reusable security challenges that mimic real-world
scenarios involving computer attacks and defense strategies. To this end, the
project borrows ideas and practices from successful experiences in building
computer security competitions such as capture-the-flag, and provides
instructors with a reusable platform for designing and managing competition-
style challenges for the purpose of computer security and information assurance
education. The investigators are also developing new educational material
related to computer security that can be more easily integrated into relevant
non-security computer science courses. The main goal is to broaden computer
security education by developing a "cross-cutting" teaching approach, whereby
fundamental computer security concepts are taught in most core computer science
courses, from lower-level undergraduate courses, to upper-level undergraduate,
to core graduate courses. Moreover, this project creates an opportunity to
further adapt the newly developed education material to a larger audience,
offering introductory information security education to IT professionals and
increasing awareness regarding information security problems in general.