* 1319571
* SHF: Small: Contracts for Message-Passing Parallel Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Stephen Siegel, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 463,999.00

Software plays an increasingly important role in science and engineering. The
design of aircraft, sky scrapers, and automobiles; climate modeling and weather
prediction; and the development of new pharmaceuticals, are just a few of the
many endeavors that use computer programs to simulate natural phenomena. Yet
studies have shown that many of these programs are ridden with defects ("bugs")
that may lead to incorrect results. The same is true in other software domains,
but the problems with scientific software are particularly acute for several
reasons. Most significantly, much scientific software is "message-passing"
parallel software---designed to execute on "supercomputers" which are networks
of many thousands of processors. While there are many methods to help develop
verifiably correct sequential programs, few of these have been extended to
parallel programs. The "Design by Contract" methodology --- which works by
decomposing a program into parts that can be specified and verified
independently --- is one such approach, and has been successfully applied to
sequential programs in a variety of domains. Professor Siegel's project is
extending that methodology to apply to message-passing parallel programs,
enabling the development of much more reliable scientific and engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach generalizes and extends existing
contract specification and verification mechanisms in various ways. As in the
sequential case, a procedural decomposition is used, but each procedure can be
executed by multiple processes that are not necessarily running in lockstep. The
contract pre-conditions and post-conditions are interpreted as "collective
assertions". These are expressions that can refer to the state of multiple
processes and have a special semantics: to evaluate such an expression a
snapshot of the local state of each process is taken as it passes through the
assertion location; once a snapshot has been obtained from each process they are
composed to form a global state in which the expression is evaluated. Contracts
must also refer to the state of the message buffers, for example, to express
that there are no unreceived messages from one process to another. Symbolic
execution and model checking techniques are used to verify a procedure satisfies
its contract. These ideas are being realized as an extension to the Toolkit for
Accurate Scientific Software (TASS), and applied to programs written in C with
the widely-used Message Passing Interface.