* 1319849
* EXP: Local Ground: A Contextually Grounded Approach for Learning Data Science Skills
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Bamman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 556,190.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education Exploration project, researchers
focus on the challenge of helping students in grades 4 through 6 develop data
science skills -- understanding the significance of data and where it comes
from, and developing capabilities involved in manipulating data and using it to
draw conclusions and make informed decisions. The researchers are developing and
refining software, called Local Ground, designed to allow learners to collect
data relevant to local scientific or socio-scientific challenges and to help
learners manipulate those data and use them to achieve the challenge, in the
process developing charts, graphs, and narratives to be shared with others. The
system is designed to provide scaffolding that helps students iteratively
develop and refine representations and understandings of what their data
represent. It is designed to display and translate between a variety of distinct
representations. The intention is that Local Ground will act as an "auxiliary
stimulus" -- a cultural form wedged between students' naïve ways of thinking and
spontaneous inclinations to represent that thinking. The research team is using
use of Local Ground as a context for investigating fundamental questions
associated with developing data science skills, including how children convert
naïve representations into more usable and communicable forms, how and if those
forms are appropriate by others, how those processes support understanding of
core mathematic, statistical, and computational constructs, and the impact of
locally collected and relevant data on learning these
competencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding, manipulating, and using data
are essential skills for 21st century citizens. The researchers in this project
are exploring a new approach to helping pre-teens begin to develop data skills
and designing a software platform called Local Ground that supports 4th through
6th graders as they work on community projects they care about that require
significant data collection, manipulation, analysis, and application. The
pedagogical approach has students using data in sophisticated ways to address
issues of importance to their communities; the tool helps them successfully
gather, analyze, and use the data. In this context, the researchers are engaging
in research that will add to what is known about how to help young learners
understand core mathematical, statistical, and computational constructs
important to data use and analysis.