* 1319378
* III: Small: TwitterHealth: Learning Fine-Grained Models of Health Influences and Interactions From Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Henry Kautz, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 497,939.00

Current techniques for answering questions about the influence of behaviorial
and environmental factors on public health are based on surveys, which are
costly and subject to response bias, or simulations, which rely on possibly
incorrect or simplistic assumptions. The TwitterHealth project is developing
techniques to extract reliable public health information from social media. In
essence, the online population becauses a vast organic sensor network.
Statistical natural language processing techniques are employed to classify
tweets (or other social media postings) as self-reports of disease or particular
behaviors of interest. GPS information included in postings made from cell
phones allow a variety of behavioral information to be inferred about each user,
such as the venues visited and the other individuals from the data set who are
encountered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major technical challenges for using social
media in this manner are the highly noisy nature of the information channel,
scaling to a large number of different health conditions, and the need to
discover causal influences as well as correlations between behavioral and
environmental factors and health. The challenge of noise is approached by
learning dynamic relational models of health states, which generalize classical
epidemiological models but support individual as well as aggregate predictions.
The scaling challenge is dealt with by knowledge transfer techniques, which
reduce data and computational requirements by transfering information between
models for different health conditions. Specific knowledge transfer techniques
are cascaded training of a target classifier starting with a given classifier
for a related but different disease, and the use of ensembles of general and
specific classifiers. The challenge of inferring casuality is addressed by
temporal-lag methods, which identify changes in behaviorial or environmental
conditions that consistently precede changes in health. For example, the
inference that a venue is a cause (vector) of disease spread is accomplished by
tracing backward in time the GPS trails of users who post social media reports
of illness. TwitterHealth employs two approaches for validating its results:
first, comparing the aggregate predictions of the model against CDC statistics;
second, comparing individuals' behavior in reporting or not reporting disease
symptoms in status updates against the behavior predicted by the models. The
project also includes planning for clinic based evaluations, in which subjects
identified by their social media postings would provide swabs that would be
tested for disease agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TwitterHealth approach to
collecting and analyzing health information has the potential to improve public
health, by making detailed data about health, behavior, social structure, and
geographic influences available in real time and at almost no cost. While it
will not completely replace traditional methods of gathering health information,
it provides an important complementary information channel, which emphases
speed, reach, and scale. The project includes outreach expert medical
professionals in order to plan future clinical validation. The outreach
interaction provides a forum for exchange of computer science and medical
expertise between researchers and students in the two fields. Information about
the project is available online at
http://www.cs.rochester.edu/u/kautz/twitterhealth.