* 1319105
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Toward Trusted Third-Party Microprocessor Cores: A Proof Carrying Code Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Yier Jin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 09/30/2017
* USD 275,731.00

Third-party hardware Intellectual Property (IP), written as code in a Hardware
Description Language (HDL), is extensively used in modern integrated circuits.
Contemporary electronics typically include 75% of third party hardware IP and
only 25% in-house design to provide customization or a profit-making edge. Such
extensive use of third-party hardware IP in both commercial and military
applications raises security and trustworthiness concerns, especially in today's
globalized market. Malicious modifications to a module's HDL code may introduce
vulnerabilities, jeopardizing the security of the larger system within which it
is integrated. So how does one protect electronics from the threat of
potentially tampered with third-party hardware IP? To this end, this project is
developing a framework for facilitating acquisition of provably trustworthy
microprocessor cores. Drawing concepts from software proof-carrying code (PCC),
security-related properties are codified in a temporal logic to outline the
boundaries of trusted operation. In the case of microprocessor cores, these
security properties ensure that the microprocessor instruction set architecture
(ISA) does not introduce malicious architectural state changes, thereby
preventing attackers from using a programming interface to exploit maliciously
introduced hardware modifications. A formal proof of these security properties
is then crafted by the vendor and presented to the consumer, who can
automatically check correctness and validate compliance to the security
properties. An ecosystem for developing provably trustworthy microprocessor
cores, including a foundations framework, libraries, software tools, and
demonstrations, as well as an educational module on Trusted Integrated Circuits
and Systems are being developed as part of this project.