* 1319520
* CSR: Small: High-Level Programming Languages and Environments for Scalable Graph Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Martina Barnas, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2016
* USD 497,840.00

Graphs and graph algorithms are fundamental to computer science. Although
historically they have not played a major role in traditional scientific
computing, their importance is rapidly increasing with the emergence of
informatics and data-centric applications. Although many graph analysis tasks
are performed sequentially today, problem sizes continue to grow, necessitating
the increasing use of parallel computing. Parallel graph algorithms are already
being written, but with great effort and limited code reuse. A major issue in
current ways of implementing parallel graph algorithms is the lack of
performance portability: not only is it often required to reimplement algorithms
on different platforms for the best performance, it is frequently also necessary
to completely redesign them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To avoid this rewriting and
thus increase scientists' productivity, this project will study domain-specific
programming languages allowing graph algorithms to be expressed portably, while
using compilation techniques that allow the high-level expressions to achieve
performance competitive with hand-written, low-level code for these algorithms.
Domain-specific languages have already shown benefit in multiple application
areas. This project will extend their benefits further in the graph domain,
including to more platforms and data representations than in the past. In
particular, the project goals include finding abstractions common to the
expressions of graph applications on different platforms, as well as between
different applications. To demonstrate the effectiveness of these abstractions,
the project includes the creation of prototype implementations of graph
algorithms for a variety of high-performance computing platforms and the
evaluation of the high-level versions of algorithms against comparable low-level
versions.