* 1319137
* TWC: Small: A platform for enhancing security of binary code
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ramasubramanian Sekar, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,957.00

Cyberattacks are enabled by software vulnerabilities that allow attackers to
plant software exploits. As old vulnerabilities are found and fixed, attackers
continue to find new ones. As a result, software vendors, system administrators
and security professionals have come to rely increasingly on techniques that
insert additional code into software for detecting and/or blocking cyber attacks
in progress. This process, called software instrumentation, can be applied to
the broadest range of software if it operates on binary format in which most
software is distributed, rather than on source code. Moreover, binary based
techniques are more general: unlike source-codebased techniques, they are not
limited to a particular programming language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
major challenges in binary instrumentation is the complexity of modern
instruction sets. Accurate instrumentation requires the semantics of all
instructions to be captured, since all of the analyses and transformations
performed by the instrumentor are based on this semantics. Clearly, this is a
daunting task even for a single architecture: the Intel manual describing the
x86 instruction set runs to over 1500 pages describing over 1100 instructions.
When this task is multiplied across different architectures such as ARM,
PowerPC, SPARC, MIPS, etc, the effort involved becomes impractically large. This
project will develop a novel approach that avoids the need for modeling
instruction sets by leveraging knowledge embedded in retargetable code
generators in today's compilers such as GCC. This approach not only simplifies
the development of instrumentation, but also makes it applicable to all
architectures for which a code generator is available. Using this approach, this
project will develop a platform to support efficient, architecture-neutral
static instrumentation of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) binaries. Based on
this platform, this project will develop several effective instrumentations for
hardening software against common vulnerabilities.