* 1319567
* HCC: CGV: Small: Eyeglass-Style Multi-Layer Optical See-Through Displays for Augmented Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Henry Fuchs, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,997.00

For over two decades, researchers have shown the potential of augmented reality
(AR) to transform computer graphics into an everyday extension of human vision
that can enhance such diverse applications as medicine, manufacturing,
maintenance, smart offices, and navigation. However, there is virtually no use
of augmented reality by the public or industry today. The investigators believe
that this discrepancy is due largely to the lack of suitable high performance
and widely applicable augmented reality displays on which applications can be
deployed. The most capable AR displays available today, optical see-through
head-mounted displays (HMDs), generally lack four key qualities that prevent
their widespread use: wide field-of-view, non-encumbering, support for mutual
occlusion, and preservation of most depth cues. The investigators know of no
existing or proposed displays that feature all, or even most, of these
capabilities. This project takes a radically different approach to optical see-
through design that offers the potential to deliver all four missing qualities
in a compact form factor that approaches ordinary glasses. The approach relies
on a multi-layer display architecture that follows the principles of the
emerging field of computational displays - simple optical devices whose
functionality and complexity generally lies in software. This project applies
existing multi-layer optimization techniques from desktop 3D displays to optical
see-through HMDs, while exploring new approaches such as perceptual error
metrics, the use multiple layers for occlusion masks, and field of view zone
prioritization. This knowledge will be used to build prototype optical see-
through displays while handing such challenges as calibration, tracking,
computational complexity, and latency. The performance of this approach will be
robustly tested and evaluated in simulation, with calibrated cameras, and with
human viewers. The target device will transform augmented reality, allowing
society to take advantage of the diverse set of applications that have been
studied in AR. The proposed design is a radically different approach to optical
see-through displays that uses spatial light modulators and software
optimization to replace conventional reflective, refractive, and diffractive
optics. The ability to produce a focused image on a display placed closer than
the eye can accommodate without the use of lenses will be investigated. Sharing
of display components for both image formation and occlusion masking will also
be researched. The investigators will also explore the use of multi-layer
optimization to create multi-focal imagery, prioritize different areas over the
viewer's field of view, and facilitate eye
tracking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Research and practice have shown
the promise of augmented reality to improve such diverse areas as medicine,
accessibility, worker efficiency and communications. However, to date there is
very little use of augmented reality by the public or industry. This project
will lead to a high performance augmented reality display that is badly needed
to make the field practical and allow the public to reap the benefits of years
of visionary augmented reality research. The science and technology developed in
this project will open the use of augmented reality to a wider class of
researchers, similar to how the recent development of the commodity depth sensor
has permitted new opportunities for scientific inquiry.