* 1319458
* An Efficient Framework for Channel State Dissemination and Network Synchronization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* John McNeill, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 551,866.00

With the rapid proliferation of wireless devices in the last decade, it has
become increasingly important to efficiently utilize limited spectrum resources
through close coordination of devices in the network. While several advanced
techniques have been developed recently to address this problem, these
techniques require an accurate and consistent view of the channel states as well
as some degree of synchronization among the devices in the network to be
effective. The research plan in this project is focused on developing an
analytical framework and efficient techniques for channel state dissemination
and network synchronization to enable close coordination of devices in a network
and efficient utilization of the channel resources. The proposed research is
based on the view that, in order to determine the best use of the spectral and
temporal resources available to the network, channel state estimation and
dissemination should be performed continuously as part of the normal network
operation. By estimating and disseminating network channel state information
continuously through existing network traffic, devices in the network can
adaptively determine an appropriate network structure and mitigate the effects
of interference to facilitate efficient communication under current and
predicted channel states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foundational nature of the
research plan makes it broadly applicable in a wide range of wireless
communication systems such as cellular networks, wireless local area networks,
vehicular networks, and emergency communication systems. The analytical
framework and techniques for efficient channel state dissemination and network
synchronization developed on this project will impact emerging wireless
communication systems such as informed-transmitter multi-input multi-output
(MIMO), cognitive radio, cooperative relaying, distributed transmission, and
interference alignment. The proposed research will establish a solid theoretical
foundation for understanding the limits of minimum-staleness channel state
dissemination and clock synchronization in wireless networks and will also
include experimental verification through testbed implementations of the channel
state dissemination and network synchronization techniques.