* 1319080
* AF: Small: Algorithmic and Quantitative Semi-Algebraic Geometry and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Saugata Basu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 09/30/2017
* USD 368,837.00

Algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry lies at the heart of many problems in
several different areas of computer science and mathematics, including discrete
and computational geometry, robot motion planning, geometric modeling, computer-
aided design, geometric theorem proving, mathematical investigations of real
algebraic varieties, molecular chemistry, constraint databases, etc.

Recent breakthroughs in discrete and computational geometry have spurred new
research in real algebraic geometry, and there is a new synergy between these
two fields. The award funds research that contributes to both areas --
increasing our understanding of real algebraic geometry, and how it impacts
discrete and computational geometry. The main new ideas involved include more
intricate perturbation schemes of polynomials using infinitesimals, and novel
application of the well developed tool from differential topology -- namely,
Morse theory, including stratified Morse theory, used in the context of semi-
algebraic geometry. The results will potentially have far reaching impact in the
study of arrangements in computational geometry, computer graphics, robotics,
and even in areas of pure mathematics such as harmonic analysis. In addition,
the research aims at developing newer and more efficient algorithms for several
extremely important problems in algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry. These
include algorithms for computing "roadmaps", a crucial ingredient in deciding
questions of connectivity of semi-algebraic sets. These improvements will
potentially impact the way the vitally important problem of robot motion
planning is dealt with currently.

All these research objectives are integrated in a broad program of training
graduate students and curriculum development. In particular, graduate students
are involved in both aspects -- namely, proving theoretical results, as well as
practical implementations of algorithms.