* 1319496
* SHF: Small: Network Flow Approach to Functional Verification of Arithmetic Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Maciej Ciesielski, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 374,000.00

With the ever-increasing size and complexity of microelectronic systems,
hardware verification has become a dominating factor of the overall design flow.
One promising approach is formal functional verification of arithmetic circuits,
which attempts to prove correctness of the design with respect to its intended
arithmetic function. This problem is particularly challenging since Boolean
techniques, traditionally used in verification of control logic, are not
scalable to complex arithmetic designs. Efficient solutions to this problem will
contribute to the development of state-of-the-art tools for circuit
verification, increase design productivity, and lower the design development
cost and consumer prices.

The goal of this project is to develop efficient solution to verification of
arithmetic circuits without resorting to expensive Boolean techniques. It will
be accomplished by modeling the problem as a Network Flow problem, in which the
circuit is represented as a network of standard arithmetic components. The
computation performed by the circuit is modeled as a flow of binary data and
represented as an algebraic, pseudo-Boolean expression. Functional correctness
of the circuit is proved by transforming the algebraic flow expression at the
primary inputs into an expression at the primary outputs and checking if it
matches the binary encoding of the output. The method also offers a way to
extract the arithmetic function implemented by the circuit and identify bugs in
the design. The technique are applicable to complex arithmetic circuits, such as
newly developed adders, large multipliers, arithmetic logic units, and other
components of combinational and sequential data paths implementing complex
instructions.