* 1319180
* FSML: Outdoor research garden and rainwater collection system at Tyson Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Barbara Schaal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2015
* USD 368,721.00

This action funds a research garden and rainwater collection system at
Washington University's environmental field station, the Tyson Research Center
(TRC) in Eureka, MO. TRC's website is www.tyson.wustl.edu. The garden
complements other recent improvements at TRC that are substantially increasing
research productivity in landscape-scale manipulative ecological research,
terrestrial plant ecology and aquatic ecology; teaching activity including
research experiences for undergraduates; and public outreach integrated with
ongoing research. In addition to this recent increase in research and outreach
in the environmental sciences, TRC's commitment to sustainable facilities has
led to a recent diversification of TRC's user base, which now includes
architects, engineers, and artists, in addition to natural scientists. A recent
facilities plan identified the research garden and rainwater collection system
as high priority improvements needed to fully exploit the scientific and
educational opportunities made possible by the other improvements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conjunction with current renovation and construction
projects in progress, the research garden provides a centralized,
interdisciplinary research space that brings together researchers from their
various and widely-separated field sites, allowing for greater opportunities for
collaboration while supporting several NSF-funded research projects.
Additionally, the centralized location of the garden allows for greater teaching
and outreach opportunities by bringing a part of the field research at TRC into
view of student researchers, outreach visitors, and visiting members of the
public. Finally, this accessible, easy-to-use experimental space benefits TRC's
NSF-funded informal science education program by providing new opportunities for
including experimentation in field courses.