* 1319671
* SHF: Small: VeriQ: Formal Quantitative Software Verification in Realistic Application Scenarios
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Zhong Shao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2018
* USD 449,721.00

The goal of the VeriQ project is to develop techniques for the
formal&lt;br/&gt;verification of quantitative properties of software. Every
program&lt;br/&gt;requires a certain amount of resources such as memory, power,
and&lt;br/&gt;processor cycles to perform its task. A proof that the
resources&lt;br/&gt;provided by the hardware of the system are sufficient to
safely&lt;br/&gt;execute a program should be the first step in the verification
of that&lt;br/&gt;program. In addition to the verification of such resource-
usage&lt;br/&gt;bounds, there are a vast number of domain-specific
quantitative&lt;br/&gt;properties that are crucial for the correctness of
software. Finally,&lt;br/&gt;reasoning about quantities can simplify the
verification of&lt;br/&gt;non-quantitative properties such as termination. By
advancing the&lt;br/&gt;state-of-the art in quantitative verification, VeriQ
facilitates the&lt;br/&gt;development of reliable, efficient and predictable
software systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators focus on three
technical goals that are among the&lt;br/&gt;most important problems in the
field of quantitative verification.&lt;br/&gt;First, they develop an automatic
and compositional resource analysis&lt;br/&gt;for programs that are written in
high-level languages with garbage&lt;br/&gt;collection, side effects, and
higher-order functions. Second, they&lt;br/&gt;apply the techniques from
resource analysis for high-level languages&lt;br/&gt;to simplify the reasoning
about quantitative properties of realistic&lt;br/&gt;system code with concurrent
execution and advanced control flow.&lt;br/&gt;Third, they investigate the
relationship between quantitative&lt;br/&gt;properties and liveness properties
with the goal of utilizing&lt;br/&gt;quantitative reasoning techniques in
correctness proofs of software&lt;br/&gt;verification.