* 1319086
* NeTS: Small: Endpoint User Profile Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Aleksandar Kuzmanovic, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2017
* USD 478,445.00

The Internet has transformed from a small non-profit network into a gigantic
infrastructure that creates revenues measured in billions of dollars.
Unfortunately, this has created an unprecedented pressure on the end user's
privacy by trackers and information aggregators, because a user's profile is
used to determine which personalized content (e.g., ads, search results,
recommendations, etc.) will be served to the given user. The common goal of the
trackers is to gather a more perfect user profile in an attempt to increase
revenues from content personalization. Such user profiling can often be misused.
For example, signs of price and search discrimination have been recently
reported. Others argue that content personalization, which creates the so-called
'filter bubble' effect, has an even more profound impact on the society and in
particular on the future of democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes
endpoint user profile control as a comprehensive approach to the above
personalization-induced problems. In the PI's approach, the user has the ability
and means, which this project will develop, to explicitly define and implicitly
control its profile at all possible trackers at once. The PI will develop and
implement endpoint user profile controller as a thin sub-layer that 'sits'
between the end-user and endpoint client applications. The controller imprints
the desired user profiles by leaving controlled online footprints in the public
domain, e.g., by actively visiting web pages from a set of selected topics,
sending search queries semantically linked with the user-defined profile etc.
This allows users to submit their preferences to all possible trackers they
encounter, granting the user a single point of control over their profiles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research will address
fundamental questions that are key to developing and deploying effective
endpoint user profile control. The main challenges are how to effectively
control numerous ad trackers at once and how to achieve this in a scalable and
effective manner. The PI's focus will be on the control of (i) ad trackers, (ii)
web site trackers, (iii) search engine trackers, (iv) social-network trackers,
and (v) information aggregators. The PI will develop statistical methods to
accurately evaluate the properties of these trackers in order to effectively
control them. The proposed techniques range from statistical rule mining to
developing comprehensive scoring, noise-reduction, and orthogonal probing
algorithms that are necessary for effective
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: By empowering the user to
explicitly and comprehensively control his user profile on the Internet, the
system will not only help users regain their online privacy, but also enhance
human liberties and promote free and open society. This will be possible to
achieve without scrutinizing the online advertising industry, which is
effectively funding today's Internet. The proposed system is capable of
achieving this goal in a realistic and feasible way, without the adoption of a
complex infrastructure. The PI plans to design and disseminate endpoint user
profile controller as easy-to-use browser extensions, plug-ins, and mobile
applications, which will enable effective endpoint user profile control.