* 1319786
* SHF: Small: CDSChecker: Model-Checking Concurrent Data Structures under the C11/C++11 Memory Model
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Brian Demsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 399,997.00

Society has long relied on increasing computing power to
drive&lt;br/&gt;technological development. Continuing this trend in the multi-
core era&lt;br/&gt;will require a large scale migration to parallel software. As
an&lt;br/&gt;acknowledgment of the new importance of parallelism in
software&lt;br/&gt;development, the 2011 C and C++ standards extended C and C++
with&lt;br/&gt;language support for low-level atomic operations to allow
developers&lt;br/&gt;to write portable efficient concurrent data
structures.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, implementing concurrent data structures is
extremely&lt;br/&gt;difficult to do correctly. Despite the difficulties, we
expect that&lt;br/&gt;the potential performance benefits will lure many
developers, both&lt;br/&gt;experts and others, to attempt to develop customized
concurrent data&lt;br/&gt;structures. Without tool support, this will inevitably
lead to&lt;br/&gt;potentially costly failures in deployed
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore techniques for
efficiently model checking&lt;br/&gt;concurrent data structures under the C/C++
memory model and support&lt;br/&gt;for developers to effectively use a model
checker for testing and&lt;br/&gt;debugging code. These techniques will be
implemented in the form of a&lt;br/&gt;concurrent data structure checking tool,
CDSChecker, that will be&lt;br/&gt;developed by the this project. The project
will develop efficient&lt;br/&gt;model-checking techniques for the C/C++ memory
model, explore how to&lt;br/&gt;specify the correct behavior of concurrent data
structures, explore&lt;br/&gt;how to support testing and debugging of concurrent
code, and explore&lt;br/&gt;how to effectively communicate information about
concurrency bugs to&lt;br/&gt;developers.