* 1319142
* EAGER: Revisiting Catalyst Design in Heat-Exchanger Microreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Benjamin Wilhite, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2015
* USD 57,460.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Wilhite, Benjamin &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Texas A&amp;M&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1319142&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER:
Revisiting Catalyst Design in Heat-Exchanger
Microreactors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficient catalytic conversion of natural
gas (methane) to hydrogen and/or synthesis gas remains a critical challenge for
both emerging clean energy industries and existing petrochemical and natural gas
markets. Development of efficient, meso-scale high-purity hydrogen generators
operable from natural gas would allow immediate conversion of existing natural
gas resources to an emission-free hydrogen fuel. Realization of cost-effective
technologies for efficiently converting methane to synthesis gas (for subsequent
conversion to synthetic crude oil) facilitates the direct substitution of
abundant natural gas for dwindling petroleum resources with a minimal disruption
to existing petrochemical infrastructure. Heat-exchanger microreactors, capable
of efficient thermal coupling of exothermic methane combustion with endothermic
steam reforming provide a robust platform for meeting these challenges. Current
heat-exchanger microreactor designs employ thin catalytic washcoatings placed
directly over the microchannel wall, such that heat transfer between endothermic
(steam reforming) and exothermic (combustion, partial oxidation) processes occur
via conduction across both catalyst films, in addition to the intended heat
transfer medium (i.e. microreactor wall). This represents a subtle yet
significant departure from catalyst pellet designs, as heat may be supplied or
removed from the center of the catalyst film (as opposed to the adiabatic center
condition present in pellet designs). To date heat exchanger micoreactors have
employed uniformly thin catalyst films to prevent the development of any
internal heat- or mass-transfer resistances. The PI?s previous research results
in the field of membrane microreactor design have illustrated that introducing
significant mass transport resistances in catalyst films can provide
breakthroughs in overall system performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
12-month exploratory effort to determine whether unconventional catalyst designs
aimed at introducing significant heat-transport resistances to catalyst films
employed in heat exchanger&lt;br/&gt;micoreactors can achieve breakthroughs in
catalyst and heat utilization. This hypothesis will be explored through detailed
computational fluid-dynamic (CFD) simulations of an industrial
radial&lt;br/&gt;microreactor (RMR) under development for this application.
Experimental data for refining and validating CFD simulations will be provided
by Power &amp; Energy, Inc. in support of this fundamental research effort. The
research is both novel and high-risk / high-gain, as the PI intends to introduce
significant heat-transfer resistances at the catalyst- and reactor-scales to
manipulate reaction-transport phenomena. The design strategy thus stands in
contrast to traditional catalyst and reactor-design principles aimed at
minimizing transport limitations, as well as current practices in heat exchanger
microreactor design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Fundamental
knowledge gained under this award is expected to be of broad value to the
microreactor and process-intensification community. Fundamental analysis and
design simulations will be disseminated through publication in peer-reviewed
research journals emphasizing reactor design, including Chemical Engineering
Journal, Chemical&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Science, Industrial &amp; Engineering
Chemistry Research and AIChE Journal. Findings will also be disseminated through
research presentations at ACS and AIChE national
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Breakthroughs in hydrogen
production from natural gas, or biogas, directly support the development of a
sustainable energy economy with commensurate environmental and economic
advantages. Advances in hydrogen or synthesis gas technologies meet critical
industrial needs in the petrochemicals and natural gas industries, with
commensurate economic advantages.