* 1319944
* CGV: Small: Collaborative Research: Theories, algorithms, and applications of medial forms for shape analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Erin Chambers, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 127,123.00

Shape analysis is a fundamental problem in computer graphics and vision. A
significant body of research over the past few decades has centered around the
medial axis, a classical geometric structure introduced by Blum in 1967. Not
only does the medial axis provide a low-dimensional representation that captures
both the shape and topology of the object, it also creates derivative shape
descriptors that measure useful shape properties, such as thickness. This
collaborative project that involves two partner institutions builds on that body
of research and extends it in two important and related directions. First, the
PIs will generalize the definition of medial axis to systemically define a
sequence of medial representations of successively lower dimensionality (e.g.,
medial curve and medial point of a 3D object) that all inherit the essential
properties of the medial axis. These representations, called medial forms, are
useful in various applications such as shape matching and decomposition. While
algorithms for computing low-dimensional skeletal structures are abundant, sound
mathematical definitions have not yet been developed. Second, based on the
medial forms, the PIs will introduce a set of shape descriptors that can
characterize non-uniform (or anisotropic) expansion of shape. These descriptors
will not only be able to differentiate plate-like and tubular parts, but also to
measure the amount of plate-like stretching and tube-like elongation. Shape
anisotropy is common in 3D objects, and is important for deriving knowledge from
digital models, particularly in biological research. However, none of the
existing descriptors can characterize this important aspect of 3D shape. The PIs
will build on their recent study of 2D objects to develop the mathematical
foundation and computational algorithms of medial forms of 3D objects, and will
explore their use in analyzing shape anisotropy through several derivative shape
descriptors. They will formalize the definitions of medial forms of a 3D object,
and will examine their properties including their dimensionality, topology, and
sensitivity to boundary perturbations. Based on the definitions, the PIs will
develop efficient algorithms that create provably good approximations of the
medial forms given discrete samples of an object. The PIs will explore how a
variety of derivative anisotropy-aware descriptors, in the forms of either
geometric skeletons or surface signature functions, complement existing
descriptors in shape modeling applications (e.g., segmentation and matching) and
in biological shape analysis.

Broader Impacts: The new mathematical formulations and shape descriptors will
contribute significantly to both the theoretical and applied side of computer
graphics. The ability to characterize shape anisotropy will directly translate
to more accurate and efficient analysis of shapes in various application
domains, and the PIs will particularly explore their use in understanding
biological shapes. The team will develop and distributable online software that
implements the new algorithms. Students, both at the undergraduate and graduate
level, will be actively recruited with an emphasis on diversity, and in addition
project outcomes will be used in outreach programs at local middle- and high-
schools.