* 1319914
* RI: Small: A Generic Mid-Level Representation as Object Part Hypotheses for Scalable Object Category Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Benjamin Kimia, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 474,000.00

This project develops a fragment-based intermediate-level representation for
images based on shape and appearance, with shape playing the primary role. The
representation can be populated in a bottom-up, category-independent fashion,
which at the same time can be efficiently accessible by top-level, category
dependent processes. The inherent ambiguity in generating object part hypotheses
is resolved by combinatorially forming alternative image fragments by standard
as well as novel perceptual operations, taking into account both shape and
appearance, and both region-based and boundary-based cues. The exponential
growth of the number of fragments is managed under a best-first graph
representation that avoids duplication, leading to a sufficient number of
diagnostic recognizable object parts among a vast pool of fragments. The project
also explores an embedding of these fragments in a metric similarity space via
proximity graphs and a geometric index structures for efficient nearest neighbor
search. The final outcome is a representation space and an index for scalable,
logarithmic object category recognition. A key aspect of this work is that
categories themselves are also represented in a hierarchical similarity space,
and this computationally implements ideas akin to Rosch?s basic level
categorization.

The broader impacts of this activity spans a vast number of applications: any
application which benefits from scalable object recognition such as indexing
into databases, e.g., searching in a database of trademarks, engineering
drawings and computer generated graphics, content-based web search, aerial
tracking and recognition of vehicles, automated animal behavior analysis, and
many others.