* 1319527
* CSR:  Small:  Online Global Reconfigurations in Key-Value and NoSQL Cloud Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Indranil Gupta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2017
* USD 479,998.00

Key-value and NoSQL storage systems are growing and predicted to become a multi-
billion dollar industry sector within a few years. This project targets global
reconfiguration operations in this new generation of storage systems. Today such
operations largely involve exporting and then re-importing entire databases,
thus making data unavailable for long periods of time. The project will first
design efficient online algorithms for a variety of global reconfiguration
operations, with the twin goals of making such operations efficient, while
continuing to support fast read and write actions on the data at all times. We
will then implement and build our solutions into real production code, with a
focus on existing and widely-used open-source systems software. This work
requires a carefully orchestrated mix of algorithmics with systems design and
implementation. Our systems will be evaluated using industry benchmarks and
traces, and in production clusters.

The project will augment existing widely-used key-value and NoSQL storage
systems software with the much-needed ability to support online reconfiguration
operations. Our work will produce open software and meaningful datasets. Thus
our innovations and systems will be directly available to, and impact
positively, both providers of key-value and NoSQL stores as well as a variety of
customers ranging from small to large companies. On the educational front, the
project will address the dearth today of learning materials for key-value and
NoSQL stores by developing and disseminating course materials for this area.
Additionally, we will incentivize entrepreneurial activities centered around
key-value and NoSQL technologies.

