* 1319406
* AF: Small: Geometric Data Processing and Analysis via Light-weight Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Yusu Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 05/31/2017
* USD 481,393.00

In the current era of information, large amounts of complex data are routinely
generated across science and engineering. Geometric and topological data
analysis is a major component involved in organizing, analyzing, as well as
utilizing the huge amount of data generated. As data becomes more complex and
high dimensional, it can be computationally formidable to compute and maintain
even local structures from data. Hence it has become crucial to identify and use
light-weight structures that can be efficiently computed, maintained and/or
manipulated; while at the same time are also sufficiently informative.

This project will focus on two such light-weight structures: the Reeb graph and
the Gaussian-weighted graph Laplacian. Both of them have already been
extensively used for various data analysis applications. Nevertheless, there are
many theoretical and algorithmic questions about them that need to be addressed
to better understand their behavior, their potential, as well as to further
their practical usage. This project aims to address these issues, develop a
solid theoretical foundation as well as efficient algorithms for their practical
usage, and investigate novel geometric processing applications based on these
two objects.

Data analysis is a fundamental problem in computational science, ubiquitous in a
broad range of application fields in science and engineering. The intellectual
value of this project lies not only in developing novel computational geometry
algorithms and techniques, but also in transferring the results and insights to
practical applications. Results from this project, especially algorithms and
software, will be disseminated to a large scientific community so as to
potentially produce a broader impact in scientific and engineering endeavors.