* 1319501
* CSR: Small: Power Efficient Emerging Heterogeneous Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 466,000.00

This project addresses the problem of design space exploration for high-
performance embedded computing platforms. Such systems are increasingly
heterogeneous, and include powerful multi-core microprocessors (CPUs), many-core
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), and Digital Signal Processors (DSPs). Despite
the availability of these powerful platforms, many barriers exist for
application developers and platform designers to reap the full benefits of these
devices. Some of these challenges include finding effective mappings of
applications to a wide range of heterogeneous compute platforms and
defining/exploring the most appropriate memory interfaces.

The goal of the project is development of a Heterogeneous Design Environment
(HDE), that will allow one to define algorithms at a high level, and automate
the search of the design space to select hardware and software implementations
to meet desired objectives. Towards this co-design goal, the research includes
investigation of methods of expressing algorithms at a conceptual, functional
level; exploration of static methods of analyzing parallelism of applications;
and extending simulation frameworks to support and accurately model power and
performance on CPUs, GPUs, and DSPs at different levels of abstraction. The
target application domain for proof of this concept is computer vision, one of
the fastest growing market sectors within embedded high-performance computing,
in which applications tend to be data-driven, compute-hungry and power-
constrained.

The Heterogeneous Design Environment is expected to simplify development of
power-efficient embedded computing applications across a set of heterogeneous
devices. By providing a rich set of design exploration tools in the context of
industry-standard programming frameworks, such as Multi2Sim and OpenCL, the
project aims to accelerate the pace at which new computer vision applications
are developed. Integrated education and outreach activities include new
development of new courseware, delivery of tutorials, involvement of
undergraduates, participation in a summer program for middle-school students,
and use of the HDE in undergraduate and graduate courses.