* 1319556
* CIF: Small: Realizing Millimeter Wave Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Robert Heath, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2017
* USD 494,940.00

Cellular networks are challenged by the limited spectrum available at microwave
frequencies. In the past several years, various technologies have been proposed
to achieve ultra-high levels of spectral efficiency involving the use of
multiple antennas, serving multiple users, and shrinking cell sizes. Many of
these technologies have significant potential but do not provide the high data
rates due to the limited spectrum available. An alternative is to use the
millimeter wave (mmWave) band between 3-300 GHz to provide high bandwidth
communication channels. Realizing mmWave cellular communication, however,
requires addressing the fundamental difference between mmWave and microwave
communication. mmWave networks will require high gain directional antennas at
the transmitter and receiver to overcome path loss at higher frequencies and to
ensure sufficient signal-to-noise-ratio at the receiver. These directional
antennas must be implemented using a combination of analog and digital signal
processing techniques, due to power hungry mixed signal hardware. The cellular
systems must be designed to support highly directional transmission and
reception from their inception, and must also deal with the increased impact of
signal blockages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will establish the
potential of millimeter wave cellular networks by incorporating the key features
and constraints of mmWave communication. To understand the potential of such
networks, this project will develop mathematical tools to analyze the
performance of large-scale millimeter wave cellular networks, explicitly
incorporating directional antennas and blockages. To enable robust
communication, this project will create communication strategies that are
simultaneously suitable for the harsh millimeter wave propagation environment
and the limited capabilities of millimeter wave hardware. To leverage potential
coexistence with lower frequency signals, this project will investigate the
design and analysis of a hybrid-access system that exploits the coexistence of
microwave and mmWave cellular systems. A main theme in the research thrusts is
to incorporate key features of mmWave communication into the algorithms and
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project's theory,
algorithms, and architectures are expected in diverse areas. The mathematical
tools developed in this research will impact the design and realization of
cellular networks with directional communication. The signal processing
algorithms based on array processing and stochastic geometry will pave the way
for a new understanding of millimeter wave wireless communication. Industry
impact will occur through the Wireless Networking and Communications Group
(WNCG) industrial affiliates incorporating the results of the research into
their wireless networking technologies. The project will foster the training of
graduate students in course projects and will reach out to the community through
public demonstrations.