* 1319045
* TWC SBE: Option: Small: Building Public Cyber Health -  Designing and Testing the Efficacy of a School-Focused, Gamification Approach to Create a Secure Computing Environment
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Noel Greis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 653,975.00

As the frequency and complexity of cyber attacks increase, approaches to create
secure computing environments must look beyond technical barriers that protect
from the outside to building a collaborative culture of cyber health from the
inside. Use of online incentives have been shown to be an effective tool for
enhancing an individual's engagement with a task. This project explores the use
of online incentives and social networking to improve an organization's cyber
health by coalescing the micro cyber behaviors of individuals within the
organization to create a more secure computing environment. Schools represent an
ideal setting in which to test such a new model for cybersecurity. Teachers,
faculty and parents are motivated to keep students safe and secure. Further,
most students today are very technologically savvy, which introduces technology
as an ideal means by which to teach students about cyber risks and how to avoid
those risks--and to reinforce good cyber behaviors while reducing bad behaviors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project approaches the school as a system in which
cybersecurity is improved and maintained through the use of digitally-mediated
interventions that combine online psychological incentives for student
engagement and social networking to reinforce social and authority figure
influences. In short, the project broadly aims to "build cybersecurity in" by
engaging multiple stakeholders to help build a more robust public cyber health
system. The effectiveness of incentives in building collective cybersecurity
awareness and reinforcing positive cyber behaviors is being explored through
intervention experiments that are implemented in three student populations: 1)
elementary school students who are being exposed to supervised use of digital
devices, both in a school environment and at home, for the first time; 2) middle
school students who are "experimental" users of digital devices and have limited
awareness of cybersecurity concepts; and 3) college students who have been shown
to demonstrate risky cyber behaviors that often put them and other university
stakeholders at risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent success in school-based
public health interventions to modify personal health behavior informs the
project's approach to building public cyber health. In particular, the well-
known Health Belief Model provides a lens for exploring how individuals balance
belief in their susceptibility to a cyber threat against their belief in the
effectiveness of the proposed mitigating behavior when deciding whether to adopt
that behavior. However, there are important differences between public health
and cybersecurity. Online incentives, used in public health in particular, have
been shown to be most effective in modifying behaviors that individuals already
know they should perform and that they already know how to perform. This
research will explore whether interventions delivered through digital devices
can be successful in both changing an individual's current risky behavior and
introducing new safe behaviors, at various ages. To assess the impact of the
interventions, throughout the study data will be collected on individuals'
cybersecurity knowledge, perceptions and behaviors using surveys and by
monitoring intervention experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
novel public cyber health interventions developed in this project will provide
benefits that cascade over the long-term to businesses that hire participating
students, additional organizations that adopt the intervention techniques, and
the broader cyber community. In the near term, this project will directly
benefit student participants, as well as teachers and parents, by improving
their cybersecurity knowledge, perceptions, and behaviors, thus reducing their
risks. Thereafter, the techniques developed will be made widely available for
use by other schools and organizations, and as individuals become more secure,
the project's impacts have the potential to be further amplified by
participants' security behaviors outside of the organizational environment.
Further, specific at-risk groups are being targeted in the study?two of the
student populations participating provide unique challenges to our research as
well as unique rewards if our research is successful. The elementary school
population will be drawn from a charter school composed exclusively of minority
youth in North Carolina that face significant social, economic, and educational
challenges. The middle school partner, located in a rural, economically-
challenged eastern North Carolina, is struggling to provide the technical skills
that its students need to succeed in the wider global economy.