* 1319658
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Geometry-aware and data-adaptive signal processing for resource constrained activity analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Anuj Srivastava, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2017
* USD 175,001.00

The task of characterizing human activities using multimodal sensing and
automated inference techniques is critically important in many applications.
Human activities when observed using traditional audio and video sensors, as
well as novel emerging sensors such as depth cameras, orientation sensors, and
smart personal devices, result in complex, high-dimensional spatiotemporal
signatures that are difficult to analyze. The sources of difficulty are many:
high data throughput, the need for sensor registration, variable execution rates
associated with activities, pose variability in sensing, the non-Euclidean
nature of feature spaces due to physical constraints on environments and actors,
and data corruption due to occlusions. The current techniques, involving
Euclidean representations and multivariate analyses, fall short in
characterizing human activities, as they do not handle non-Euclidean structures
nor obtain invariances to pose and execution rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research uses tools spanning differential geometry, statistics and signal
approximation theory to develop novel frameworks for characterizing human
activities. These fundamental tools lead to comprehensive solutions that are
applicable to a broad swath of traditional and emerging sensors. The salient
aspects of this approach are: 1) geometry awareness, encompassing both classical
Euclidean as well as non-Euclidean feature spaces, 2) invariance to sensor
placement and execution rate tightly integrated into the representation, and 3)
data adaptivity leading to low bitrate representation of human activities for
reduced communication and low computational scenarios. Applications of this
research include monitoring of human activities using off-the-shelf sensors in
resource-constrained environments, such as at homes and on mobile devices.