* 1319998
* AF: Small: Multiscale Spectral Signatures for Local and Multi-objective Biological Network Alignment
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Carleton Kingsford, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 480,000.00

Within many environments, there are hundreds or thousands of microbial species
that interact in a community. These communities can be determined from
metagenomic sequencing projects in which DNA is collected from an environment (a
sample of seawater, a patch of soil, etc.). The communities can be represented
using ecological networks where nodes correspond to species and edges represent
inferred or known relationships between the microbes (competition, symbiosis,
etc.). Microbial communities in different environments or over time can then be
compared by comparing their networks. One computational approach for this
comparison is to align the networks by finding regions of local similarity, a
new application of network alignment. However, network alignment is a
computationally challenging problem for which there are no algorithms that have
sufficient speed, accuracy, and generality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop improved algorithms for network alignment to compare microbial
ecological networks and for other applications in computational biology. Network
alignment has found wide adoption in computational biology to compare biological
pathways, to correct errors in networks, and to form hypotheses about the roles
of genes with unknown function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Improved alignments between networks for different environments
or time points will help identify conserved patterns of interactions, truly
functional relationships between microbes, and bacteria that are performing
similar functions within different microbial communities. The algorithms
developed by this project will also lead to more accurate prediction of protein
function and protein interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach taken by
the project will use two primary algorithmic innovations, which will lead to
substantially more useful local network aligners. The first is the development
of a new signature for describing the similarities between network nodes based
on their connections and attributes and the connections and attributes of other
nearby nodes. This signature is based on the eigenvalues of subgraphs
representing regions of the network around each node. Preliminary work has shown
that such a multiscale spectral signature results in global network alignments
that are more accurate, and more efficiently computed, than those using other
approaches. The second main algorithmic innovation for this project is the
explicit modeling of network alignment as an optimization problem with multiple
objectives. This will allow the new aligners to handle the often-competing
requirements on alignments so that they can find regions of networks that have,
for example, genes with similar sequences and similar interaction partners.
These innovations will lead to more accurate, high-quality alignments yielding
new biological insight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This
project has three aspects to its broader impact. An educational tablet
application will be developed that will teach graph theory to high-school
students. This interactive application will introduce a beautiful, approachable,
yet sophisticated, branch of mathematics to a group of students who often would
not have the chance to study it. In addition, the project personnel will
participate in programs at Carnegie Mellon University that aim to introduce
middle-school girls to technical topics by presenting the new techniques.
Finally, while the focus is on biological applications, the techniques and
software developed as part of this project are expected to be useful in graphics
and vision applications, such as object recognition in photos.