* 1319455
* NeTS: Small: Practical Strategies for using MIMO to Mitigate Interference in High-Density Uncoordinated Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Douglas Blough, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,941.00

Interference between neighboring wireless networks is a serious problem in high-
density deployments. As one well-known example, WiFi networks in dense
deployment areas can experience severe performance degradation. Current
approaches efficiently share available bandwidth between networks, but do not
address the underlying interference problem. One potential approach is multiple-
input multiple-output (MIMO) interference cancellation. While the theory of MIMO
interference cancellation is well understood, it has not been deployed due to
practical limitations. This project is designing, evaluating, and implementing
practical solutions to MIMO interference cancellation. Ideas being studied
include Consistent Access Point Orientation to reduce the complexity of
gathering channel state information, Proportional Fairness with Interference,
which enables better MIMO link scheduling, multi-level scheduling to reduce
computational overheads, tit-for-tat policies that encourage access point
cooperation, and Guided CSMA/CA to guide nodes toward a scheduled execution.
Approaches are being implemented and evaluated within the ns-3 network simulator
using accurate physical layer models, and are also being tested on a software-
defined radio platform.

This project aims to significantly boost performance of wireless networks, such
as WiFi networks and femtocells, that operate in dense deployment areas. The
approach taken enables each network to use the full available bandwidth of the
wireless channel regardless of surrounding interference. The project is expected
to produce algorithms and protocols to enable MIMO interference cancellation
techniques to be adopted in practical network settings. The project will also
contribute to the research infrastructure by implementing support for MIMO
interference cancellation the ns-3 network simulator and making the enhancements
available to the research community.