* 1319270
* Improved Cyberinfrastructure To Support Coral Reef Research And Education At The Hawaii Institute Of Marine Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Jo-ann Leong, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 235,778.00

The Hawai'i Institute of Marine Biology (HIMB) at the University of Hawai'i is
awarded a grant to upgrade its communication and data storage capacity to take
advantage of a 10 Gigabit fiber optic cable line that is being provided by
Hawaiian Telecom to Coconut Island from the Oahu main line. The HIMB research
community generates large amounts of highly heterogeneous data stemming from
diverse experimental sources, such as DNA sequencing data, confocal microscopy
image analysis, and environmental data sensors on the surrounding coral reefs.
The high magnitude and diversity of the data collected and used by researchers
at HIMB impacts the island?s data network, the storage and computational
capacity, and requires a modular and timely approach to data management with
robust underlying infrastructure that can efficiently handle it. Thus, HIMB has
designed a complete upgrade of its cyber infrastructure. These improvements will
take place in two phases: Phase I involves the upgrade of the entire HIMB
Network, including the replacement of the central networking and data storage
equipment, as well as the deployment of a single centralized HIMB wireless
access network throughout the island. Phase II will provide a secure data
storage facility and set of user-friendly, web-based data transfer and analysis
software. A description of the research facility and its faculty is available at
http://www.hawaii.edu/HIMB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new HIMB portal system
will significantly enhance the ability of HIMB researchers to collaborate and
share data with other researchers at UH and across institutions, as well as work
with resource managers and NGOs to extend the availability and utility of their
research findings. HIMB will be able to extend access to HIMB data resources to
faculty at UH Manoa main campus and Community Colleges for use in their courses
and research. For example, with improved cyberinfrastructure, we can offer
opportunities for college students to remotely operate the confocal microscope
to view images of live marine organisms. HIMB is a partner in the NSF Pacific
Climate Education Partnership teacher Institute and COSEE Island Earth. This
partnership will be delivering teacher summer institutes on climate change
science to middle school teachers in Hawaii, American Samoa, Republic of the
Marshall Islands, and Palau or the Mariana Islands. The greater bandwidth of the
new HIMB system will enhance these teacher institutes by making available real
time data exploration.