* 1319353
* CSR: Small: Managing Multicore Energy for Emerging Applications and Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Kai Shen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 433,673.00

Multicore systems-on-a-chip have permeated every segment of
the&lt;br/&gt;digital market, from servers and supercomputers, to desktops and
smart&lt;br/&gt;phone/mobile devices. Innovative applications continue to emerge
that&lt;br/&gt;integrate user interactivity via mobile devices with the power
of&lt;br/&gt;high-end computation and large-scale storage. These applications
tend&lt;br/&gt;to demonstrate dynamic and diverse execution behaviors,
requiring&lt;br/&gt;close tracking in order to manage resource consumption.
Inherent&lt;br/&gt;application behavior variations and resource requirements,
coupled&lt;br/&gt;with complex interactions due to contention for shared
resources,&lt;br/&gt;present new challenges for efficient, dependable, and
sustainable&lt;br/&gt;advances in computing and information
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop foundational system
mechanisms to manage&lt;br/&gt;individual cores, memory, and power/energy
consumption on&lt;br/&gt;multicore-based systems, and explore resource
allocation policies that&lt;br/&gt;use these mechanisms. A new online multicore
power model will allow&lt;br/&gt;power and energy tracking at a fine-grain
level, combining available&lt;br/&gt;hardware-based power measurements with
event-based modeling and&lt;br/&gt;attribution of power for shared resources.
Accuracy will be improved&lt;br/&gt;via coarse-grain measurement-triggered
online model recalibration. A&lt;br/&gt;new operating system mechanism, power
containers, will be developed to&lt;br/&gt;allow application-defined boundaries
for resource tracking, breaking&lt;br/&gt;from the traditional thread and
process boundary resource tracking in&lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art operating
systems. Further optimizations will be&lt;br/&gt;explored to lower the overhead
of resource tracking, allowing online&lt;br/&gt;power accounting to scale to
large core and resource counts. Finally,&lt;br/&gt;new techniques will be
developed to enable use of the power containers&lt;br/&gt;to control and isolate
power usage in an application-defined manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will enhance the power protection, energy efficiency,
and&lt;br/&gt;dependability of multicore-based computer systems. The
techniques&lt;br/&gt;developed can be broadly applied to emerging dynamic
applications in&lt;br/&gt;data centers, desktops, and mobile devices. In
particular, power&lt;br/&gt;containers will identify and mitigate (either
malicious or&lt;br/&gt;unintentional) power anomalies (execution that results in
unusually&lt;br/&gt;high power consumption), in both high-end servers and multi-
core and&lt;br/&gt;multi-accelerator smart phones. The success of this project
will&lt;br/&gt;contribute to the long-term sustainability of the world's
fast&lt;br/&gt;evolving digital economy and society.&lt;br/&gt;