* 1319432
* III: Small: Enabling Declarative Querying and Analytics over Large Dynamic Information Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Amol Deshpande, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

In this project, we are building a graph data management system and a suite of
tools aimed at supporting real-time, historical, and analytics queries over very
large, dynamic, heterogeneous, and noisy information networks. Examples of such
information networks include social networks, communication networks, financial
transaction networks, citation networks, gene regulatory networks, disease
transmission networks, ecological food networks, sensor networks, social contact
graphs, and many more. Network data is most naturally represented as a graph,
with nodes representing the entities and edges denoting the interactions between
them. There is, however, a lack of established data management systems that
provide declarative frameworks for querying and analysing such graph-structured
data, especially very large volumes of heterogeneous, complex-structured, and
rapidly changing data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we are developing
a set of formalisms that include: (a) a declarative query language for graph
data, (b) a declarative framework for specifying complex, iterative network
analysis tasks like entity resolution, link prediction, etc., and (c) a general-
purpose neighborhood-centric distributed programming framework. Our declarative
interfaces and the programming framework are based on "Datalog", a well-
established database query language, providing the users or the analysts a
consistent abstraction of the graph data to specify their queries or tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are designing a suite of techniques, algorithms, and
index data structures, to efficiently store large volumes of time-evolving graph
data, and to execute queries and analysis tasks over it. We are addressing the
challenges in minimizing network communication overhead during distributed
computation through designing new partitioning and adaptive replication
techniques. We are also developing a compression-based approach to minimize the
resources needed for graph processing, and a framework for extrapolating missing
historical information to enable querying over incomplete historical traces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Managing and reasoning about graph data is increasingly
becoming crucial in many real-world application domains including social media,
e-science, disease epidemics, and financial markets, to name a few. The
frameworks and tools that we are developing make it easier and more intuitive
for domain experts and analysts to process, analyze, and extract insights from
large volumes of dynamic time-evolving graph data. Our system enables temporal
evolutionary analytics over very large historical traces, and continuous and
real-time analytics over highly dynamic graphs, thus enabling a rich class of
applications that would not have been possible before. The declarative
frameworks and the query language that we are developing have the potential to
transform and streamline the highly fragmented research area of graph query
processing and analytics. This project provides research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, and is aligned with several undergraduate
and graduate courses offered by the PI. For further information, see the project
web site at: http://www.cs.umd.edu/~amol/GrDB