* 1319280
* III: Small: Fast and Efficient Algorithms for Matrix Decompositions and Applications to Human Genetics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,10/31/2016
* Petros Drineas, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2016
* USD 329,455.00

Linear algebraic algorithms, and in particular matrix decompositions, have
proven extremely successful in the analysis of datasets in the form of matrices.
Tools such as the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) and the related Principal
Components Analysis (PCA) have had a profound impact in diverse areas, ranging
from web search engines to the physical sciences. Over the last decade, the
introduction of randomization provided a new paradigm for the design and
analysis of such algorithms. On the other hand, human genetics researchers are
now finding out how truly different we are from one another. Large datasets
describing the common patterns of human genetic variation may be easily thought
of as matrices, with the rows representing individuals and the columns
representing loci in the genome that correspond to common polymorphisms. The
broader impact of such datasets can not be overemphasized: they are expected to
be a key resource for researchers to use to find genes affecting health,
disease, and responses to drugs and environmental factors, as well as
understanding the evolutionary and biological history of our species. The main
objective of this proposal is to bridge the gap between state-of-the-art
algorithms for data analysis developed in the theoretical computer science and
applied mathematics communities and the application of such algorithms to the
analysis of the increasingly larger volume of datasets in the human genetics
community. The particular focus of our proposal is, from an algorithmic
perspective, the design and analysis of (supervised and unsupervised) randomized
algorithms for the so-called CX matrix factorization, and, from a population
genetics perspective, the selection of ancestry informative and disorder
associated markers, as well as ancestry and affection status prediction. This
work will have immediate impact in the analysis of population genetics data. The
results will be disseminated to a broad community of applied mathematicians,
theoretical computer scientists, and population geneticists