* 1319212
* TWC: Small: Unsupervised and Statistical Natural Language Processing Techniques for Automatic Phishing and Opinion Spam Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Rakesh Verma, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 09/30/2019
* USD 408,167.00

In phishing, an attacker tries to steal sensitive information, e.g., bank/credit
card account numbers, login information, etc., from Internet users. The US
society and economy are increasingly dependent on the Internet and the web,
which is plagued by phishing. One popular phishing method is to create a site
that mimics a good site and then attract users to it via email, which is by far
the most popular medium to entice unsuspecting users to the phishing site.
Because of this modus operandi and the damages caused by phishing, it is
important to design efficient and effective classifiers for emails and web
sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, new techniques, inspired from
natural language processing methods, are being designed for phishing email and
web site detection. They are then implemented and validated rigorously on
realistic data sets. They are also applied to automatic detection of opinion
spam. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed research is expected to: (i) be useful in
pushing the envelope of natural language processing techniques, and (ii) yield
new applications of these techniques in cyber security. In the past, the PI has
been very successful in involving women and minorities including
underrepresented minorities in his research and this effort will be continued in
this project. University of Houston has been recognized as a Hispanic-serving
institution and the PI will continue his past successful efforts to involve
underrepresented minorities including African Americans and Hispanics in this
research. This research will be moved into the classroom and broadly
disseminated through publications and software on the web.