* 1319483
* CGV: Small: Mesh-based Simulation of Thin Liquid Structures
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2014,02/28/2017
* Eitan Grinspun, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2017
* USD 515,998.00

In this research the PI will develop efficient mesh-based algorithms to simulate
the dynamics and interactions of thin liquid structures such as sheets, jets,
bubbles, and films. The thin geometry of these liquid phenomena poses tremendous
difficulties for traditional techniques, leading to long runtimes and excessive
memory consumption. The PI argues that a fundamentally different approach that
recognizes and exploits the unique geometry of thin liquids is needed in order
to simulate them efficiently and accurately (by analogy with the special
treatment of thin elastic bodies such as rods, plates, shells). The project is
comprised of three thrusts. First, the PI will develop algorithms for the
dynamic simulation of liquid bodies composed of high viscosity threads and
sheets, including physical modeling, collision processing, topology changes, and
mixed dimensional remeshing. Second, he will address the specific challenges of
low viscosity jets and sheets, considering in particular the enhanced influence
of surface tension, sheet breakup, and the choice of Eulerian vs. Lagrangian
evolution. Finally, he will examine the deformations of films, bubbles, and
foams, using a new mesh-based representation for deforming multi-region
interfaces, coupled to the fluid dynamics of the surrounding air. In each
thrust, the predictive power of the techniques developed will be validated
against both experimental observations and theoretical results from the
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To these ends, the PI will bring several
geometric and computational techniques from the dynamics of thin elastica to
bear on the dynamics of thin fluids. The PI believes this cross-pollination of
ideas has the potential to provide dramatic improvements in efficiency and
accuracy, while yielding computational tools that complement theory and
experiment in the study of thin fluid phenomena. By considering a thin material
as a lower dimensional object (curve or surface) with an associated thickness,
the dimension of the problem can be reduced, yielding improved numerical
properties and better allocation of degrees of freedom. This perspective has
never before been applied to develop computational techniques for three-
dimensional thin liquids. The use of non-manifold meshes to represent mixed
bodies of thin liquids also opens up previously unexplored challenges in mixed
dimensional remeshing and the handling of topological transitions. Furthermore,
the proposed surface tracking representation builds on robust collision-
processing techniques originally applied to cloth animation, and will offer the
first surface mesh-based technique for the evolution of multi-material
interfaces. This will allow for more accurate tracking of bubbles and general
multiphase flows than can be achieved with state-of-the-art implicit surface
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Thin liquids are crucial to a
broad class of problems in computer graphics, engineering, and scientific
applications. Liquid animations are increasingly prevalent in visual effects-
driven films, yet thin splashes remain among the most difficult effects to
animate. Thin threads and sheets of viscous liquids arise in applications from
food processing to cosmetics, from the geophysics of the earth's crust to the
forming and blowing of elaborate glass artwork. They are the subject of
substantial concurrent experimental and theoretical investigation, and
complementary computational tools for these problems could offer vital new
insights. The potential applications for low viscosity liquids and foams are
equally wide-ranging. Project outcomes will be reported at major international
venues including the SIGGRAPH conferences, and the associated computational
tools will be made publicly available. A variety of education and outreach
efforts, some of which specifically target minority middle school students, are
also planned.