* 1319078
* Numerical Study of Electrokinetic Bioparticle Transport Through Fluid-Structure-Electric Interaction
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jin Wang, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 213,901.00

This proposal aims to develop a new computational framework to simulate
electrokinetic bioparticle transport in microfluidics devices involving complex
fluid-structure-electric interactions. Due to the complicated nature of multi-
physics and multi-scale phenomena, several important numerical issues have to be
addressed: (1) Numerical stiffness and convergence challenges due to the strong
fluid-structure interactions; (2) Resolution of unsteady phenomena such as
wakes, separation and vortices induced by interactions of flows with deformable
moving boundaries; (3) Convergence and accuracy challenges imposed by the strong
electric-structure interactions. The investigator and her team propose to use
the lattice Boltzmann equation (LBE) for the fluid motion because of its
accuracy (low dissipation/low dispersion and better isotropy) and computational
advantages including its excellent parallel scalability, absence of the need to
solve a time consuming elliptic Poisson-type equation for the pressure field,
and ease of representation of complex boundaries on Cartesian grids. The
immersed boundary method (IBM) is chosen to track the deformable moving
boundaries for its ease of implementation without re-meshing to generate the
body-fitted mesh. Relaxation and multigrid methods are used to solve the
electric field represented by Laplace equation. A central theme of this proposal
is to advance the capability of LBE, IBM and multigrid techniques through a more
rigorous mathematical formulation of these methods combined with their numerical
analysis, as well as through the application of existing numerical algorithms in
conjunction with the development of novel efficient numerical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main motivations for this study
comes from the Lab-on-a-chip (LoC) application, important for bio-medical,
pharmaceutical, and environmental industries. Well-controlled manipulations of
bio-particle transport are the basis of the working principle of LoC. For
instance, electrical cell separation by deformability in a microfluidic
reservoir can be demonstrated using the proposed numerical framework, which will
benefit inexpensive point-of-care diagnostics of pathogens that affect the
biomechanical properties of human cells such as parasite-infected red blood
cells in malaria. The project will complement and advance the current knowledge
of particle electrokinetics in microfluidic devices, and build the fluid
mechanics foundation for the design and electric control of future bioparticle
manipulation microdevices. In addition, this proposed research will be
intimately integrated with undergraduate and graduate education programs.