* 1319259
* EDU:Collaborative:Re-energizing K-12 Extramural Programs with Security Activities
* EHR,DGE
* 06/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Kate Lockwood, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 03/31/2016
* USD 299,782.00

The proposed project intends to expand and mature the extramural STEM program
Cyber Adventurers through collaboration between the California Polytechnic State
University, California State University Monterey Bay, Hartnell Community College
and the Lyceum of Monterey. The project seeks to include Cybersecurity topics
appropriate for its target audiences: middle school, high school, and
undergraduates early in their career. The project seeks novel ways to bring
Cybersecurity topics into existing curricula at the K-12 and undergraduate
levels to address the widening gap between the supply and demand for qualified
Cybersecurity professionals. The developed Cybersecurity lessons will be
accessible to a broad audience and synergize with existing programs in formal
and informal education contexts. This intervention will inform students early in
their education about careers in Cybersecurity; help to understand the value of
digital assets and related Cybersecurity issues; create activities to engage
students in Cybersecurity lessons typically reserved for advanced computer
science majors; and present Cybersecurity as an interdisciplinary concern
relevant to a variety of STEM fields. The Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
(SaTC) program funds proposals that address Cybersecurity from a Trustworthy
Computing Systems perspective; a Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
perspective; and proposals focusing entirely on Cybersecurity Education.

The project will design activities that synergize with existing K-12 STEM
programs. It will increase interest in those existing programs, diversify those
programs, engage new audiences, and educate that Cybersecurity is relevant
across a variety of STEM fields. The collaboration network of two K-12 schools
and three post-secondary schools will unite interested practitioners and
researchers, and will facilitate community building among STEM stakeholders in
the Central Coast region of California. The dissemination strategy has the
potential to impact and inform other projects at the national level.