* 1319005
* FSML: Improvements to the Keys Marine Laboratory Seawater System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Nancy Thompson, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 161,052.00

The Keys Marine Laboratory (http://keysmarinelab.org) is awarded a grant to
upgrade and expand its existing seawater system to provide a state of the art
research capability on-site. The Keys Marine Laboratory (KML), in the Florida
Keys, is an educational and research laboratory serving researchers, faculty and
students from around the world. This enhanced seawater system will provide KML
users with year-round high quality, on-demand seawater to conduct laboratory
experiments and hence allow on-site research not previously possible. The
upgraded system provides the ability to recirculate and manipulate water
quality, temperature, and pH into a variety of tanks, allowing for recirculation
and effluent treatment, including filtration and UV sterilization. The proposal
leverages prior improvements supported by the Florida Fish and Wildlife
Conservation Commission (FWC). Water from the treatment facility (built with FWC
funds), will flow into a series of head tanks where temperature and pH
adjustments take place. A set of heaters and chillers provide temperature
control and similarly, injected carbon dioxide regulates pH to desired levels.
The head tanks then deliver water, via pumps, to the experimental tanks. The
experimental tank setup will allow for experiments requiring replicate ability
at varying volumes and a variety of temperature and pH combinations. Larger
tanks will be equipped with the capacity for water recirculation. Recirculation
allows for further control and manipulation of water, increased filtration, and
provides a safeguard against upstream failures or contaminations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new seawater system will provide a basis for research
on tropical and sub-tropical ecosystems, including living marine resources, with
global implications. In particular the ability to manipulate water quality to
represent past, present, and future conditions will provide an improved
scientific understanding and anticipation of the range of impacts to systems and
living marine resources. In this way, forecasts can provide best case and worst
case scenarios in addition to intermediate scenarios, which will guide resource
management actions. For example, research on coral under future climate
scenarios will provide new insights into coral productivity and vulnerability.
It is estimated that coral reefs support a $4.4 billion industry in South
Florida alone by providing a habitat for fishery resources for recreational and
commercial fishing and through recreational snorkeling and diving activities. As
such, they are not only of scientific curiosity, but are also of economic
importance and a means of educational outreach to a broader audience.