* 1319606
* CGV: Small: Collaborative Research: Immersive Visualization and 3D Interaction for Volume Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* David Laidlaw, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2017
* USD 249,955.00

This collaborative research project (IIS-1320046, IIS-1319606) designs a
3-dimensional immersive visualization environment for volume data that is
critical in a variety of application domains, such as medicine, engineering,
geophysical exploration, and biomechanics. For example, biomechanics researchers
examine volumes derived from insect scans to understand how form relates to
function, particularly in regard to how insects create internal fluid flows. For
effective analysis of a 3D volume, scientists and other users need to integrate
various views, peer inside the volume, and separate various structures in the
data. However, despite many advances in volume rendering algorithms, neither
traditional displays nor traditional interaction techniques are sufficient for
efficient and accurate analysis of complex volume datasets. This project
develops an approach for interactively exploring and segmenting volume datasets
by combining and extending: (1) utilization of advanced, high-fidelity displays
based on virtual reality (VR) technologies for improving the visual analysis of
volume data, and (2) the use of natural, gesture-based 3D techniques. Using
controlled, empirical studies with real-world volume datasets from biomechanics
and other biological sciences, the investigators are determining what
characteristics of advanced displays can lead to faster, more accurate visual
analysis. Iterative design and evaluation methods are being used to develop
usable and natural 3D interaction techniques with which users can explore the
interior of volume datasets. Beyond the empirical findings of these studies, an
important outcome of the project is the design of a next-generation volume data
analysis system that can be used by scientists and researchers to improve the
efficiency and accuracy of their work.

The expected results will provide a deep understanding of visualization
principles fostering further advancements in the realm of volume data analysis.
Easier, more accurate, and faster analysis can lead to improvements in
healthcare, breakthroughs in science, and advances in education. For example,
this work may lead to insights into fundamental physiological mechanisms of
feeding, breathing, and circulation in insects - one of the most important
animal groups on earth. There are millions of insect species living in almost
every habitat, and their lifestyles have profound impacts on human societies.
Their effects in areas such as agriculture and health can be both positive
(e.g., pollination) and negative (e.g., crop damage, disease), and understanding
their fundamental physiologies is critical to controlling their impact. The
project provides opportunities for interdisciplinary educational and research
activities for graduate and undergraduate students, and outreach activities to
underrepresented students. The results of this work will be disseminated broadly
via publication in archival journals, peer-reviewed conferences, and online
forums. The project website (https://research.cs.vt.edu/3di/node/188) will
provide access to research results, including data sets and software.