* 1319732
* AF: Small: Efficient Algorithms for Rectangular Layouts and Cartograms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Xin He, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2017
* USD 349,986.00

A "rectangular layout" L is a partition of a rectangle into a set of disjoint
smaller rectangles by vertical and horizontal line segments. L is said to
"represent a graph G" if the smaller rectangles correspond to the vertices of G
one-to-one, and two vertices are adjacent in G if and only if their
corresponding rectangles share a common boundary in L. An "area assignment
function" of L is a specification of the area of each rectangle in L. L is
called a "rectangular cartogram" if the areas of the rectangles in L equal to
their specified areas. L is called "area-universal" if it can realize any area-
assignment function.

Rectangular layouts have applications in VLSI, architectural design,
computational geometry, geographic information system, and other practical
fields. Extensive research works have been done in this area. But many
interesting problems remain open. The PI will study several open algorithmic
problems related to these structures: (1) How to decide if a given graph G has
an area-universal layout? (2) Given an area-universal layout L and an area-
assignment function a, how to compute the coordinates of the cartogram for a by
using a combinatorial algorithm? (3) Not all plane graphs have rectangular
layouts. If G does not have one, how to find a representation of G by using
recti-linear polygons of more complex shapes? (4) Another useful subclass of
rectangular layouts are "slicing floorplans". Many optimization problems are NP-
complete for general floorplans, but polynomial time solvable for slicing
floorplans. How to decide if a given graph G has slicing floorplans or not?

The PI aims to develop efficient algorithms for solving these problems. This
research will make both theoretical and practical contributions. On the
practical side, many problems discussed above are motivated by real-world
applications. On the theoretical side, the algorithmic tools developed in this
project include several important graph-theoretic constructions, and are related
to some open questions in graph theory and combinatorics. While the four
problems outlined above are interesting and important, they are by no means the
only problems in this field. The techniques developed in this research are
likely useful in solving related problems. Two graduate students will work on
this project under PI's supervision. The topics covered in this research will be
taught in an advanced algorithm course.