* 1319667
* RI: Small: Fast, Cheap, and In Control: New Methods for Precision Navigation of Low-Cost Autonomous Underwater Vehicles for Ocean Science
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Louis Whitcomb, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

A novel class of small low-cost unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) is beginning
to perform oceanographic, environmental assessment, and national security
missions that are faster and less expensive than previous methods such as large
high-cost UUVs, human-piloted vehicles, and human divers. A significant
limitation of small low-cost UUVs is their low-cost navigation systems which
presently limit them to missions requiring comparatively low-precision
navigation. This project is developing new methods for high-accuracy navigation
with low-cost sensors to provide dramatically improved navigation accuracy for
low-cost UUVs. The three-part approach (1) employs Doppler sonar velocity
measurement and low-cost low-power inertial measurement units to estimate
attitude; (2) develops nonlinear model-based state estimators employing a full
nonlinear model of the vehicle's second order plant dynamics; and (3) utilizes
underwater acoustic modem networks to provide simultaneous acoustic
communication and acoustic range and range-rate data, and employ these data for
improved underwater vehicle navigation. Experimental validation of these methods
includes full-scale experimental trials with two disparate testbed underwater
vehicles. Dissemination of the results includes research publications and more
general public outreach. This project involves hands-on training and mentoring
of undergraduate students and graduate students. The undergraduates will be
involved in the research, and will also serve as mentors in a program which
provides introductory engineering experiences for middle school girls in the
Baltimore area through half-day weekend programs on the Johns Hopkins University
campus. This research will enable UUVs to perform missions requiring high
navigation accuracy that are presently considered either impractical or
infeasible with existing low-cost UUVs.