* 1319680
* SHF: Small: RUI: Generating High Quality Trace Links through Intelligent Composition of Tracing Features
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Jane Huang, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 529,383.00

Software traceability serves a critical role in ensuring that software systems
operate correctly. It is used to support a wide variety of software engineering
activities such as change management, compliance verification, and safety
analysis. Unfortunately current practices fall far short of delivering cost-
effective traceability, primarily because creating and managing trace links in
large and/or complex systems is time-consuming, arduous, and error-prone. These
problems were highlighted in a recent report entitled 'Critical Code: Software
Producibility for Defense' commissioned by the Department of Defense. The report
stressed the need for the research community to develop cost-effective and
accurate traceability solutions. While state of the art tracing techniques offer
significant promise for reducing the cost and effort of tracing, they fall short
of meeting industrial needs primarily because the quality of the generated links
is imprecise. This work will investigate ways to integrate techniques from
feature modeling, product line development, artificial intelligence and machine
learning to deliver a dynamically configurable trace infrastructure. The
framework will then be used to investigate and integrate a broad set of novel
tracing techniques which are expected to significantly improve the quality of
generated trace links.

The results of the project will contribute towards the development of software
intensive systems, especially safety-critical ones in which traceability is
mandatory. Technology transfer will be facilitated by delivering solutions on
the TraceLab platform, disseminated via the Center of Excellence for Software
Traceability (CoEST.org) and through training materials targeted at industrial
users. Ongoing research opportunities will be provided for a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students, and pedagogical materials will be developed
and made publicly available for use in a variety of courses on requirements
engineering, software engineering and software architecture.