* 1319924
* NeTS: Small: Meta-Networking Research: Analysis, Partitioning, and Mapping Tools for Large Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Sonia Fahmy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2017
* USD 325,785.00

This project attacks the pressing research problem of scaling and semi-
automating large network experiments. Networking research is technically
challenging due to the great scale and heterogeneity of protocols and devices in
the Internet that researchers need to experiment with. To address this the
project will investigate and tackle the problems of resource limitations and
experimental artifacts of the testing platforms and scaling techniques. Work to
date has either focused on control plane protocols (e.g., routing simulators),
or solely considered the data plane. This project's goal is to conduct
experiments that are joint control plane and data plane at a scale not
previously possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project project includes three
complementary efforts to address experimentation scale challenges by
designing:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Experiment Mapping Tools and Taxonomy: The
project will design a general framework, taxonomy, and a set of tools to bridge
the current gap between testbed users and large-scale testbed experiments that
use multiple scaling techniques. The user can supply hints on desired fidelity
of different components, and these will be used to determine a high fidelity
mapping for the experiment.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Experiment Analysis and Partitioning
Tools: The project will design methods to model complex dependencies between
components of a large-scale experiment to facilitate planning and mapping. These
models may also allow partitioning the large experiment into maximally
independent smaller experiments that can be sequentially executed to mimic the
large experiment.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Applications to Case Studies: The project will
use a range of large experiments as applications, focusing on problematic
experiments including (a) experiments to understand the effect of
misconfigurations, attacks, and defenses on Internet infrastructure (e.g.,
scalability of RPKI, effect of worms or DDoS on BGP, BGP policy conflicts), (b)
experiments for anomaly detection, and (c) experiments with cloud
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will help identify and deploy
scalable protocols that will enable the Internet to securely accommodate
increased traffic volumes. Impacts of the research include the development and
public dissemination of general-purpose experimental tools, large-scale testing
techniques, methodologies for the use of testing frameworks, and related
graduate-level courseware. The PI will undertake significant outreach efforts to
simulation and testbed teams, e.g., DETER/Emulab, GENI, AutoNetkit, ns-3, and to
industry. The PI will actively involve undergraduate and graduate students from
under-represented minority groups in computer science in the research and
educational efforts, and will organize a DIMACS workshop on project topics.