* 1319152
* RI: Small: BCSP: Robustness and Adaptation in Morphogenetic Collective Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Hiroki Sayama, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2017
* USD 376,567.00

The objective of this project is to understand the roles of general
morphogenetic principles such as heterogeneity of components,
differentiation/re-differentiation of components, and local information exchange
among components in the self-organization of biological collectives, and to
utilize them to improve the performance of collective artificial systems. The
research is conducted in the following four steps: (1) Study the effects of
morphogenetic principles on self-organizing patterns of heterogeneous
collectives using mathematical/computational models. (2) Apply the results of
theoretical investigation to construct models of actual self-organizing patterns
found in real-world heterogeneous biological collectives. (3) Introduce the
morphogenetic principles to existing collective artificial systems and develop
mechanisms for programming their structures and behaviors. (4) Measure the
overall performance of the proposed morphogenetic collective systems in
decentralized optimization and exploration tasks. This research contributes to
biology and ecology by providing new theoretical insight into how heterogeneous
collectives may self-organize without centralized control, and also to
computational science and engineering by bringing an unexplored combination of
morphogenetic principles into bio-inspired computational systems. It is expected
to produce societal impacts by providing a novel framework for the design of
growing, self-organizing, self-repairing, and evolving artifacts. This project
involves the following educational activities: (1) Interdisciplinary graduate
certificate program in complex systems science. (2) New course on computational
approaches to the origin and evolution of life. (3) Regional high school
research program. (4) Public exhibition of morphogenetic collective systems at
New York Hall of Science. Efforts will be made to attract female and ethnic
minority students who are currently underrepresented in STEM.