* 1319720
* Efficient Methods for Electromagnetic and Acoustic Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Yassine Boubendir, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 214,568.00

The investigator proposes a family of new algorithms to respond to the
increasing demand for computational efficiency and/or accuracy for acoustic and
electromagnetic problems. The main idea of this project consists in adequately
combining several numerical techniques such as finite elements, integral
equations, and domain decomposition methods. The investigator plans to develop a
quasi-optimal non-overlapping domain decomposition method for Maxwell's
equations using an appropriate approximation of the Dirirchlet to Neumann
operator. In the case of partially coated dielectric objects, the following are
proposed: (1) design well-conditioned integral equations; and (2) use these new
integral formulations to introduce a novel robust domain decomposition method,
where the iteration operator is only defined on the aperture interface. It is
also proposed to explore hybrid algorithms for large and complex bodies such as
aircraft and satellites. In particular, the investigator plans to couple finite
elements, localization techniques of the Dirirchlet to Neumann map, and
substructuring methods to deal with scatterers with large platforms where
dielectric objects and deep cavities are attached. Parallel computing and
mathematical analysis will be used to help achieve these goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is concerned with the improvement of
computational tools required to face rapidly increasing engineering and
industrial needs. Indeed, the computation of acoustic and electromagnetic waves
is a vast area of research. This is largely due to breadth of applications, many
of which have imposed technological requirements in systems, such as noise
reduction, oceanic scattering, optical fibers, stealth technology, radar design,
remote sensing, and many others. In developing modern aircraft, which consist of
many very different components, engineers use high performance computing and
innovative mathematical algorithms to enhance performance and optimize passenger
safety. This procedure reduces the cost of the design, and allows to rapid
response to new technological advances as well as minimization energy
consumption. The results obtained through this research plan will be made
readily available to engineers and scientists in the aerospace industry, which
will contribute to enhancing U.S leadership in this field. In addition, this
work can be used in the areas of underground water flow in hydrology, oil
recovery in petroleum engineering and fluid flow through body tissues. Several
aspects in this project will benefit the education of both undergraduate and
graduate students, and will train them in state-of-art scientific computing and
mathematical analysis. This will reinforce their preparation to face future
challenges in science and technology.