* 1319811
* AF: Small: Approximation Algorithms for Uncertain Environments and Graph Partitioning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Anupam Gupta, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2017
* USD 406,298.00

This project focuses on research and teaching activities in the general area of
approximation and online algorithms. Many optimization problems are intractable,
so it is natural to approximate the optimum instead of computing an exact
solution. With this insight, the past two decades have seen tremendous activity
in approximation algorithms, to the point where the approximability of some
basic problems is well-understood. In addition to this enhanced understanding of
the computational complexity of optimization problems, an ever-increasing set of
techniques and tools to attack problems old and new have been proposed. Given
this situation, it is natural to take a two-pronged plan of research: while
continuing to resolve some of the long-standing open problems of interest, the
investigator will concurrently extend the scope of the new techniques, and also
investigate more expressive models and problem abstractions that attempt to
capture the rich diversity of optimization problems that arise in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along these lines, a major theme of this research
is to investigate how to solve optimization problems in the presence of partial
information, and hence uncertainty. This is something often considered in
practice: based only on probabilities of various events happening in the future,
and subject to constraints on resources (time/money), a system must make
decisions. In the spirit of computational thinking, this research is aimed at
formalizing some of these problems so that efficient solutions can be found for
more realistic models than the traditional worst-case model. Research progress
on these questions will advance the state-of-the-art in decision-making under
uncertainty, an area lying at the intersection of computer science, operations
research, and decision theory. This research will also be instrumental in
training of graduate and undergraduate students.