* 1319206
* AF: Small: Research in Complexity and Related Areas
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Emanuele Viola, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2017
* USD 493,824.00

Computational inefficiency is a common experience: the computer cannot complete
a certain task due to lack of resources such as time, memory, or bandwidth.
Computational complexity theory classifies -- or aims to classify --
computational tasks according to their inherent inefficiency. Since tasks
requiring excessive resources must be avoided, complexity theory is often
indispensable in the design of a computer system. Inefficiency can also be
harnessed to our advantage. Indeed, most modern cryptography and electronic
commerce rely on the (presumed) inefficiency of certain computational
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to make
progress on several mutually enriching directions in computational complexity
theory, including problems at the intersections with algorithms and
cryptography. Building on the principal investigator's (PI's) previous works,
the main proposed directions are:&lt;br/&gt;- computational tasks whose inputs
are distributed among several computers which communicate either by broadcast or
through a dynamic network,&lt;br/&gt;- structures that store data compactly
while allowing efficient answers to queries,&lt;br/&gt;- linking the
inefficiency of computational tasks by establishing reductions among them,
and&lt;br/&gt;- compiling any cryptographic protocol into a circuit that remains
secure even when in the hands of an adversary who observes it during
execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is closely integrated with a plan
to achieve broad impact through education. The PI is reshaping the theory
curriculum at Northeastern on multiple levels. At the undergraduate level, the
PI is working on and using in his classes a set of lecture notes aimed towards
students lacking mathematical maturity. At the Ph.D. level, the PI is including
into core classes current research topics including some of the above. Finally,
the PI will continue to do research working closely with students at all levels.