* 1319147
* EDU: Competing to Build Secure Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Atif Memon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Even as security has long been a tenet of good programming practice, developers
continue to produce insecure software resulting in a litany of data breaches and
other compromises. This project aims to improve education on secure software
development and add evidence to understanding methods, tools, techniques, and
other factors that best contribute to writing secure code. The project centers
on a novel multiphase programming competition that combines ideas from two
traditionally disparate kinds of contests: those for building code and those for
finding bugs in others' code. In phase one, contestants are tasked with building
secure code. In phase two, contestants perform vulnerability analyses to attempt
to break the code submitted by the other contestants in the first phase. The
original builders finally aim to fix exploits discovered in phase two to recover
lost points. Educators, practitioners, and policymakers broadly view secure code
as important, and yet there is little consensus as to how best to teach and
encourage secure-programming practices. By developing a competition, this
project creates a setting that is more engaging to students, improving learning
outcomes, and moreover enables greater insight into both practice and pedagogy
through the analysis of data on how the participants approach secure
programming, what techniques they use, and what methodologies succeed or fail
for different programming tasks. The educational impact is significant, as the
competition scales to hundreds of participants over two years, improving the
design of the contest based on each offering. The artifacts and data produced by
this project are made freely available to assist secure-programming endeavors
across educational institutions. Finally, the students involved in the design,
implementation, and execution of the contest are trained in advanced research
and pedagogical methods.