* 1319798
* CSR: Small:Collaborative Research: Data Center Demand Response: Coordinating the Cloud and the Smart Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Amir-Hamed Mohsenian-Rad, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 172,969.00

Data centers have become both significant consumers of electricity and
substantial sources of greenhouse gas emissions, and so a focus on energy-
efficient computing has emerged. Until now, the most common approach for
improving sustainability of data centers is a ?local? one, e.g., installing
rooftop PV panels. This project takes a different, more ?global? approach: it
allows data centers to contribute towards improving the sustainability of the
electricity grid as a whole, in order to meet data centers' social
responsibility as major energy consumers. Interestingly, engaging in such global
sustainability efforts will, in turn, provide data centers with new
opportunities to gain financial benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
coordinate data centers with the smart grid through programs such as demand
response, which allow the utilities to signal consumers to reduce or increase
consumption as needed in order to stabilize the grid and tackle the
unpredictability of the renewable energy resources. New resource management
algorithms for data centers will be developed to facilitate their participation
in demand response and other electricity market programs; and the responsiveness
that data centers can provide the smart grid through such participation will be
quantified and optimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is truly
interdisciplinary as it requires a deep understanding not only about data
centers and cloud computing but also about electricity markets and the smart
grid. In particular, the results will help data centers in terms of both their
choice of which electricity market programs to participate in and how to
participate in such programs. Additionally, this project will help utility
companies in the design of electricity market programs that encourage maximum
data center responsiveness to better operate the grid and to reduce the price of
electricity.