* 1319384
* SHF: Small: Inference and Checking of Context-sensitive Pluggable Types
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Ana Milanova, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 315,058.00

Pluggable types allow programmers to extend a language's type system to enhance
program correctness and program security. Unfortunately, pluggable types require
annotations in the program, and therefore, place a burden on programmers. This
annotation burden is one reason why pluggable types have not been widely adopted
in practice. This project will develop techniques that will allow programmers to
realize the benefits of pluggable types without incurring the annotation burden.
One concrete application (and thrust of the project) tackles security and
privacy of Android apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pluggable types will become more
important, as JSR 308 (Type Annotation Specification) becomes part of Java 8 in
2014. The PI has developed a framework for inference and checking of context-
sensitive pluggable types. The framework is instantiated to nontrivial systems
and has inferred and checked close to a million lines of Java code in a modular
and compositional manner. The key innovations in the framework are (i) support
for context sensitivity, which allows instantiation to precise type systems such
as Purity and Ownership, and (ii) a scalable inference engine, which allows type
inference with zero or very small number of programmer annotations. The key
insight is that viewpoint adaptation, a concept from Universe types, elegantly
enables context sensitivity, both in the specification of the type system and in
the type inference analysis. The project will advance the framework towards
applications in concurrency, sustainable computing and security. Notably, the
project will leverage the framework towards modular and compositional
information flow analysis for Android; this will help address standing issues
such as (i) the large Android library, and (ii) implicit information flow.