* 1319602
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Bio-inspired Collaborative Sensing with Novel Gliding Robotic Fish
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Xiaobo Tan, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2017
* USD 257,315.00

Monitoring and understanding aquatic environments is critical to water
sustainability. The goal of this award is to establish a theoretical framework
and provide an enabling technology for robust underwater collaborative sensing
with small, inexpensive robots. Inspired by the source-seeking behavior of live
fish, computationally efficient algorithms are developed for cooperative tracing
of the gradients of environmental fields, and their robustness is analyzed in
the presence of localization error and changing communication topology. The
algorithms are experimentally validated in thermal source seeking and tracing
with a group of energy-efficient and highly maneuverable gliding robotic fish,
which are enhanced in this project with optical communication and localization
capabilities. Advanced controllers are developed for these robots to realize
three-dimensional maneuvering and to track reference paths planned through
collaborative sensing algorithms. This award offers fundamental understanding of
limits and robustness properties of collaborative sensing by resource-limited
robots, and contributes to the knowledge base in underwater communication and
ranging for small robots. It enables technological advances for persistent
sampling of versatile aquatic environments including coastal waters, lakes, and
rivers, with a myriad of applications such as oil spill response, ecological
monitoring, and port and drinking water security. The findings from this project
are disseminated through publications, software sharing, and technology
commercialization. The project provides interdisciplinary training opportunities
for students, including those from underrepresented groups. Outreach activities,
including museum/aquarium exhibits and teacher training, are developed to pique
the interest of K-12 students, teachers, and the public in science and
engineering.