* 1319981
* CIF: Small: Sparse Signal Processing Methods for Inference of Differential Gene Regulatory Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Xiaodong Cai, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 375,000.00

Genes in living cells interact with each other and form a complex network to
regulate molecular functions and biological processes. Recent studies have shown
that gene regulatory networks (GRNs) can undergo substantial rewiring when cells
respond to different environmental signals. More generally, differential changes
of GRNs can occur depending on environment, tissue type, disease state,
development and speciation. Identification of such changes in GRNs is thus an
important step to fully understand how GRNs work, and may have profound impact
on the understanding of various biological processes and on biomedical research.
However, current computational methods are focused on the inference of GRNs
under a single condition or attempt to identify differential gene co-expression.
No method currently exists that is capable of systematically identify structural
changes in GRNs. The objectives of this project are to design systematic methods
that can exploit gene expression and other relevant data to infer structural
changes of GRNs, and to develop software that implements such inference methods.

Intellectual merit: The proposed inference methods seek to leverage an important
attribute of GRNs, the sparsity in both GRNs and their structural changes, and
they are built on the innovative ideas of sparse signal processing. They employ
novel inference techniques to integrate various types of data into a unified
framework. This systematic approach is expected to significantly improve
inference accuracy over existing ad hoc methods. The proposed methods and the
resulting software will provide a valuable tool for the analysis of differential
GRNs and help to uncover differential gene-gene interactions under different
conditions. Although mathematical formulations are framed for the problem of
inference of differential GRNs, the underlying mathematical ideas and the
associated inference methods may also find applications in more general domain
of sparse signal processing and sparse model learning.

Broader impact: Successful completion of the proposed project will have a broad
impact on the fields of signal processing, systems biology, and medicine. It
will contribute a novel set of inference methods to the field of sparse signal
processing. It will also help to understand the dynamic changes of GRNs that
occur in various disease states, during cell differentiation, or in cellular
response to environmental changes. In particular, understanding differential
gene-gene interactions in genetic diseases such as cancer will open the door to
new diagnostics and therapeutics development. Overall, the proposed research
will help to discover new knowledge and potentially find applications in medical
research, thereby benefiting society as a whole. The proposed project will also
positively impact interdisciplinary education at both graduate and undergraduate
levels, and attract minority students to be involved in cutting edge research.