* 1319293
* Students Discover: Improving Middle School STEM Outcomes through Scaling Citizen Science Projects
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2020
* Margaret Lowman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Monica Cardella
* 03/31/2020
* USD 7,221,108.00

This Community Enterprise for STEM Learning Math and Science Partnership,
entitled Students Discover and led by North Carolina State University (NCSU),
highlights citizen science through the collection and analysis of data by
students for use by professional scientists. The project teams NCSU with core
partners North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences and three school districts:
Alamance-Burlington School System, Pender County Schools and Wake County Public
School System, to target improving Middle School STEM education through
implementing hands-on "real-science" in the classroom. Typically, when students
"do" science, they most often repeat experiments and projects that reveal known
truths. A growing body of research in STEM learning has taken the tact that by
involving the public in helping to discover the science deepens their
understanding of the scientific concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modules
developed within the Students Discover project will provide a framework within
which many scientists can bring the science they do to classrooms in order to
enhance their work, increase student learning and create opportunities for
students to participate in real discoveries. To develop these modules, the
project is bringing exemplary North Carolina teachers to the Nature Research
Center at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences to work with scientists
and a design team. Once the modules are developed, teachers from across North
Carolina come to the Nature Research Center to work on and prepare to use these
modules in their classrooms, statewide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three core
partner school systems conduct summer programs for students tied to the science
curriculum and include a series of Students Discover course modules. These
students and their families are engaged in additional programing throughout the
year. The students, teachers and parents using the modules will become part of a
community of collaborators who collectively help to make new discoveries -
whether they are of new species, phenomena or observations - that would
otherwise be impossible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also includes a
research component that is examining a process for moving innovations from more
ideal classroom settings to a variety of schools and community-based settings
where conditions for success may be less favorable. A key aspect for the broader
community is the research identifying the conditions and elements of modules and
science that best translate to other settings and adapt the approach so as to
build on those factors that most effectively alter learning outcomes and spread
class to class and region to region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves
scientists in every phase. Initially, the scientists at North Carolina State
University and in the Nature Research Center lead the implementation and
development. As the project develops, it capitalizes on broad interest among
faculty in K-12 education to forge many new links between scientists, educators
and students. Those links and the project's modules help students and scientists
make new discoveries together.