* 1319268
* PFI:  BIC- Biomimetic Sealant for Aqueous Environments
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Michael Harrison, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 695,099.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity project from the
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) and the California Institute of
Technology (Caltech) will integrate the latest innovations in polymer chemistry,
bioengineering, and medicine to advance development of a novel biocompatible
glue toward medical use as a surgical sealant. For years, chemists and materials
scientists have been working to design a biocompatible adhesive that can seal
tissue inside the wet environment of the human body. A polymer with the desired
characteristics (strong wet adhesion, nontoxic and non-immunogenic, stable under
physiological conditions, and flexible for use with soft organs and membranes)
has now been synthesized at Caltech. This PFI: BIC project will focus on
completing the early translational research tasks (in vivo efficacy and
biocompatibility demonstrations; optimization of glue chemistry and formulation
for mass-production) to take this discovery to a practicable, market-valued
solution that will fill the presently unmet need for a biomedical adhesive that
works in wet conditions. This process will also involve development of a novel
delivery device that incorporates advances in sensor technology to detect the
proper location for glue deposition inside the body.

The broader impacts of this research include enabling new and safer procedures
in several areas of medicine (prenatal diagnosis and therapy, vascular surgery,
drug delivery, tissue engineering) as well as development of a new class of
devices with self-contained sensing mechanisms that enable controlled access
and/or delivery of a substance to a precise location in the body. This project
also provides opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students to participate in the exciting process of translating research
discoveries to realities and to witness first-hand the potential for innovation
that can be realized by integrating academic and industry knowledge from
multiple fields. Small business partners will benefit from a competitive
advantage in the new market niches created from development of the adhesive and
sensing delivery device, creation of new intellectual property, and development
of new technical capabilities and expertise, resulting in increased innovation
capacity and competitiveness. Partners at the inception of the project are lead
academic institution University of California, San Francisco (Departments of
Surgery and Bioengineering & Therapeutic Sciences); small technology-based
business partners: Modified Polymer Components, Inc. (Sunnyvale, CA) and Bay
Materials, LLC (Menlo Park, CA); and collaborating academic partner California
Institute of Technology (Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering). Other
partners include educational partners California Maritime Academy (Vallejo, CA);
Saint Ignatius College Preparatory (San Francisco, CA); San Francisco
International High School; San Francisco State University College of
Engineering; University of California, Berkeley, College of Engineering; the
UCSF Center for Educational Partnerships; and the UCSF Office of Diversity and
Outreach.