* 1319721
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards a User Centric Battery Management System for Smartphones
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Prasant Mohapatra, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 09/30/2016
* USD 199,998.00

This proposal is motivated by the observation that the battery drain of an app
in a mobile device is user-centric, i.e., it depends on several factors that are
associated with specific usage patterns. These factors include but are not
limited to the mode in which the app is used, the network coverage that the user
enjoys and whether or not certain features of the app are turned on/off. In this
project, the objectives are to (i) develop a fundamental understanding of the
factors that influence the energy consumption of smartphone apps and, (ii) based
on the understanding obtained, design and implement a user-centric battery
management system that is called BLT.

The PIs plan to first undertake an extensive measurement study that will provide
a comprehensive understanding of how and to what extent user-centric factors
affect the energy consumption on a smartphone. Subsequently, they aim to tackle
several challenges towards identifying the energy hungry apps on a user's
smartphone; some of these challenges include the presence of several coexisting
active apps at any given time. Finally, they will design and implement a set of
solutions that allow a user to trade-off performance or content quality for
energy savings. This project hinges on a strong experimental and prototyping
effort, and the PIs will leverage the smartphone testbeds at UC Riverside and UC
Davis towards undertaking the same.

The project will have an immediate broader impact in empowering users with an
ability to control their battery usage. It will also allow users and developers
in understanding why activities and apps result in high battery drain. The
project will also undertake efforts towards inspiring K-12 students in our
respective regions, and helping teachers develop projects for science olympiads.
The project will include the modification of wireless networking courses taught
at UCD and UCR, and new educational efforts on establishing courses that include
design and implementation on mobile devices.