* 1319305
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Speeding Up Learning through Modeling the Pragmatics of Training
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2016
* David Roberts, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 12/31/2016
* USD 156,203.00

Years of effort to develop algorithms capable of learning from reward signals
have resulted in a plethora of techniques that can leverage numerical signals
that vary in value based on performance. Recent efforts to use these techniques
to learn from humans providing rewards have been slower to progress, in part,
because humans give feedback discretely rather than numerically. This project
contributes new learning algorithms designed specifically to leverage the
information contained in the choices humans make to provide such discrete
feedbacks. The algorithms are inspired by the human-canine partnership, and the
incredible things that humans are able to teach dogs using only discrete
feedback and carefully constructed sequences of tasks. The Bayesian learning
framework being developed in this project will leverage the pragmatic
implicatures contained in the feedbacks and tasks sequences to learn more
quickly from human feedback.

The ultimate goal of this work is to provide a more natural paradigm for humans
to tell computers what they would like for them to do. To that end, project
efforts will result in a teaching module for Brown University?s Learning
Exchange (LE). The LE involves undergraduates working with underserved minority
middle school students to engage them in STEM. They are a perfect audience to
demonstrate the broader impacts of this work. LE participants learn to instruct
computers using a combination of programming with the Scratch environment and
the feedback paradigm, which shows how powerful the algorithms are.