* 1319938
* EXP: Macro Data for Micro Learning: Developing FUN! for Automated Assessment of Computational Thinking in Scratch
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Sarah Brasiel, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2016
* USD 549,999.00

This Cyberlearning: Transforming Education Exploration Project is designed to
advance understanding of how to personalize feedback and advice to learners as
they engage in exploratory and creative activities in constructionist
technology-enhanced learning environments. During such activities, learners
often engage in programming (using, e.g., Scratch, Alice) with the goal of
creating a model or an animation of their own choosing. Assessment of learner
capabilities and conceptions would allow automated personalization of advice to
learners, facilitate self-reflection, and help teachers or mentors to know the
range of capabilities and understanding across a classroom. This project brings
together a PI who is expert at promoting learning in the context of
constructionist learning activities and another who is expert at educational
data mining to identify indicators of young learners' (middle schoolers)
conceptions of computational concepts and programming capabilities. The project
uses a data analytic approach; data mining methods are used to mine the
thousands of operations learners carry out to find patterns that might indicate
understanding and capability, qualitative methods are used to analyze what
learners were intending and thinking as they were carrying out those operations,
patterns are identified in the observational data, and the two streams of data
are matched to identify the ways conceptions and capabilities show themselves
while learners are programming. The intellectual activity focuses both on the
combination of data mining and ethnographic methods for such purposes and on the
specifics of those indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automating assessment is
difficult in a project-based learning environment where learners are creating
products of their own choosing. Because the activity is quite unconstrained,
collecting and analyzing the data necessary for providing help and feedback to
the learner is quite difficult. This project uses a combination data analytic
and ethnographic approach to find indicators of the conceptions and capabilities
of middle schoolers as they are using Scratch to create models and animations of
their choosing. The results of this project will make contributions in several
areas: (i) advancing methods for automating assessment for learners using the
Scratch programming language, (ii) advancing methods for data collection and
analysis for personalizing feedback in a relatively open-ended programming
environment (iii) broadening understanding of how to assess computational
thinking in the context of open-ended programming assignments, and (iv)
advancing methodology for automatically assessing capabilities and understanding
when learners are engaged in open-ended kinds of assignments.