* 1319081
* FSML: Ambient Laboratory for the La Selva Biological Station, OTS, Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 136,950.00

The Organization of Tropical Studies is awarded a grant to construct a new
ambient laboratory at the La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica in order to
support a significant number of researchers and students requiring such a
facility and to improve broadband access and connectivity for research purposes.
An ambient laboratory is a facility that allows research with plant and animal
subjects under conditions similar to those found in nature (such as temperature,
humidity, and ventilation). The location, characteristics, and conditions of a
fully-functioning ambient laboratory are critical for the performance of
realistic and accurate experimentation, cultivation, and observation.
Constructing a new stand-alone ambient laboratory facility at La Selva will
replace a temporary one-room ambient laboratory and help meet the demands of 37
to 40 research projects (33 of which are supported by NSF grants) and a total of
86 researchers, graduate students, and research assistants. The new ambient
laboratory will improve substantially the capacity, types, and quality of
projects that can be carried out at the station by increasing lab space by 70%.
The new space will meet the more stringent ambient conditions for research and
would add equipment and cyber connectivity (drying ovens, incubators, autoclave,
stereo-microscope, timer-controlled lighting, sources of rain and filtered
water, and permanent records of ambient temperature and humidity). It will
increase and improve the availability of equipment to support experiments and
studies that require ambient conditions, including an ambient monitoring system
to accurately assess conditions in the lab, equipment for general use of
researchers and students, and a number of other features, such as rainwater
collection system, water purification system, incubators, and cooling units to
support studies. Finally, bandwidth will be increased up to 40 mbps to keep
ahead of the trend toward greater data streaming that is increasingly being used
by scientists at the station. Expanded fiber optic access in the new ambient
laboratory will allow researchers to efficiently and productively conduct
cutting-edge research in a tropical forest setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OTS
graduate and undergraduate courses spend significant time at La Selva, including
a site-based REU program for students from (1) non-R1 research universities and
colleges; (2) groups under-represented in the sciences; and (3) financially
disadvantaged situations. In addition, OTS' REU program for Native American and
Pacific Islander undergraduate students also spend part of their summer
conducting research at the station. During the peak summer field season, the new
ambient lab will ease congestion considerably and provide an enriching
educational, long-lasting experience. For more information about La Selva
Biological Station, visit the OTS website at http://www.ots.ac.cr.