* 1319445
* EXP: Collaborative Research: Fostering Ecologies of Online Learners through Technology Augmented Human Facilitation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Marcela Borge, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2017
* USD 279,052.00

This Cyberlearning: Transforming Education project brings together leading-edge
researchers in computational linguistics and computer-supported collaborative
learning to explore feasibility issues in designing an intelligent
conversational agent that interacts with groups of learners as they are working
together and provides cognitive, meta-cognitive, and social advice to enhance
their collaborations. The conversational agent is being designed to enhance
group dynamics by providing supportive advice as well as promoting awareness of
the dynamics. Design of the agent is informed by theories of meta-cognition,
collaborative learning, and accountable talk. In addition to investigating how
to design such agents and testing their effectiveness, investigators are
exploring how learning develops when a conversational agent is available to help
with productive talk, the influences of conversational behaviors on developing
understanding and actions, and ways of influencing understanding and behaviors.

One of the biggest limitations of online education, especially massive online
courses (e.g., MOOCs), is personal contact with instructors and peers. While
much of formal education focuses on faculty interactions with large groups of
students in lectures, much student learning depends on interactions with
teachers and teaching assistants and discussions, study sessions, and project
work done with peers. Massive online education will be broadly successful only
after we know how to provide these kinds of supports to online learners. This
project focuses on designing an interactive agent that can provide
conversational support for small groups of collaborating students to help them
productively solve problems and learn together. The agent is being designed to
provide the kinds of advice that a teacher or teaching assistant would provide
if such a human mentor were available. The researchers conjecture that with such
support available, online students can provide for each other the kinds of
social supports for learning that contribute in integral ways to students'
learning experiences in higher education. The agent is being deployed and tested
in several different online courses. Results are expected to be applicable to
massive online education as well as to blended educational environments such as
flipped and project-based classrooms.