* 1319299
* CIF: Small:Analog-to-Analog Compression: Fundamental Limits and Constructive Schemes
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Sergio Verdu, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2017
* USD 474,978.00

For analog signals of high dimension, compression methods relying on the
acquisition and quantization of the entire signal may not always be possible. It
is hence of interest to develop methods for compressing information directly
from the analog to the analog (A2A) domain. Two philosophies have proven
successful in addressing the general problem of conveying analog information
through an analog medium: the Shannon theoretic approach and the compressed
sensing approach. This research investigates a third approach, which blends the
generality of the Shannon theoretic approach with the practicality of the
compressed sensing approach. The fundamental limits of A2A compression are
investigated in single and multi-signal settings, and constructive schemes are
proposed to achieve these limits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge of A2A
compression is to achieve the maximal dimensionality reduction, i.e., a
bandwidth reduction factor of the signal dimension per measurement, by
exploiting prior knowledge about the signal, which may include, but it is not
limited to sparsity. Wu-Verd√∫ have shown that the Renyi Information dimension
(RID) is the fundamental limit for i.i.d. signals with known distributions. The
RID is a very coarse measure of information, as many different signals lead to
the same RID. This research investigates other signal features that influence
the A2A compression performance beyond RID, particularly in the non-asymptotic
regime. It investigates the A2A compression of signals which do not have an
i.i.d. known distribution, and of multi-signal settings, where correlations
among signals can be exploited. Finally, it proposes constructive schemes to
achieve the fundamental limits using polar codes.