* 1319800
* Blind Noise Estimation Using Signal Statistics in Random Band-Pass Domains
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Siwei Lyu, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,663.00

Noise, which corresponds to random variations extrinsic to the signals of
interest, is an ubiquitous aspect that affects the performance of many tasks in
signal processing. Even with the improving quality and sophistication of the
modern acquisition devices, digital signals still carry noise due to many
incontrollable factors. This research focuses on the fundamental problem of
estimating parameters of the random noise model directly from a noise corrupted
signal. As an immediate consequence, the results of this investigation will be
applicable in a wide range of fields, including the forensic analysis of digital
images, automatic processing of medical images, spectrum sensing in wireless
communications and data processing in sensory neuroscience.

The technical approach taken in this research exploits the regular statistical
properties of the original signals in multiple signal representations and their
relationship with the noise parameters. Specifically, we will investigate the
use of domains constructed from random band-pass filters that are more effective
in revealing ?typical? statistical properties of the signals, especially when
compared with deterministic representations such as Fourier, DCT, and wavelet.
Concurrently, we will investigate the mathematical relationship between the
observed statistics of noisy signal and the noise parameters. Drawing on these
theoretical findings, this research is expected to lead to more effective and
efficient algorithms for blind noise estimation. More generally, the proposed
work will also explore efficient algorithms for blind local noise estimation in
the presence of non-stationary noise statistics.