* 1319598
* HCC: Small: Head Activated Technology for Off-the-Shelf Mobile Devices
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Kenneth Barner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 496,020.00

Mobile computing devices offer increasingly rich human-computer interaction
opportunities through the use of new sensor technology such as multi-touch
surfaces, microphones, and cameras. These advances provide users with richer
sets of interaction modalities and motivate new and novel human-centric
interfaces. Among the new input modalities, touch-based interaction is the most
advanced and widely deployed, while speech is gaining increased attention.
However, even with recent breakthroughs in computer vision and depth and motion
sensing technology, the imaging modality remains the least developed for mobile
devices. And yet image-based sensing (a) would permit richer interaction
opportunities for a general user population and (b) holds special promise for
individuals with disabilities who find touch-based interfaces very challenging
to use.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of Head-
Activated Technology for off-the- shelf Mobile Devices (HAT-MD). HAT-MD systems
will employ the next-generation imaging technology that will be included in a
wide array of mobile devices. Advanced algorithms will detect and track user
head and facial features, and map specific movements to specific interface
controls and application actions. HAT-MD is initially targeted towards
individuals with physical disabilities, and will both (a) extend to mobile
platforms the head control interaction techniques that are often employed on
desktop computers and (b) broaden the set of head and face movements that can be
employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project deliverables include: (a) HAT-MD
Algorithms: Next-generation imaging sensors will be used for detection,
tracking, and 3D reconstruction. Head position and facial features will be
detected, tracked, and mapped to interface controls. Computation will be
distributed between the mobile devices and cloud computing services. (b) HAT-MD
Applications: Head activated interfaces will be developed to address the
challenges that individuals with physical disabilities have when using
contemporary mobile platforms. (c) HAT-MD Evaluations: Rigorous human subject
studies will evaluate the effectiveness and ease-of-use of the general HAT-MD
methodology as well as specific interface and applications that are developed.
Algorithms will be benchmarked to current state-of-the-art detection, tracking,
and reconstruction methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The increased
accessibility provided by the HAT-MD project will create new opportunities for
people to interact with mobile devices, especially for individuals with physical
disabilities who currently have limited independent control of such devices. The
project will also feature direct involvement by individuals with disabilities at
the research, development, and evaluation phases in order to focus the
intellectual development in a truly useful direction that will complement the
broader impact.