* 1319197
* EDU: Revitalizing Cyber Security Education and Research through Competitions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Mohsen Beheshti, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 359,998.00

The objective of this project is to revitalize cyber security education and
research by introducing competitive aspects into their current lifecycles. The
project will create and deploy light-weight, online and diverse Class Capture-
The-Flag (CCTF) exercises on the DeterLab testbed. The competitions will require
only modest preparation and students will engage in competitions remotely, at
any time convenient for both teams. The competitions will cover a broad range of
security topics, such as infrastructure threats and defenses, denial-of-service,
botnet detection and infiltration, etc. Competitions will occur multiple times
during a semester and will involve students from different institutions,
alternating between an attacker and a defender role. To address ethical concerns
about teaching students offensive technologies, the project will develop online
materials on ethical offense, and will require each participant to view the
materials and pass the related quiz before engaging in competitions. The project
will also create a Security Challenge portal, where researchers can challenge
others to break their research prototypes experimentally or by design analysis.
The project team will further develop the Grand Challenge portal, hosting grand
challenges in several security sub-fields. The initial grand challenges will be
created by experts in selected sub-fields during virtual workshops. The Secure
and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program funds proposals that address
Cybersecurity from a Trustworthy Computing Systems perspective; a Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences perspective; and proposals focusing entirely on
Cybersecurity Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education modules developed to
accompany the CCTFs will reach student audiences that would not otherwise
receive security education. Researchers that engage in security challenges will
benefit from having more sound solutions and stronger publications than they
would otherwise. Grand challenges will engage multiple teams competing towards
the common goal, galvanizing research on that specific class of problems.
Further, security challenges and grand challenges will promote better security
metrics, experiment methodologies and code and data sharing. This will improve
the quality of security research, and the science of security experimentation.
The educational modules that cover topics related to each CCTF exercise will
enable participation by underprivileged and minority institutions that may not
regularly teach a security class.