* 1319417
* CSR: Small: First-Class Operating System Management of Computational Accelerators
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Kai Shen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 455,255.00

This project investigates operating system mechanisms to manage hardware
accelerator resources in a safe, fair, and protected manner while maintaining
high performance. Programmable vector processors including general-purpose
graphical processing units (GP-GPUs) and other accelerators for encryption,
compression, media transcoding, pattern matching, parsing, etc. are increasingly
ubiquitous in computer systems. For the sake of safety and fairness, such
accelerators must be managed by the operating system, but for the sake of
performance, they must be accessible directly from user-level applications,
without OS intervention. The conflict between these goals is exacerbated by the
opacity of proprietary library/driver/hardware interfaces. This project seeks a
balanced solution to these conflicting goals through: (1) an operating system
resource management architecture that allows direct user-level access in the
common case, but intercedes in the existing accelerator access path when
necessary to delay and re-order requests; (2) a tool chain that uncovers hidden
interface semantics required for resource management, together with a
characterization of the information needed from vendors in the future; and (3)
an integrated management and scheduling strategy across the full set of
computational resources in a given system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on
safe, fair, and efficient access to computational accelerators, the project aims
to increase performance and power efficiency over a broad range of applications
critical to today's digital economy and society. Broad dissemination is promoted
through implementation in the Linux kernel, and open-source software release.
Technology transfer is pursued through regular communication and collaboration
with GPU industry vendors. Project research is integrated with education through
curricular development and graduate student instruction.