* 1319893
* Computational Methods for Discrete Conic Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Theodore Ralphs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project's goal is to develop and implement methodology for solving mixed
integer conic linear optimization problems (MICLPs), which are to minimize a
linear function subject to both conic and linear constraints, as well as
integrality constraints on a subset of the variables. The primary focus of this
work is on computational methods for solving MICLPs involving so-called second
order cones, which form the basis for the most tractable class of conic
optimization problems. Although both discrete and conic optimization models have
been the subject of intense study, their integration is a challenging task; only
recently have the two areas gained enough maturity to make the development of
efficient solution methodologies for MICLPs realistic. The PI proposes a new
paradigm, called branch and constrain, that generalizes the disjunctive methods
so successfully applied in the case of discrete linear models. The work involves
study of the geometric structure of the feasible regions of these models and the
disjunctive sets that arise, as well as the development of methodology to
exploit this knowledge in a general computational framework.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An optimization problem is that of choosing values for a
set of variables that minimize the value a given objective function (function of
the variables) subject to the restriction that the values of a set of constraint
functions (also functions of the variables) are constrained to be between given
bounds. One may also require the variables to take values from a certain
restricted set (such as the integers). The most tractable optimization problems
are those involving linear functions and for which the variables may take any
real value. The addition of nonlinear functions or variables whose values must
be taken from a discrete set significantly impacts the efficiency with which the
model can be solved. Among nonlinear constraints, conic constraints are the
easiest to accommodate, so the development of methods for solving discrete conic
optimization problems is the first natural step in developing approaches to more
general models that have both discrete and nonlinear structure. Many real-world
applications involve a combination of these two modeling paradigms. For example,
financial optimization models often involve constraints on the level of risk,
which can be expressed using conic constraints. In supply chain logistics,
bounds on the distance between two geospatial locations can also be expressed
using conic constraints. In both of these classes, applications naturally arise
in which there are also discrete choices to be made. For example, in portfolio
optimization, one often wants to restrict the number of investments in a given
portfolio. In facility location models, one wants to restrict the choice of
locations to a given list of candidates. Models of maximizing returns subject to
risk bounds or minimizing costs subject to geospatial constraints are examples
of the kinds of models whole solution this work will enable.