* 1319104
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Exploring Synergies of Multi-State Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Syed Jafar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 12/31/2016
* USD 249,793.00

The objective of this project is to undertake a comprehensive study of
synergistic gains for multi-state communication networks and develop strategies
that can exploit them. The project is organized into three complementary
thrusts, focusing on 1) dynamic channels, 2) dynamic channel knowledge, and 3)
mixed channel knowledge. The first thrust seeks ways to exploit channel
variations starting with simple and optimal joint coding schemes over infinite
horizons and leading, from a practical perspective, to efficient coding schemes
over finite horizons, and, from a theoretical perspective, to alternative
canonical models for information-theoretic insights into networks where the
static setting has been intractable. The second thrust seeks ways to exploit
alternating patterns of channel knowledge, either arising naturally out of
channel dynamics or deliberately enforced through alternating feedback from
different groups of users, to identify the most efficient forms of channel
knowledge spread over time. The third thrust explores ways to exploit the
simultaneous availability of distinct forms of channel knowledge, that have
previously been studied only in isolation, and are therefore associated with
coding schemes that are mutually incompatible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
existing wireless networks struggling to keep up with the exploding data rate
demands of an increasingly mobile and information-dependent society, it is
imperative to uncover new opportunities for expanding the throughputs of next-
generation systems. Any such effort must grapple with the enormous complexity of
wireless networks, such as time-varying fading, dynamic network states, and the
availability of many forms of network state information across users. The
classical approach is to study the essential elements of these networks in
isolation: decomposing a fundamentally multi-state network into its constituent
states and studying each state individually. The motivation for this reduction
typically comes from the conventional wisdom that 1) studying each element in
isolation is easier than studying them together, and 2) understanding each
element individually will lead to an understanding of their collective behavior.
Surprisingly, recent work has shown that this wisdom can be misleading on both
counts: multi-state networks are often not only more tractable, practical, and
insightful, but also demonstrate significant synergistic gains that are not
accessible through isolated studies of the constituent states. By shifting the
focus from static to dynamic models, the proposed research will advance our
understanding of information-theoretic limits of wireless interference networks
where the intractability of the static setting has long stunted progress.
Because joint coding across multiple states is often simpler, more insightful,
and practical, it will bring the information-theoretic results closer to
practice. A joint consideration of multiple states will provide the foundation
for proper accounting of the overheads and benefits of channel knowledge. These
research efforts are complemented by outreach efforts that include a mixture of
traditional activities, such as tutorials at international conferences and
summer schools, and novel ventures, such as the publication of an e-book on
interference management.