* 1319592
* CIF: Small: Self-Synthesizing Mixed-signal Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Flynn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 360,950.00

This research addresses the bottleneck caused by the difficulty and expense of
designing mixed-signal interface circuits for modern integrated circuits. These
interface circuits translate between real-world analog signals and the
corresponding digital signals that are processed by digital electronics. A huge
challenge is that the cost of designing these mixed-signal interface circuits is
skyrocketing and now dominates the overall cost of integrated circuit design.
Difficulties in modeling and the worsening manufacturing variability, related to
shrinking transistor size, mean that mixed-signal design requires a huge effort.
Furthermore, to ensure good manufacturing yield, even the best designs are not
optimal in terms of energy efficiency or performance. A fresh new approach is
needed. This research investigates a completely new way of creating mixed-signal
circuits. In the new approach, the integrated circuit, itself, assembles a
mixed-signal function by combining and configuring simple building blocks. An
integrated circuit creates a function from an uncommitted set of simple
primitives and cells, such as charge-processing cells, comparators and simple
amplifiers. This approach pushes design decisions and tradeoffs to each
individual integrated circuit. It delivers the best possible solution for a
given set of design objectives in the presence of manufacturing variations. It
also avoids the need for good models and accurate simulation during
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is
that it addresses the crisis of cost and complexity in mixed-signal integrated-
circuit design with a radically new self-design approach. It moves design
decisions to the individual integrated circuit, greatly simplifying the design
process and removing mixed-signal design from the straightjacket of worst-case
design. The broader impact of this research is enhanced with substantial efforts
in outreach and education. These include outreach to K-12 students and research
experience for undergrads from under-represented minorities. An advanced
graduate-level course in analog-digital interfaces will involve graduate
students in the research of mixed-signal self-design. To help change the mindset
of the next generation of circuit designers, the undergrad major design
experience course in analog circuits will introduce students to analog circuit
optimization.