* 1319651
* Collaborative Research: Population Dynamics in Greenland - A Multi-Component, Mixed-Methods Study of Demographic Change in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2014,04/30/2022
* Elizabeth Rink, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2022
* USD 709,914.00

This award supports research on the social, cultural, environmental and
physiological dynamics of pregnancy in an indigenous Arctic population. The
project is a 3-year collaborative study focusing on Greenlandic ways of
perceiving, understanding and experiencing pregnancy. Greenlander's believe that
future generations of Greenlanders and Greenlandic culture and practices are in
jeopardy due to a variety of demographic factors including low birth rates. This
project will examine the individual, social, cultural, environmental and
physiological factors that appear to have the greatest influence on Greenlandic
women's and men's reproduction. The research will be implemented in Kullorsuaq
in northwestern Greenland and the target population for the study is Greenlandic
women and men, ages 15 to 49 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an
interdisciplinary international, collaborative community based participatory
research (CBPR) study involving the University of Greenland, local health and
community partners in Greenland, Indiana University and Montana State
University. The main activities of the research project are: 1) Examine how the
individual level characteristics including age, gender, physical and mental
health, spirituality, and beliefs about sex, pregnancy, and adoption influence
reproductive decision making in Kullorsuaq; 2) Examine how the interpersonal
dynamics in sexual relationships influence reproductive decision-making among
men and women in Kullorsuaq: 3) Examine the foundational cultural constructs
regarding kinship, familial obligations and personhood that influence pregnancy
outcomes in Kullorsuaq; 4) Examine how natural and built environmental
characteristics such as one's own and one's family's connection to place, the
climate changes occurring in the environment and its influence on hunting, as
well as the increased oil industry in the area, influence pregnancy outcomes in
Kullorsuaq; and 5) Examine whether hormonal contraceptives may be biologically
ill-matched to some clients in Kullorsuaq. The project will be implemented using
a Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR) framework. Of particular
interest is the combination of the CBPR approach with ethnographic (cultural,
natural and biological) and public health methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall
the project will contribute to our understanding of the complexity of the
factors that may be influencing a declining Arctic population. This research is
important for strengthening the scientific collaborations between the United
States and a strategic Arctic ally, Greenland. In addition, the information
gained from this research will give us critical insights into the effects of
global economic forces on the well-being of remote communities. In addition, the
interdisciplinary investigation of photoperiod has promise for providing
insights into the higher risk of breast cancer faced by women who work in night
shift and other jobs that involve changes from a typical daytime work schedule
(e.g, airline pilots and personnel, and others with heavy travel schedules),
which could lead to low-cost interventions that would reduce the risk of cancer,
thereby saving medical costs and increasing economic productivity.