* 1319188
* Acquisition of a Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer to Support Marine Science Research and Education in the Northern Gulf of Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Kenneth Heck, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2014
* USD 314,725.00

The Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium (MESC) are awarded a grant to
acquire a laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-
MS) instrument for its Dauphin Island Sea Lab (DISL) in Alabama. This instrument
will enable DISL and regional scientists to investigate myriad questions related
to the marine ecosystem in the northern Gulf of Mexico and elsewhere, as well as
to conduct archaeological and biogeochemical research. Example of the types of
research to be conducted include 1) examining habitat utilization and
metapopulation structure in marine fishes; 2) relating anthropogenic sources of
nutrients in coastal waters to local and regional freshwater input; 3) employing
Si isotope dilution protocols to examine silcon cycling processes and the global
carbon cycle; and, 4) examining the environmental history of fish and shellfish
resources of Native Americans in the southeastern US via LA-ICP-MS analysis of
otoliths and shells found in middens.

The LA-ICP-MS instrument will have substantial broader impacts by facilitating
research on a wide range of topics well-aligned with public and governmental
needs. Marine education activities also will be strengthened by exposing DISL
undergraduate and graduate students to the latest technology through coursework
and research projects. The instrument and results of studies undertaken with it
will enhance the education and outreach activities of DISL's Discovery Hall
Program, which is a well-regarded K-Gray program that educates over 5,000
students annually through its year-long program and through the NSF-sponsored
COSEE Gulf of Mexico program. Lastly, the novelty and enhanced research
capabilities that the LA-ICP-MS instrument will bring to DISL will greatly
assist efforts in recruiting students from underrepresented groups, which will
occur among member universities of the MESC and through the Alabama Alliance for
Graduate Education and Professoriate.