* 1319810
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Statistical ranking theory without a canonical loss
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Ambuj Tewari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 245,594.00

The problem of ranking objects occupies a central place in key technologies such
as web search and recommendation systems. These technologies have a tremendous
daily impact on the lives of millions of people. Moreover, the enormous scale of
data on the web makes the use of machine learning especially attractive in
constructing ranking algorithms. A huge amount of research effort has been
devoted to developing efficient ranking algorithms that can deal with a variety
of data sets encountered in web search and recommendation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops unifying mathematical theory
that will provide a basis for understanding and categorizing existing algorithms
and, more importantly, lead to deeper insights and new algorithms for the
problem of learning to rank. The investigators also apply ranking algorithms to
new domains. For example, ranking chemical reactions based on their plausibility
will help chemists discover much-needed reaction bases for technologies such as
carbon dioxide reduction, and conversion of natural gas into gasoline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental advances in the statistical theory of ranking
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses. Data sets and
software developed will be made freely available to the scientific community.
The investigators will also organize a workshop with a focus on
interdisciplinary participation and involvement of under-represented groups in
computer science and statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary technical
challenge in developing statistical ranking theory is the absence of a
universally agreed-upon loss functions for ranking. This is in contrast to
classic machine learning problems such as classification and regression, where
there are only a few natural possibilities for the loss function and these are
well-understood theoretically. The project addresses this gap by investigating
how different loss functions for ranking affect fundamental theoretical
properties such as learnability, and by creating a theory of convex surrogates
that is applicable when loss functions abound. The project re-examines existing
statistical literature on ranking with a computational lens. This will enable
development of flexible and efficient plug-in decision rules that model the
conditional probability of labels given inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
incorporating the results of this research into courses and survey articles, the
PIs help train a new generation of machine learning researchers and
practitioners who will view ranking as a learning problem on par with
classification and regression in mathematical depth as well as practical
importance. Theoretical guidance for practitioners formulating new algorithms
for ranking will improve the most common applications on the web.