* 1319363
* CGV: Small: Graph-Based Techniques for Visual Analytics of Big Scientific Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Ching-Kuang Shene, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 10/31/2014
* USD 324,448.00

Scientific visualization has become an indispensable tool for visual analysis of
data generated from simulations and experiments across a wide variety of fields.
Although there have been substantial advances in developing novel algorithms and
techniques for processing, managing and rendering scientific datasets, several
critical challenges still remain. These challenges include solving the inherent
occlusion and clutter problem when visualizing large three-dimensional scalar
and vector fields, examining complex data relationships and tracking their
changes over time for time-varying multivariate data, and gaining a
comprehensive overview and acquiring full control of data navigation to glean
critical insights. The ever-growing size and complexity of data produced only
exacerbate these challenges. To enable discovery from big scientific data, there
is a need to seek a new perspective on data abstraction and relationship
exploration by going beyond the traditional boundary of scientific visualization
and fully incorporating information visualization techniques for effective
visual data analytics. While there are encouraging, isolated examples of
applying information visualization techniques such as parallel coordinates and
treemaps to scientific data analysis, leveraging the more generalized and
familiar form of graphs to address a wider range of scientific visualization
problems at greater extent has not been fully studied. In this project, the PIs'
goal is to establish systematic graph-based techniques to investigate large-
scale scalar and vector scientific datasets. To this end the team pursues three
major tasks: (1) exploring core graph-based techniques to analyze and explore
time-varying multivariate scalar and vector field data; (2) developing scalable
parallel algorithms for constructing and visualizing large graphs for scientific
visualization; and (3) conducting a formal user study using the choice behavior
model and tackling real problems from application domains with expert
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because scientific visualization plays a key
role in many scientific, engineering and medical fields, the potential benefits
from generalized graph-based visual analytics tools are far reaching. The
general ideas developed will directly benefit the understanding of volumetric
scientific datasets including scalar and vector field data, time-varying and
multivariate data. They will also impact the understanding of data in other
forms such as adaptive mesh refinement, unstructured grid and point-based data.
Since this work is a departure from traditional approaches, it could be
transformative by providing a completely new way of exploring and analyzing big
scientific data. From a scientific perspective, the potential impact is a new
class of techniques for knowledge discovery. This project will maximize its
outcomes through close collaboration with combustion and biomedical scientists.
It will produce results in various forms which are publicized at the project
website (http://www.cs.mtu.edu/~chaoliw/nsf13-graph.htm). The project provides
training for graduate, undergraduate and under-represented students in big data
computing and visualization. Public outreach activities are planned, including
summer programs for middle and high school students, and tutorials or contests
for researchers at premier visualization conferences.