* 1319076
* TWC: Small: XCap: Practical Capabilities and Least Authority for Virtualized Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* John Regehr, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,912.00

Modern software systems inherit their architecture, software development
methodology, and security model from time-sharing operating systems developed
four decades ago. Desktop, server, cloud, and even industrial control systems
rely on a large stack of commercial off-the-shelf software that runs on top of a
monolithic operating system kernel. Each application runs with the full set of
privileges of some user, has access to the entire file space of that user, and
can access the complete interface of a complex operating system kernel, and a
number of privileged systems components. The security model exposed by existing
software systems is fundamentally too weak; it fails to provide adequate
isolation between computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;XCap is a secure
environment for least-authority execution of applications and system services.
Unmodified, untrusted, off-the-shelf applications, running on untrusted
operating systems, are isolated by a virtual machine monitor. XCap builds on two
principles: strong isolation and secure collaboration. XCap's default -- a share
nothing environment -- is augmented by a capability access control model: a
clean and general abstraction, enabling fine-grained delegation of rights in a
flexible and manageable way. In XCap, capabilities serve as a general foundation
for constructing least privilege services out of existing components of the
traditional operating system stack. XCap maximizes the principle of least
authority: it redesigns common operating system services in such a way that the
authority of individual applications and services is minimized. Each component
possesses the smallest subset of rights required to accomplish its task.