* 1319979
* CIF: Small: Optimal Iterative Estimation in Signal Processing, Information Theory and Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Andrea Montanari, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2018
* USD 416,160.00

Modern imaging devices, sensors, data acquisition systems allow to gather data
with unprecedented speed and&lt;br/&gt;accuracy. Most of the times, however, we
are not interested in accumulating data per se, but rather to&lt;br/&gt;uncover
some hidden patterns in the data. For instance, given a large network, we might
want to discover &lt;br/&gt;a small subset of notes that are tightly connected
to each other. Such highly connected substructures&lt;br/&gt;are of interest in
biological datasets, but also in social network analysis, and in signal
processing. &lt;br/&gt;Finding such patterns requires highly efficient
algorithms that can process large amount of data and&lt;br/&gt;uncover tenuous
statistical signatures. The investigators develop new algorithms that
simultaneously optimize&lt;br/&gt;both metrics: statistical efficiency and
computational efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consider in particular the
problem of finding an anomalous submatrix in a large data matrix with
independent &lt;br/&gt;random entries. If the anomalous submatrix has entries
with a different distribution, this can be done via &lt;br/&gt;principal
component analysis, as long as the submatrix has dimensions of the order of the
square root of&lt;br/&gt;the ambient dimensions. The investigators introduce a
class of first order methods with linear complexity,&lt;br/&gt;and determine the
optimal algorithm within this class. This appears to provably outperform
existing approaches. &lt;br/&gt;The same framework is generalized to several
other classes of high-dimensional estimation problems. &lt;br/&gt;Optimal
iterative procedures are developed under strict computational constraints.