* 1319469
* AF: Small: Novel Directions for Biological Network Alignment
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Tijana Milenkovic, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 452,863.00

Bioinformatics research and genomic sequence alignment in particular have
revolutionized the understanding of how cells work. Genomic sequence alignment
identifies regions of similarity between sequences of individual genes that are
a likely consequence of functional or evolutionary relationships between the
sequences. However, genes and other biomolecules in the cells do not function in
isolation. Instead, they interact with each other to keep one alive. And this is
exactly what biological networks (BNs) model: in BNs, biomolecules are
represented as nodes and physical or functional interactions between the
biomolecules are represented as edges. Thus, BN alignment, which aims to
identify topologically and functionally similar regions between BNs of different
species, is promising to give further insights into organizational principles of
life, evolution, disease, and therapeutics. For example, it could guide the
transfer of biological knowledge across species between the conserved (aligned)
network regions. This is important, since many nodes in BNs are currently
functionally uncharacterized even for well-studied model species.

Intellectual Merit: This project aims to address several issues with the current
view of the problem of network alignment. First, it will develop a novel
framework for fair evaluation of existing BN alignment methods, which is
currently lacking. Second, it will redefine the problem of network alignment to
allow for directly optimizing the amount of conserved network topology, which
current methods fail to do. Third, since different types of BNs exist that
capture different functional slices of the cell, and since the existing methods
can align only homogeneous networks, ignoring any node or edge types, this
project will extend the proposed methods to allow for alignment of heterogeneous
networks encompassing the different BN types. The proposed methods will be used
in two novel interdisciplinary collaborative applications: 1) studying the role
of yeast S. cerevisiae and human proteasomes responsible for protein
degradation, and 2) studying pathogenicity and drug resistance of malaria
parasites from the Plasmodium family.

Broader Impact: BN alignment has broad applications. For example, it can be used
to transfer biological knowledge from well annotated to poorly annotated species
between similar network regions or to infer species' phylogenetic and
evolutionary relationships based on similarities of their BNs. Besides
computational biology, this project may impact other domains as well. For
example, network alignment can de-anonymize online social networks and thus
impact user privacy. Since network research spans many domains, a free open-
source software tool implementing the proposed methods will be offered to
researchers from diverse disciplines. The software will also serve as an
educational tool.