* 1319754
* SHF: Small: Static and Dynamic Techniques for Correctness of Probabilistic Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Aravinda Sistla, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Computerized systems are ubiquitous in modern society. They are present in our
homes, cars, medical devices and various appliances. It is extremely important
to ensure that these systems function without failing and work as they are
intended to. This project explores basic research to ensure the correct
functioning of such systems. The proposed research will contribute towards
development of error free and high quality computerized systems, especially
safety critical systems. It will also make it more difficult to break into
systems, thus making them safer. It will lead to reduced down time of computer
systems, thus yielding economic benefits as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses fundamental research on static as well as dynamic techniques
for ensuring correct functioning of probabilistic computer systems. The project
proposes novel research on model checking concurrent probabilistic programs that
exhibit individual process level non-determinism. It investigates model checking
of such systems under different classes of schedulers that more accurately
represent the resolution of non-determinism in them. The project also proposes
dynamic techniques, based on monitoring, for ensuring correctness of
probabilistic systems at run time when their internal state is not directly
observable. Techniques based on state estimation are proposed and will be
analyzed to ensure timely detection of malfunctioning.