* 1319653
* Optimal sampling and recovery for multilinear signals and systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Eric Miller, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2017
* USD 509,287.00

This research involves the development and validation of a novel framework for
signals and systems defined in dimensions greater than two. Such multilinear
signals can be viewed as high dimensional data tensors, and the associated
systems as multidimensional linear operators acting on this class of signals.
These mathematical objects are ubiquitous in science and engineering and of
growing practical importance. They arise in time varying tomographic problems
such as medical imaging, hyperspectral remote sensing, and seismic data
acquisition and processing for rapid exploration for oil and gas, to name but a
few applications. More recently multilinear signals have become prominent in the
context of data analytics for social networks, online big-data management, data
visualization, predictive modeling for disease propagation and forecasting of
complex events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective multilinear computation and
processing requires generalization of the traditional 2-D factorization methods
to higher dimensions. To date, tensor factorization techniques are either
optimal in terms of compactness of data or operator representation but NP-hard
to evaluate, or on the other extreme computationally feasible but can be
severely non-compact thereby loosing structural information. This adversely
affects the efficiency in sampling (tensor data compression) and computational
costs in recovery of multilinear data using regularized inversion algorithms. In
this context, the investigators develop fundamentally new approaches for tensor
decompositions, which, while being computationally feasible, are also provably
compact. Specifically, the investigators will develop: Algorithms for handling
large scale processing for multilinear signals and systems; Optimal sampling and
recovery of multilinear data as non-trivial extension of the theory of
compressive sensing; and Tensor representation based, regularized inversion
models and algorithms for multilinear inverse problems.