* 1319858
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Mera: Memoized Ranged Systematic Software Analyses
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Corina Pasareanu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2017
* USD 149,022.00

As software pervades our society and lives, failures due to
software&lt;br/&gt;bugs become increasingly costly. Scalable approaches
for&lt;br/&gt;systematically checking software to find crucial bugs hold a key
to&lt;br/&gt;delivering higher quality software at a lower cost. Mera is
a&lt;br/&gt;methodology to scale model checking and symbolic execution which are
two&lt;br/&gt;powerful approaches for systematic software analysis and known to
be&lt;br/&gt;computationally expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds
on two novel concepts: memoization, which allows&lt;br/&gt;re-using computations
performed across different checks to amortize&lt;br/&gt;the cost of software
analysis; and ranging, which allows distributing&lt;br/&gt;the analysis into
sub-problems of lesser complexity, which can be&lt;br/&gt;solved separately and
efficiently. Mera consists of three research&lt;br/&gt;thrusts. First, the core
memoization and ranging techniques for model&lt;br/&gt;checking and symbolic
execution are developed. Second, these&lt;br/&gt;techniques are optimized in the
context of different kinds of changes,&lt;br/&gt;like the program code, expected
properties, or analysis search-depth&lt;br/&gt;parameters. Third, these
techniques are adapted to effectively&lt;br/&gt;utilize available resources for
parallel computation using static and&lt;br/&gt;dynamic strategies, such as work
stealing. Mera will help improve&lt;br/&gt;software quality and reliability thus
holding the potential to provide&lt;br/&gt;substantial economic benefits and to
improve our quality of life.