* 1319578
* III: Small: Integrated Digital Event Archiving and Library (IDEAL)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jefferson Bailey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

The Integrated Digital Event Archive and Library (IDEAL) system addresses the
need for combining the best of digital library and archive technologies in
support of stakeholders who are remembering and/or studying important events. It
extends the work at Virginia Tech on the Crisis, Tragedy, and Recovery network
(see http://www.ctrnet.net) to handle government and community events, in
addition to a range of significant natural or manmade disasters. It addresses
needs of those interested in emergency preparedness/response, digital
government, and the social sciences. It proves the effectiveness of the 5S
(Societies, Scenarios, Spaces, Structures, Streams) approach to intelligent
information systems by crawling and archiving events of broad interest. It
leverages and extends the capabilities of the Internet Archive to develop
spontaneous event collections that can be permanently archived as well as
searched and accessed, and of the LucidWorks Big Data software that supports
scalable indexing, analyzing, and accessing of very large collections. Through a
new model-based approach to intelligent focused crawling, it improves the
quality (e.g., accuracy, coverage, and elimination of noise) of collections of
webpages so as to ensure comprehensiveness, balance, and low bias, as is needed
for scholarly study of historically important events by social scientists. It
incorporates a range of visualization capabilities in support of key stakeholder
communities, including archivists, librarians, researchers, scholars, and the
general public. IDEAL connects the processing of tweets and webpages, combining
informal and formal media, to automatically detect important events, as well as
to support building collections on chosen general or specific topics. It
supports integration of multiple types and at multiple levels, including key
models about the event it is crawling (event models), the sources of information
about the event (source models), the mechanisms used for disseminating
information about the event (publishing venue models), and the entities related
to the event (society /organization models). Integrated services include topic
identification, categorization (building upon special ontologies being devised),
sentiment analysis, and visualization of data, information, and
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IDEAL website (http://www.eventsarchive.org)
supports searching, browsing, analyzing, and visualizing of event collections
(of both tweets and webpages), as well as access to project software, methods,
findings, publications, and other results. Usage is encouraged of the integrated
system along with a growing number of collections, as well as of particular
tools such as for focused crawling, which should aid curators to avoid non-
relevant content while including a broader range of sources, improving
significantly upon current crawling and archiving methods. Important data and
information on events of interest are saved rather than lost, helping preserve
our history and culture, in support of public interest, education, policy
making, historical analyses, and comparative studies. Students studying
sociology, human-computer interaction, digital libraries, information retrieval,
computational linguistics, multimedia, and hypertext are gaining experience and
contributing in scholarly studies, algorithms, software, interfaces, and big
data handling.