* 1319302
* CSR:  Small:  Realism in Activity Recognition for Long Term Sensor Network Deployments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Stankovic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 423,263.00

Research in wireless sensor networks has been very successful in creating
academic testbeds and short term real deployments for many application areas
such as home health care, saving energy in buildings, infrastructure monitoring,
agriculture, and various environmental science applications. However,
significant new problems arise for long term deployments in uncontrolled
environments. It is also important to note that most of these applications
perform activity recognition. Yet, these activity recognition solutions are not
always robust enough for long term deployments. Consequently, the goal of this
work is to develop robust and reliable activity recognition for in-home
deployments that address the realism of long term deployments. To accomplish
this goal requires new research results in: obtaining labeled ground truth for
training activity recognition systems, recognizing overlapping activities,
detection of activities that occur across rooms of a home, handling missing
sensor events and sensor failures, addressing the issues of multiple person
homes and visitors, and handling the evolution of human behaviors. These
solutions must be combined in a holistic manner. In addition, the utility of
activity recognition often depends on recognizing anomalies from typical human
behaviors. Anomaly detection can also suffer from the realisms of long term
deployments and, therefore, is also addressed. The basic research approach
includes employing data mining, machine learning, and other techniques in robust
ways that account for realisms in long term deployments. Demonstration of the
utility of the solutions spans from lab experiments to realistic long term
deployments for 9 months or longer.

The broad significance of this work occurs because developing robust activity
recognition schemes for wireless sensor networks that operate for long time
periods implies improvement in applications such as home health care and saving
energy in homes and buildings. Home health care can save lives, provide improved
life style and greater independence for the elderly and chronically ill, lower
medical costs, and via longitudinal studies, increase understanding of the
causes of diseases. Energy is a scarce resource and improved activity
recognition can be used to perform control actions that save energy. This energy
savings can save money and lower the impact of global warming.