* 1319600
* III: Small: QUEST: An Integrated Query and Event System on Noisy Streams and Tables
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Tingjian Ge, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* James French
* 08/31/2017
* USD 390,897.00

Sequence and order are prevalent in data. In particular, time, as often
perceived as the "fourth dimension", plays a pivotal role in data streams as
well as in stored time series data. The ability to define events, detect and
query complex events over noisy sequence data is a much needed addition to the
standard data management systems and SQL. This is because complex event
detection is about discovering the correlation and co-occurrence of many tuples
in the same relation - different from the cursor model in SQL, and because it is
sensitive to sequence errors. The goal of this research is to tightly integrate
SQL queries and complex event detection over noisy streams and stored tables in
a high-performing system. Specific techniques include: (1) Using a query suite
to encapsulate the interactions between SQL queries and complex event detection,
and proposing a comprehensive semantics for complex events; (2) Incorporating
correlated error models into a novel complex event matching algorithm; (3)
Designing more efficient algorithms that only get the top-k highest probability
matching paths, as well as algorithms that handle other variants of semantics;
and (4) Devising several indexing mechanisms for stored sequence tables, and
performing overall system optimization for both streams and
tables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QUEST project has applications in dietary and
exercise monitoring/analysis, ECG monitoring, shopping behavior study, security
monitoring, and travel pattern discovery, among many others. These applications
play a key role in the nation's economy (business intelligence), health, and
security. The project greatly enriches the course contents of the undergraduate
directed research course in addition to a new graduate course. Further
information on the project can be found on the project web page:
&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.uml.edu/~ge/projects/quest/ .