* 1319983
* SHF: Small: Novel Techniques for Handling Memory Model Bugs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Abdullah Muzahid, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 249,328.00

With the ubiquitous availability of parallel architectures, the burden falls on
programmers' shoulders to write correct parallel programs that have high
performance and portability across different platforms. Unfortunately, most
programmers find it a challenging task. One of the major issues that contribute
to this challenge is the intricacies involved with the underlying memory
consistency models that define the order of memory operations. The situation is
worsened by the fact that the memory model specifications provided by public
architecture vendors are often ambiguous, difficult to use, and even incorrect.
This project looks at techniques to characterize, detect and avoid bugs caused
by memory models.

A memory model forms the fundamental basis for writing parallel programs. If a
programmer is not careful about the constraints of the underlying memory model,
a parallel program might end up having subtle bugs. In one scenario, the bugs
might cause a program execution to have unintuitive interleaving of
instructions, which eventually leads to incorrect behavior and lack of
portability. In other scenarios, the bugs might cause a significant slowdown and
poor scalability of the program. Unfortunately these bugs, referred to as Memory
Model Bugs, receive very little attention from the research community.
Therefore, this work focuses on developing new techniques to deal with these
bugs. The work will first characterize different memory model bugs in real world
code bases. The findings will be useful in developing hardware and compiler
techniques (e.g., new hardware modules, exceptions, static analyzers, etc.) to
detect as well as avoid these bugs. Finally, the work will focus on designing
new software debugging tools to help programmers get rid of these subtle bugs.
The research in this proposal will enable the widespread practice of parallel
programming by addressing some of the hardest concurrency bugs. On one hand, it
will encourage software and hardware companies to invest in new techniques for
debugging and avoiding these bugs. On the other hand, it will help make C++ and
Java memory models simple and robust.