* 1319922
* HCC: Small: The Development and Evaluation of a Full-Page Refreshable Braille Display
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Sile O'Modhrain, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2018
* USD 514,486.00

This project will develop a large-area dense-array tactile display device
suitable for displaying a full-page of braille characters and tactile diagrams.
This device will co-locate tactile input and output and will make interaction
with text and graphic content on mobile devices as direct and meaningful for
visually impaired users as touchscreen interaction is for sighted users. Current
braille display technology can only render a single line of content at a time.
This project will address this problem by developing new display technology
based on microfluidic actuators and microfluidic logic circuits. This technology
holds tremendous promise for creating refreshable tactile features on a flat
screen, and for new multipurpose displays because the microfluidic substrate can
be designed as a transparent overlay to a visual display. There are just a few
technological barriers remaining until microfluidics is practical for creating
programmable haptic features. One of these barriers is the "piping problem",
packing a dense array of bubble actuators without an independent channel
dedicated to each actuator. A second problem involves matching the microfluidic
actuators to the properties and sensitivity of the fingertip skin through an
appropriately engineered surface. The research team has piloted solutions to
both of these problems and will construct analytical models that will enable
these solutions to be scaled, both up and down, for rendering a variety of
features from individually perceivable braille dots to perceptually continuous
lines, curves and tactile forms. The design of the display technology will be
guided and informed by a series of user evaluations that will advance the
science of surface haptics while at the same time comparing this microfluidic
approach to alternative assistive technologies currently under development in
academia and industry. The collaborative team is uniquely qualified to develop
microfluidics technology specifically for a braille display. Mark Burns will
further develop microfluidic logic circuits and shift registers to individually
address braille pin actuators. Brent Gillespie will optimize the mechanics of
the actuators and braille dots and adapt them to the mechanics of the skin and
actively guided touch. Sile O'Modhrain will develop the science of surface
haptics to guide the match between microfluidic technology and application in
human-computer interaction through braille. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project will develop a full-page electronic braille device that
will increase braille literacy among blind persons worldwide. At the same time,
the project will solve the most pressing problems blocking the application of
microfluidics in shape display and surface haptics on touchscreens. The
availability of a large-area tactile display would open up the possibility for a
wide range of scientific exploration and would also have a huge commercial
impact because it would have a profound impact on what is fundamentally possible
with touchscreen devices. The project will recruit and engage blind persons,
under-represented minorities, women, and undergraduate researchers.