* 1319312
* "AF:Small:Efficient and reliable low-rank approximation techniques and fast solutions to large sparse linear equations"
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ming Gu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

In many computational and engineering problems, it is critical to solve large
sparse linear systems of equations rapidly and reliably. Nevertheless, many
practical but difficult large linear systems of equations remain out of reach
computationally. In this project, the PI develops structured fast direct methods
and pre-conditioners for solving such large sparse linear systems. These methods
systematically exploit potentially rich numerical low-rank patterns within the
fill-ins for large reductions in computational time and memory. The efficiency
of these methods comes from three innovative design strategies: the PI develops
randomized algorithms that can rapidly compute high quality low-rank
approximations with low numerical compression overhead; the PI adapts these
methods to preserve desirable properties of the original matrix for enhanced
numerical reliability; and the PI re-organizes the computations so that no
numerical compression and data communication is performed unless necessary.

The outcome of this research has the potential to create a novel class of direct
solvers and pre-conditioners that in conjunction with iterative solvers can
become powerful weapons for solving difficult large sparse linear systems, and
the low-rank approximation schemes would become a valuable tool for the general
scientific community, as effective data compression is essential in many areas
of science and engineering. Mathematical software for rapidly solving large
sparse linear systems of equations and for effective compression of large data
sets will be made available to the scientific computing public.