* 1319846
* RI: Small: RUI: AIR: Automatic Idiom Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Jing Peng, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2018
* USD 176,514.00

The main goal of this research project is to develop a language independent
method for automatic idiom recognition. Idiomatic expressions, such as 'a
blessing in disguise' and 'kick the bucket' are plentiful in everyday language,
though they remain mysterious, as it is not clear exactly how people learn and
understand them. There is no single agreed-upon definition of idiom that covers
all members of this class, but idioms tend to be relatively fixed in grammatical
form and meaning, but with relatively little predictability in the relation
between form and meaning. Also, many idiomatic expressions can appear with both
literal, i.e. fully predictable, interpretations given their form -- compare
'The little girl made a face at her mother.' (idiomatic) vs. 'The little girl
made a face on the snowman using a carrot and two buttons.' (literal) As a
result, idioms present great challenges for a variety of natural language
processing applications, including machine translation systems, which often do
not detect idiomatic language. To address these challenges, an algorithm is
proposed that neither relies on target idiom types, lexicons, or large manually
annotated corpora, nor limits the search space by a particular type of
linguistic construction. The starting point is that idioms are semantic outliers
that violate cohesive structure, especially in local contexts. The following
properties are quantified and are incorporated into the outlier detection
algorithm: 1) lack of compositionality comparing to literal expressions or other
types of collocations; 2) violation of local cohesive ties, so that they tend to
be semantically distant from the local topics; 3) while not all semantic
outliers are idioms, non-compositional semantic outliers are likely to be
idiomatic; 4) idiomaticity is not a binary property; rather, idioms fall on the
continuum from being compositional to being partly unanalyzable to completely
non-compositional.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to the better
understanding of idiomatic language, to the computational treatment of such
phenomena and, with the creation of high quality, publicly available linguistic
resources annotated for idioms, to the facilitation of machine learning research
and big data science. Additional benefits include efficient algorithms for
computing compositionality and topicality from large corpora, interesting new
generalizations about the nature of figurative language, and the training of a
cadre of undergraduate and graduate students in highly practical work on a
difficult interdisciplinary problem.