* 1319829
* HCC: Small: Activity-Enriched Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* James Hollan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,976.00

Although myriad extraordinary benefits have resulted from the web and expanding
network connectivity, the intertwining of computers with virtually every aspect
of life also brings a growing stream of interruptions. These interruptions and
the fragmenting of activity they produce are increasingly accepted parts of
modern life. A critical research challenge for human-centered computing is how
to smooth and mitigate the impact of interruptions as well as assist in resuming
interrupted activities. Meeting this challenge will require moving beyond the
traditional document-centric view of information to address the complexity of
real activity, its often fragmented history, and the need to access information
arrayed across digital and paper media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the design of systems that will allow people to exploit visual and
episodic memory to benefit from the capture of the history and context of their
computer-mediated activities. The heart of the project is rethinking the nature
of data as stored in computers from being a state to being an inspectable
activity history of interaction that can be presented to users. Activity-
enriched computing has the potential to reshape how we use computers by creating
systems that react to and are augmented by the history of past events, changing
the computer environment to one in which history is always available to assist
if needed. The primary scientific contributions will be to (a) develop an
activity-enriched computing framework for designing a new class of systems in
which history is a first-class element, (b) prototype and evaluate activity-
enriched applications, and (c) extend theory and methods for representing,
visualizing, and analyzing activity histories. Scientific contributions will
include a novel activity-enriched computing framework that will (a) capture the
rich detail of computer-mediated activity, (b) identify and make meaningful and
useful episodes available, (c) link the worlds of paper and digital documents,
and (d) exploit summarization and visual access mechanisms to support navigation
of activity histories and ease resuming interrupted activities. The overarching
objective is to lessen the impact of interruptions and aid reestablishment of
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of the
proposed activity include the potential to radically improve the efficacy of all
computer-mediated activities. The results of the project and the software
developed will be widely disseminated and made available on the project website.
Additional impact will result from training students in the interdisciplinary
approach required to design activity-enriched computing applications, providing
research opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students. A long-term
impact will be to crystallize a research community to further develop and evolve
activity-enriched computing.