* 1319935
* SHF: SMALL: Energy Efficient Self-Healing Design of Carbon Nanotube Thin Film Transistors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Satish Kumar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 456,000.00

Thin-film transistors (TFTs) are one of the most important components of macro-
electronic circuits used in various flexible electronic applications such as
displays, large area sensors, radio frequency identification (RFID) tags, and
antennas. In this context, Carbon Nanotube Thin-Film Transistors (CN-TFTs) are
very promising for enhancing performance and expanding the range of operation of
many flexible-electronic applications due to several reasons. However, some
critical issues need to be addressed before CN-TFTs can be made available for
commercial flexible electronic use. The objectives of this research are to: (a)
analyze the effects of different coatings of CN-TFT substrates and self-heating
on CN-TFT performance and reliability; and (b) design and analyze energy
efficient and self-healing CN-TFT circuits and establish/control the effects of
statistical and morphological variability of transistors on circuit-level
performance. A multi-scale modeling framework consisting of an atomistic model
for Carbon Nanotube (CNT) junctions, electro-thermal transport model for CN-
TFTs, and circuit models will be developed to enable this analysis. The multi-
scale framework will facilitate the design of energy efficient, high
performance, and reliable CN-TFT circuits and establish guidelines for
significant decrease in the power consumption, hot spot temperature, and
performance variations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient numerical methods
developed for multi-scale electrical and thermal transport will boost the field
of efficient computing and analysis of electronic devices. This program will
develop education modules on power consumption, energy transport and heat
dissipation in electronic devices and energy-efficient circuit design, which
will enhance the undergraduate and graduate curriculum. Small demonstrations and
hands-on sessions prepared by this program will motivate K-12 students for
higher education.