* 1319109
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Extensible Symbolic Analysis Modulo SMT: Combining the Powers of Rewriting, Narrowing, and SMT Solving in Maude
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jose Meseguer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

This project develops the foundations for automating verification of secure and
trustworthy systems. It extends the range of analyses that are amenable to
automated checking and addresses scalability. Symbolic techniques that represent
possibly infinite sets of states by symbolic constraints have become important
tools, but many systems of interest fall outside the scope of current
techniques. There is a real need to extend and combine the power of symbolic
analysis techniques to cover a much wider class of systems in order to develop
the foundations for security and trustworthy software and systems.

Maude is a language based on rewriting logic. Maude can be used to model a
system of any kind -- for example, an algorithm, a database, a hardware system,
a programming language, a network protocol, a sensor network, or the molecular
biology dynamics of a cell -- using a set of rewrite rules that describe the
systems behavior. The current Maude implementation provides a high performance
rewrite engine, as well as built-in search, unification, and model checking
tools to support execution and analysis of systems specified in Maude. This
project will develop general extensibility techniques for symbolic analysis that
can simultaneously combine the power of Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT)
constraint solving, rewriting- and unification-based analysis, and automata-
based model checking to analyze a wide variety of systems beyond the scope of
each separate technique. Specifically, the goals of the project are to: (i)
develop the semantic foundations of extensible symbolic analysis combining SMT
solving, rewriting and narrowing, and automata-based model checking; (ii) endow
the Maude formal specification system with combined symbolic analysis
capabilities based on such foundations; and (iii) demonstrate through case
studies the power of such combined and extensible symbolic techniques in
analyzing challenging systems in areas such as: model checking, theorem proving,
programming languages, cryptographic protocols, and real-time and cyber-physical
systems.

Maude has a substantial set of users who are doing research on approaches to
secure and trustworthy systems. These users are poised to use the new techniques
and tools as they develop. For critical systems, where even small security
issues can lead to catastrophic failures, this foundational research will
support rigorous techniques and tools for automated and scalable checking.