* 1319529
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: TIMING VARIATION RESILIENT SIGNAL PROCESSING: HARDWARE-ASSISTED CROSS-LAYER ADAPTATION
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Adit Singh, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 205,029.00

In this research, a new vertically integrated cross-layer timing variation
resilience methodology at the algorithm, microarchitecture and circuit levels,
with "hardware-assistance" from the latter two levels is proposed. This
addresses the effects of process variations and random delay defects in modern
deeply scaled technologies as well as the effects of electrical bugs. At the
highest level of the layer stack, the project considers algorithmic level
workload adaptation as well as adaptation to intermittent errors in the
underlying hardware due to low-power/high-speed pipeline and arithmetic unit
operation. A key contribution of this research is a novel way to accurately
determine when the logic and arithmetic units of pipeline stages have finished
computation. This uses concepts from wave pipelined operation of logic circuits
and allows activity completion detection within nearly a single or a few gate
delays. Such completion sensing allows pipeline stages to "borrow" or "lend"
time much more effectively than currently used synchronously clocked pipelines.
In addition, backup error detection mechanisms allow the processor pipeline to
operate reliably even when there is some kind of malfunction in the completion
sensing circuitry. A vertically integrated control algorithm is used to modulate
power vs. performance vs. timing error resilience at the circuit,
microarchitecture and algorithm (video compression) levels to deliver the
desired quality of service at the required video throughput with minimum power
consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this research effort, the development
of courses at GaTech in embedded DSP design and test, and yield management
research under extreme process variations will be greatly facilitated. The PIs
will develop a set of teaching materials on power management and error
resilience in real-time digital signal processing systems. The PIs will make
maximum effort to involve undergraduate students from the Summer Undergraduate
Research Experience for minorities (SURE) program in the proposed research. It
will also be possible to involve senior undergraduate project students in this
research through targeted advisement. They will participate in H.O.T. Days@
Georgia Tech, a one-week long summer program designed to introduce high school
students to electrical and computer engineering concepts. The key involvement
will be in working with robots (LEGO Mindstorm, simple functions). Both Georgia
Tech and Auburn University aggressively encourage participation of undergraduate
students, as well as women and minorities in research. Auburn's participation in
the project will also improve the research capabilities of Alabama, an EPSCOR
state. Additionally, several master's students from the Historically Black
Tuskegee University located near Auburn will take graduate courses at Auburn
University. The best prepared among these students will be encouraged to join
the project and Ph.D. programs at the participating universities. Thus, funding
for this project will support the goals of recruiting more U.S. citizens, women
and minorities to graduate programs.