* 1319052
* Uniqueness and Reconstructions Methods for Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Bangti Jin, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 280,000.00

Specific problems addressed in this proposal include the recovery of the
location and shape of interior objects from surface measurements or the
determination of obstacles from acoustic or electromagnetic scattering data. In
particular, we concentrate on developing extremely fast algorithms designed to
detect significant features utilizing only minimal data. One central feature of
this proposal is the investigation of inverse problems for so-called anomalous
diffusion models. Classical diffusion is based on Brownian motion and has its
roots in 19th century physics. Here a very localised disturbance spreads with
the characteristic shape of a bell curve and, further, the state of the process
at a given time step depends only on the state at the previous time step. While
this serves well for a wide range of models, it fails for those that exhibit a
"history" or "memory" effect. This includes many materials that been developed
over the last twenty years as well as economic forecasting such as stock and
commodity market modeling. It turns out that degree of ill-conditioning in
anomolous diffusion inverse problems can be very different from those of the
classical case suggesting that indeed fundamental new physics is involved. From
a mathematical and computational standpoint this comes at a price; the resulting
analysis is considerably more complex and challenging.

Many objects of physical interest cannot be studied directly. Examples include,
imaging the interior of the body, the determination of cracks within solid
objects, and material parameters such as the conductivity of inaccessible
objects. When these problems are translated into mathematical terms they take
the form of partial differential equations, the Lingua Franca of the
mathematical sciences. However, since we have additional unknowns in the model,
these introduce unknown parameters in the equations that have to be additionally
resolved by means of further measurements. In this proposal we deal with the
practical aspects of such "inverse problems" from a mathematical and
computational perspective. We are interested in when a unique determination can
be made from a given amount of data, but these inverse problems are
characterized by often severe "ill-conditioning", meaning that even when there
is only one solution to the problem, two very different objects may produce data
sets that are infinitesimally close. This aspect makes designing and analyzing
algorithms for the efficient numerical recovery of the unknowns extremely
challenging. Inverse problems can have multiple scales of complexity. Some, such
as earthquake modeling require large scale computational resources and amassing
considerable amounts of data. Others rely on obtaining extremely fast
computations with minimal data collection; developing algorithms that enable a
hand-held scanner to locate flaws in structural materials or portable machines
to detect tumors in a noninvasive way. The proposal also has a significant
educational component in the training of undergraduate students. Many of the
distinct features of inverse problems can be seen from considering applications
in vibration, heat conduction and acoustic scattering, and can have a
significant hands-on component. The experimental equipment is readily available
and cheap. Metal plates make conductive 2D media, a saw cuts an insulating
inclusion and cheap thermistors can be used to measure data. Loudspeakers make
incident waves, microphones make receivers, the software to go between analogue
signals and digital data is on most laptops. The mystery of the "hidden" object
can be added by black, light opaque, acoustically transparent speaker cloth. We
have amassed much of this equipment already, some of it quite well used in
previous undergraduate research experiences.