* 1319366
* AF: Small: Collaborative:RUI: Mathematical foundations of reconfiguration algorithms for geometrically constraint structures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ileana Streinu, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 354,189.00

Geometric reconfiguration problems underlie modern mathematical investigations
in robotics, mechanical design and structural engineering. In recent years,
challenging questions in computational biology and computational materials
science (such as protein folding, viral assembly, flexibility studies of
crystalline materials and the rational design of macromolecules with desired
functionality) are approached with methods originally developed for abstract,
geometrically constraint structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop novel algorithms based on mathematically rigorous techniques, by
exploiting discrete structures underlying three-dimensional articulated
structures (such as linkages, panel-and-hinge chains and polyhedra). Examples
include reconfigurations of robot arms within their 3D workspace, with
singularity- and collision-avoidance, expansive motions and pseudo-
triangulations in a 3D and in periodic settings, and origami foldability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project builds upon the PIs' previous work,
and extends it in new directions. It seeks to generalize concepts from Rigidity
Theory (such as pointed pseudo-triangulations), which were previously applied
successfully to 2-dimensional linkage reconfiguration problems. It addresses
problems concerning extremal configurations of revolute jointed robotic
manipulators and the intrinsic mathematical structure of their 3D workspace. It
aims at bringing in novel algebraic and combinatorial rigidity-theoretic
methods, and at applying them to periodic and crystalline structures. Recent
results relating origami design to properties of piecewise linear surfaces will
also be extended to questions concerning origami folding properties to rigidity
questions of panel-and-hinge structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant provides
funding for the training of graduate and undergraduate students. In particular,
REU projects emerging from these topics will involve students from Smith
College, an all-women college with a sustained reputation for successfully
educating minority undergraduate students in the sciences.