* 1319551
* III: Small: Rapid screening of interacting ligands and proteins
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Daisuke Kihara, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 492,509.00

Computational infrastructure for efficient and accurate searching of bio-
molecules from various databases is foundation of any modern biology,
biochemistry, pharmacology, and biotechnology. The goal of this project is to
develop computational methods and databases that allow fast, real-time screening
of various types of three dimensional (3D) structural data of proteins and their
interacting molecules in a seamless fashion. The structure data to be searched
include 3D protein structures and protein complexes, predicted protein
structures, low-resolution protein complexes solved by cryo-electron microscopy,
small chemical ligand molecules, and drug molecules. The project employs a
mathematical representation of biomolecules that can quickly compare and search
biomolecules that have similar global and local surface shape and properties
with a query molecule. The project will further expand the applicability of the
molecule representation for searching interacting molecules by identifying
complementarity of shapes and surface properties. The methods to be developed in
the project allow biologists to quickly identify potentially interacting
proteins to a query protein, which will help generating testable hypothesis of
molecular mechanisms of diseases through building molecular networks. Moreover,
the methods will also enable quick searching of ligand molecules and potential
drug molecules that fit to a target protein.

Biology has entered the informatics era, when combining different types of big
omics data are routinely required to reach a systems-level understanding of
biological function of molecules and cells. In order to effectively glean useful
structural data for biological studies, there is a strong need for computational
methods that can quickly and seamlessly search for different types of structural
data. Establishing efficient methods for searching biomolecular shape and
physicochemical properties is essential for capitalizing on the large number of
efforts directed towards determining molecular and cellular structures by
structural genomics and other projects. The project will develop computational
methods and databases to screen various types of protein structures and their
interacting molecules seamlessly and quickly. Using the molecular representation
proposed in the project, global and local shapes and surface properties
(electrostatic potential, hydrophobicity) of proteins and ligand molecules can
be compared ery fast. In contrast to conventional 3D structure search methods
for biomolecules that take hours or even more than a day to finish a database
search, the methods to be developed will allow real-time searches against large
databases. Thus, structural analysis will become as convenient as sequence
database searches for biology researchers. The 3D molecule search methods will
be applied to identify interacting molecules for a query protein, ligand
molecules that would bind to a pocket region of the query protein as well as
interacting proteins. Knowing molecular interactions is critical for
understanding functions of proteins. The key innovations include 1) finding
interacting molecules to proteins, i.e. pocket-ligand interactions and protein-
protein interactions; 2) local surface comparisons for functional annotations;
Developed methods will be implemented into 3D-Surfer, a one-stop website for
biomolecular shape retrieval.

The proposed approach can be applied for other types of rapid shape and property
comparisons, such as 2D and 3D medical images, microscope images, geographical
landscapes, and face recognition. Graduate and undergraduate students in
biological sciences and computer science will be trained in cross-listed courses
among several departments. Several existing programs at Purdue for recruiting
minority students and undergraduate students will contribute to broad
participation in the project. Overall the proposed project leverages Purdue
University?s efforts in interdisciplinary computational life science and
engineering.