* 1319587
* SHF:  Small:  Architecting Stacked DRAM as Gigascale Cache, or Fast Memory, or Both
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Moinuddin Qureshi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

As the computing industry steps into the many-core regime, the main memory
system has become one of the key bottlenecks that limits both performance and
scalability. To address these challenges, the memory industry is developing
3D-stacked DRAM technology. Die stacking can provide lower latency, much higher
bandwidth, and significantly reduced energy dissipation. Unfortunately, stacked
memory is unlikely to have sufficient capacity to completely replace traditional
DRAM. Therefore, future memory systems will likely use stacked memory in
combination with off-chip DRAM, either architecting stacked DRAM as a giga-scale
cache or as heterogeneous main memory. However, to fully utilize the potential
of stacked memory, the system architecture must make choices that exploit the
unique latency and bandwidth characteristics offered by stacked DRAM. For
example, simply applying traditional "well-understood" cache designs and memory
designs to stacked DRAM results in low performance and poor bandwidth
utilization.

This project first looks at caching organizations and management strategies for
stacked DRAM that are tailored to exploit latency and bandwidth properties of 3D
stacking. It then looks at memory organizations that can incorporate stacked
memory as part of memory address space, without relying on OS support to exploit
temporal locality and still perform memory management at fine granularity.
Finally, this project investigates morphable architectures that can dynamically
reconfigure the stacked DRAM between cache structure and main memory, in order
to conserve power and optimize performance depending on the workload
requirements. The research solutions in this study will thus help future systems
obtain an order of magnitude improvement in both bandwidth and energy-efficiency
from the effective use of memory stacking.