* 1319731
* Hybrid Computational Models and Robust Numerical Methods for Electrostatic Interactions in Biomolecules
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Bo Li, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 280,000.00

This project develops hybrid computational models and robust numerical methods
for electrostatic interactions in biomolecular systems. The computational models
are constructed at different levels. They include variational mean-field models
with atomistic details, particularly ionic size effects, and Monte Carlo
simulation models for treating individual ions. These models are coupled with an
advanced, variational approach to the solvation of biomolecules. A robust
numerical method for solving the related elliptic interface problem and
calculating the dielectric boundary force is designed and analyzed. Special
interface algebraic multigrid methods and the GPU (Graphics Processing Unit)
implementation are developed to accelerate the related large-scale computations.
Numerical analysis focuses on the accuracy of the proposed schemes, particularly
that of the boundary force approximation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomolecules such
as proteins and DNA are assemblies of atoms of which a significant portion are
charged. Charged biomolecules polarize the solvent (water or salted water) and
produce ions that are mobile charged particles in the solution. The
electrostatic or charge-charge interaction gives rise to strong forces that
determine the structure, dynamics, and function of underlying biological
systems. For instance, the electrostatic interaction affects how a drug molecule
binds to a target molecule, which in turn determines how effective the drug is
in the process of curing a disease. Through the development of modern
mathematical theories and computational tools, this project aims at
understanding the fundamental principles of biological systems at the molecular
level and advancing the research of computational mathematics. The success of
this project can potentially help reduce the high cost often needed for
experiments and speed up the process of drug discovery. In addition, this highly
interdisciplinary research brings opportunities for students at different levels
to receive training at the interface of computational mathematics and molecular
biological science. Such training is critical to keeping our strength in
scientific research in an competitive international environment.