* 1319897
* HCC: Small: Creating a Data-Driven World: Situated Practices of Collecting, Curating, Manipulating, and Deploying Data in Healthcare
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Kathleen Pine, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This project will study the situated practices, human assumptions, and
organizational routines that transform "little data" into mineable stores of
"big data" harnessed for measures and metrics. Currently, our knowledge about
the origins of big data and what goes into collecting, curating, manipulating,
and deploying these huge information resources is limited. We know even less
about the social and cultural implications of these activities, particularly in
non-academic contexts. A growing group of scholars urge critical interrogation
of the methods, analytical assumptions, and underlying biases of big data
science. A nuanced understanding of the situated practices through which big
datasets are assembled and manipulated is required before we can comprehend
their social and political implications, particularly if we are to evaluate the
quality of the scientific results based on analysis on the manipulation of such
datasets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out through a
multi-sited ethnography of obstetrical data production in healthcare, an area
where big data and associated metrics are both important and problematic. First,
it will examine the situated practice and lived experience of creating the
massive amounts of information that come to form the datasets. Second, it will
trace how the results emerge through automatized measures and algorithms and
affect the very environments they are supposed to reflect. This research spans
the lifecycle of data. It will investigate how information is collected by
practitioners, clerks, and coders and transformed into local repositories of
supposedly "clean" data to be manipulated by performance improvement
specialists. It will then trace how information is transferred and refined
further in a statewide data center and deployed by a major quality improvement
organization. Finally, the research will follow the aggregated data back to the
local hospitals themselves and assess how data visualizations and performance
measures affect local decisions and hospital functioning.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include both near and long-term
benefits. In the short term, this research will benefit the individuals and
organizations struggling with questions about how to organize local resources to
produce and deploy big data in service of management and performance improvement
goals. In the long term, this research will generate foundational conceptual
models that help to create design recommendations and practice guidelines
regarding the social, ethical, and political implications of creating and using
big data.