* 1319187
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Similary-Based Program Analyses for Eliminating Vulnerabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Zhendong Su, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

The security of critical information infrastructures depends upon effective
techniques to detect vulnerabilities commonly exploited by malicious attacks.
Due to poor coding practices or human error, a known vulnerability discovered
and patched in one code location may often exist in many other unpatched code
locations, either in the same code base or other code bases. Furthermore,
patches are often error-prone, resulting in new vulnerabilities. This project
develops practical techniques for detecting code-level similarity to prevent
such vulnerabilities. It has the potential to help build a more reliable and
secure information system infrastructure, which will have tremendous economical
impact on society because of our growing reliance on information technologies.

In particular, the project aims to develop practical techniques for similarity-
based testing and analysis to detect unpatched vulnerable code and validate
patches to the detected vulnerable code at both the source code and binary
levels. To this end, it focuses on three main technical directions: (1)
developing techniques for detecting source-level vulnerabilities by adapting and
refining an industrial-strength tool, (2) developing capabilities of detecting
binary-level vulnerabilities by extending preliminary work on detecting code
clones in binaries, and (3) supporting patch validation and repair by developing
methodologies and techniques to validate software patches and help produce
correct, secure patches. This project helps discover new techniques for source-
and binary-level vulnerability analysis and gain better understandings of the
fundamental and practical challenges for building highly secure and reliable
software.