* 1319420
* SHF: Small: Advanced Compiler Techniques for Meeting Fault Tolerance Needs of  HPC Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Gagan Agrawal, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2017
* USD 507,695.00

Making high performance applications resilient to failure of individual nodes is
a major challenge today. Particularly, there is a need for reducing the
overheads associated with checkpointing and for dealing with silent data
corruption in an effective fashion. This project at Ohio State University is
addressing these problems based on new insights and approaches. The work on
improving the efficiency of checkpointing and restart is based on the following
observation - current checkpointing protocols were developed in context of
distributed computing, and do not exploit key properties seen in most scientific
parallel programs. This project is developing static and dynamic analysis
methods to determine what we refer to as the "message intent", which can then be
used to allow automated application-level uncoordinated checkpointing, but
without the need for message logging, keeping the checkpoint sizes small, and
recovery low-cost. In addition, a distinct software approach for handling silent
data corruption is being developed. The idea is to make the data structures that
control what computation and/or communication occurs in the program resilient,
by only replicating them and their storage. This introduces modest overheads,
but guards against the most drastic impact of silent data corruption on program
stability and correctness. &lt;br/&gt;This research will result in reducing
overheads of making high performance systems resilient, which in turn will
improve the efficiency and resource utilization.