* 1319585
* III: Small: Wavelet-Based Representations for Hyperspectral Data Processing and Interpretation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Mario Parente, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 540,651.00

Hyperspectral imaging systems play an important role in scientific research,
especially in planetary and terrestrial geology, environmental monitoring,
military and security surveillance, and mineralogy. With current advances in
imaging systems technology, large datasets at higher resolutions are being
produced and research on automated analysis of these datasets is becoming
critical. The goal of this project is to formulate mathematical models for
hyperspectral datasets that capture the types of structure commonly identified
by practitioners as informative and leveraged semantically in existing ad-hoc
methods. The focus is on models based on wavelet representations for spectral
signatures in order to provide features that represent the desired multiscale
structural information. The features will leverage the wavelet's multiscale
time-frequency analysis properties, and will be tested on several labeling,
classification, and retrieval problems from a broad range of application areas
that are expected to attract underrepresented groups in engineering. This
proposal is centered on the application of the proposed models to hyperspectral
signal processing and machine learning. The overall goal is to formulate and
study new geometric signal models for high-dimensional data and new performance
metrics for parameter estimation to be leveraged by new computationally feasible
estimation algorithms that (i) are amenable to compressive signal processing due
to the use of geometric structure to capture relevant signal information and
(ii) overcome the performance shortcomings observed in existing approaches. The
formulation of a semantic model for spectral signatures is expected to increase
the acceptance of universal representations in applications where processes
driven by ad-hoc rules are commonplace. The project broadens participation of
underrepresented groups by considering applications areas that have the
potential to appeal to diverse communities and constituencies in order to
attract interest from a diverse class of populations underrepresented in
engineering. Student researchers will be exposed to collaborators from a diverse
set of scientific backgrounds and cultures. Opportunities for undergraduate
research and high-school teacher research experience will be offered in this
project with a particular emphasis on venues serving groups underrepresented in
engineering.