* 1319376
* AF:  Small:  Flows, Cuts, Treewidth and Algorithms for Routing, Network Design and Related Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Chandra Chekuri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 495,242.00

Graphs and networks are of fundamental importance in discrete optimization.
Several natural graph optimization problems are NP-Hard and a large body of work
has been devoted to designing and analyzing approximation algorithms for these
problems. Key algorithmic advances are tied to structural understanding of
graphs and mathematical programming relaxations. This research has resulted in
effective heuristics as well as exciting connections with different areas of
mathematics. In this award, the PI will study approximation algorithms for graph
optimization problems in two broad areas: multicommodity flow and cut problems
in routing, and connectivity problems in network design. Some specific problems
of interest are:

(i) Maximum disjoint paths, congestion minimization and relation between integer
flows, fractional flows and cuts. In particular, node-capacitated undirected
graphs and directed graphs with symmetric demands will be the emphasis. (ii)
Treewidth decomposition theorems and applications to fixed parameter
tractability and Erdos-Posa theorems, in particular in directed graphs. (iii)
The survivable network design problem with vertex connectivity requirements.

The proposed problems on flows, cuts and network design are at the core of
combinatorial optimization and approximation algorithms research. Progress on
these problems will require advances in algorithms and structural understanding
of graphs, in particular directed graphs, which will have several auxiliary
benefits. The project will support and train two to three PhD students in the
design and analysis of algorithms at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. The PI plans to write a survey outlining the recent developments on
algorithms for routing, and their connection to graph theoretical results on
treewidth.