* 1319987
* AF: Small: Counting and Sampling Cuts and Paths in Planar and Lattice Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Ivona Bezakova, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 05/31/2018
* USD 128,357.00

This award targets counting and sampling variants of a number of cut and path
problems in several restricted graph classes including planar graphs, the
8-connected 2D grid, and the 3D grid. These graph classes are primarily
motivated by applications in computer vision where several recent results
renewed interest in the minimization variants of these problems. The importance
of the corresponding counting and sampling variants stems from, among others,
automated learning of the parameters of the underlying probabilistic models such
as the Markov Random Field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research builds on
the PI's recent works on counting and sampling minimum (s,t)-cuts and minimum
single-source-multi-sink cuts with connectivity priors, both in planar graphs.
These problems are used in image segmentation applications and form an initial
step towards the ultimate goal of computing the partition function for weighted
cuts, i.e., the summation of the cut weights across all (s,t)-cuts; this
quantity is essential for model parameter learning via the maximum likelihood
principle. The PI will study a variety of cut and path problems that generalize
the initial results from different perspectives. These include studying other
connectivity priors, moving beyond planarity, and beyond minimum cuts and
shortest paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will actively involve
undergraduate and master students. Related educational materials are projected
to annually impact over 600 students, about 10 of them from the National
Technical Institute for the Deaf. In addition to standard dissemination venues
like conferences and journals, the PI will also present the results at the
annual Imagine RIT festival. This community outreach festival attracted about
35,000 visitors in 2012, many of them middle and high school students.