* 1319700
* III: Small: Integrating Crowd Sourcing, Volunteer Computing and Expert Observation to Robustly Classify Massive Quantities of Avian Nesting Video
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Travis Desell, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 497,263.00

New camera technology is allowing avian ecologists to perform detailed studies
of avian behavior, nesting strategies and predation in areas where it was
previously impossible to gather data. Unfortunately, studies have shown
mechanical triggers and a variety of sensors to be inadequate in capturing
footage of small predators (e.g., snakes, rodents) or events in dense
vegetation. Because of this, continuous camera recording is currently the most
robust solution for avian monitoring, especially in ground nesting species.
However, continuous video footage results in a data deluge, as monitoring enough
nests to make biologically significant inferences results in massive amounts of
data which is unclassifiable by humans alone. This project will develop a
citizen science project which combines volunteer computing, where people
volunteer their computers to automatically analyze video with computer vision
strategies, and crowd sourcing, where people volunteer their brain power by
streaming the videos and reporting observations, to analyze over a hundred
thousand of hours of avian nesting video.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative proposal will address the data deluge in avian research, where
data acquisition rates are greatly outpacing the ability to process that data,
by gathering, storing, and analyzing nest video at unprecedented scales for
evaluating hypotheses about avian reproductive ecology and predator-prey
interactions. The team will develop computer vision techniques based on the
scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) and speeded up robust features (SURF)
algorithms and their variants capable of identifying events involving animals
with cryptic coloration in uncontrolled outdoor settings for this analysis. In
addition,they will use the nesting video to develop a large human annotated
archival video resource for ecologists and computer vision researchers alike,
generated using crowd sourced volunteer observations validated against each
other and further refined by a scientific web portal for expert analysis of the
volunteered responses. An enduring citizen science project combining crowd
sourcing and volunteer computing to perform the analysis of the video and use it
to foster public interest and involvement from K-12 classrooms, stimulating
online education in STEM disciplines is also planned.