* 1319674
* Student Travel Support for the 2013 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Chandan Reddy, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2015
* USD 28,000.00

This award provides travel support for approximately 26 students to attend the
2013 SIAM Data Mining (SDM 2013) Conference (and the Doctoral Student Forum)
that is being organized by the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
(SIAM) in cooperation with the American Statistical Association. SDM 2013 is
being held in Austin, Texas, USA from May 2 to 4, 2013. The Doctoral Forum will
consist of a poster session for Ph.D. candidates in data mining or closely
related areas or Ph.D. students who have made significant progress towards Ph.D.
candidacy. The Ph.D. student forum participants will be able to present their
work, interact with their peers from other universities as well as hundreds of
leading researchers in data mining from around the world. In addition, they will
attend the technical sessions, plenary talks, and tutorials and workshops of
their choice at the conference. Each student will be assigned a senior
researcher to serve as a mentor on a variety of career-related
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in premier research conferences in
data mining is an integral component of the training of Ph.D. students in data
mining. The SDM 2013 Doctorul Student Forum is aimed at providing an opportunity
for Ph.D. candidates to present their work and receive constructive feedback and
mentoring from established researchers in data mining. Such feedback and
mentoring is expected to improve the quality of the students thesis research.
Similarly, student recipient of a travel award will be able to attend technical
sessions, plenary talks, panels, tutorials and workshops. They will interact
with peers who share similar interests from other universities, as well as
hundreds of leading researchers in data mining from around the world. This
experience will be extremely formative and fruitful towards the shaping of their
future research endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data mining is playing an
increasingly important role in many emerging data-rich sciences and application
domains, such as healthcare informatics, bioinformatics, computational biology,
link analysis, counterterrorism and security. The SDM 2013 Doctoral Student
forum will enrich the education and training of student researchers at early
stages in their careers. Attendance in SDM 2013 will expose students to cutting-
edge research and to relevant applications in a variety of domains. The travel
awards will help broaden the participation of women and members of under-
represented groups within the Data Mining research community.