* 1319648
* AF:  SMALL:  Fundamental Data Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* John Iacono, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 515,859.00

The need to efficiently store and access data is central to modern computing.
Speeding up the actual performance of fundamental problems is not limited to
better experience for users; it is also about using computer resources more
efficiently. Faster algorithms and data structures mean less energy consumption,
and less physical computing resources needed. This project will investigate the
discovery of provably best data structures for several fundamental problems. The
dictionary, priority queue and packed memory array are three abstract data
structures considered in this project. The dictionary supports the efficient
insertion, deletion, and search of ordered data. The priority queue supports
insertion and the removal of the minimum element. The packed-memory array keeps
ordered data in sorted order in a limited amount of space.

For binary search trees (BSTs), this research will make substantial progress on
many fundamental problems that include finding a dynamically optimal search
tree, proving better explicit upper and lower bounds on BSTs, inventing methods
to combine BSTs, and transforming amortized BSTs into ones with good worst-case
runtimes. In the case of heaps, the project will analyze performance bounds for
decrease-key operations in natural models, search for a geometric view of heaps,
investigate dynamic optimality, and improve the analysis of pairing heaps.
Cache-oblivious heaps with close to optimal decrease-key operations, and
efficient packed memory array (PMA) structure are two fundamental building
blocks of many cache-oblivious algorithms. This project will develop PMAs that
perform well on sequences with certain types of order, and construct a
randomized structure whose runtime beats the lower bound for deterministic
structures. The project will also examine the role of in-degree in pointer-model
persistence and develop general transformations for cache-oblivious persistence.

Data structures are foundational for algorithms. Improving fundamental data
structures will have profound broader impact on computing practice. Advances in
data structures are accessible to undergraduates and the PI will engage under-
represented students in this research.