* 1319333
* CSR:Small: Scalable Transaction Management and Consistency Models for Cloud Data Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Anand Tripathi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 461,236.00

The goal of this project is to develop scalable techniques and system
architectures for transaction management in cloud computing systems. In the
recent years, various data management systems based on key-value storage models
have emerged to address the scalability requirements of cloud based
applications. However, these systems do not provide rich data management
primitives, such as multi-row serializable transactions, often needed in many
application domains. This project is investigating scalable transaction
management techniques for key-value based data storage systems with the aim of
supporting multi-row transactions with ACID (atomicity, isolation, durability,
consistency) properties in such systems. For scalability, this investigation is
based on utilizing the snapshot isolation model. Additional issues arise in
supporting transaction management for geographically replicated data across
different cloud datacenters. Considering that weaker consistency models can be
adequate in certain applications, this project aims to develop techniques for
supporting different transactional consistency models such as snapshot
isolation, causal consistency, serializability, and session-level consistency
for geo-replicated data in cloud applications. Moreover, the goal of this
project is to exploit the semantics of data operations for enhanced performance
and availability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at enabling the use of
key-value based cloud data storage models for a large-class of applications with
various different data consistency requirements. The lack of transaction support
with strong consistency models in cloud computing systems has been an obstacle
in adoption of such systems in many critical application domains. A potentially
transformative impact of this project will be towards enabling a broader class
of applications to utilize cloud computing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;