* 1319050
* Accelerated Algorithms for a Class of Saddle Point problems and Variational Inequalities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yunmei Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 160,000.00

This project will develop novel theories and optimal numerical methods for
solving certain classes of deterministic and stochastic saddle point and
variational inequality problems arising from large-scale data analysis in
various disciplines. The proposed accelerated primal-dual (APD) algorithm is
based on the integration of a multi-step acceleration scheme with the primal-
dual method, and expected to exhibit an optimal rate of convergence as the one
obtained by Nesterov for a different scheme. The proposed stochastic APD
algorithm is also expected to possess an optimal rate of convergence for solving
stochastic saddle point problems, while no stochastic primal-dual algorithms
have been developed in the literature. Moreover, the research will be extended
to the development of optimal methods for solving a class of composite
variational inequalities (VI) that includes the class of the saddle point
problems to be studied as a special case. This study provides some important
insights on the decomposition of a general VI problem to potentially accelerate
its solution. Furthermore, the theoretical analysis on optimal convergence rate,
and optimal estimation of the bound for duality gap, especially, the dependence
on the distance between the initial and saddle points (or the diameter of the
feasible set, if they are bounded), of all the proposed algorithms will be
investigated. The project will investigate and develop backtracking strategies
for the proposed algorithms to enhance their practical performance. The new
methods will be applied to several image reconstruction and machine learning
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The class of the deterministic and stochastic
saddle point and variational inequality problems studied in this proposal has
been considered as a framework of ill-posed inverse problems regularized by a
non-smooth functional in many data analysis problems, such as image
reconstruction, compressed sensing and machine learning. The success of the
proposed research will significantly advance non-smooth convex optimization
solvers by enriching solver's abilities in accelerating computation with good
theoretical performance guaranteed. Therefore, this project is expected to
greatly increase the applicability of many emerging technologies, such as
partially parallel imaging and dynamic multi-tracer PET. Those imaging methods
can significantly reduce scan time and improve image quality. However, their
clinical applications have been hindered by our incapability to efficiently
solve the large-scale ill-posed and ill-conditioned inverse image reconstruction
problems. Moreover, the development of stochastic APD algorithms will greatly
enhance learning power. For instance, these optimal methods will enable
researchers to build high-level, class specific feature detectors from massive
datasets. The new methods to be developed have a wide range of applications in
large-scale data analysis problems from various disciplines. Therefore, the
research will contribute to the research communities and industry with mutual
interest. The algorithms developed during the research will be made freely
available on the World Wide Web. The graduate students of the PIs will be
involved in all aspects of the research, both theoretical analysis as well as
practical implementation of algorithms. The research will be made accessible to
more graduate and senior undergraduate students through seminars and course
developments. The PIs intend to teach courses based on the proposed research.