* 1319318
* RI: Small: Closing the Loop: Inducing High-Precision Grammars for Generating Disambiguating Paraphrases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Michael White, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2018
* USD 307,982.00

This project investigates trainable methods of paraphrasing natural language
sentences to effectively disambiguate their meaning, using precise,
bidirectional grammars induced from corpora to "close the loop"' between parsing
and generation. The approach generalizes previous work on probabilistically
avoiding ambiguity in natural language generation to a broad coverage setting,
disambiguating only as necessary in order to better balance clarity and
readability. Generating disambiguating paraphrases in a broad coverage setting
makes it possible to explore ways of adapting parsers to new domains using
crowd-sourced judgments of meaning similarity. Accordingly, the project explores
methods of (1) inducing OpenCCG grammars from the dependency output of parsers
such as the C&amp;C parser, (2) generating paraphrases with OpenCCG that
explicitly aim to avoid likely distractor interpretations, (3) collecting
meaning similarity judgments between the original sentence and paraphrases of
its most likely interpretations, and (4) retraining the parser using the
collected judgments. To evaluate the approach while also conducting outreach,
the project involves data collection and experimentation at Ohio State's
language research pod at the COSI science museum, in addition to the use of
Amazon's Mechanical Turk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By closing the loop between
interpretation and generation, the project promises to dramatically enhance the
prospects for using crowd-sourcing to adapt natural language processing tools to
new domains. The project will also enable international collaborations with the
University of Sydney, and help to educate the public about language science and
technology, providing an inspirational example of science in action to the
children who attend COSI.