* 1319459
* SHF: Small: Pushing the Frontier of Linear-Time Model-Checking Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Moshe Vardi, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 304,582.00

Model checking is a technique for verifying the correctness of computer systems.
Different implementations are in wide industrial usage today. There are still,
however, many large gaps in our understanding of the algorithmic issues involved
in model checking, and the technology is still greatly challenged by industrial
designs. For example, in hardware-design verification, it is rarely possible to
apply existing tools to complete units with clear functionality. This project is
pushing the frontier of this technology with the goal of scaling its
applicability to functional system units by developing novel scalable algorithms
for model checking. The result will be increased reliability of computer
systems.

This project will explore the mathematical approach to design verification that
uses automata theory as a unifying paradigm for design specification and
verification. The automata-theoretic approach separates the logical and the
combinatorial aspects of reasoning about systems. The translation of
specifications to automata handles the logic and shifts all the combinatorial
difficulties to questions about automata, yielding clean and asymptotically
optimal algorithms. While the fundamental theory is well understood, there are
still many challenging gaps and improved algorithms can enhance the scalability
of this approach significantly. This project investigates ways of improving
automata-theoretic algorithms so they are more suitable for model checking at
scale.