* 1319769
* SHF: Small: Collaborative research:Complexity and feasibility for programs over coinductively-defined data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Royer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

The typical tools of complexity theory and algorithms tend to be biased toward
low-level models of computation that refer directly to bit-level representations
of data. But when programming in the large, there are layers upon layers of
abstraction over any low-level details, and a key feature of modern programming
is the ability to compose different abstractions without regard to such details.
Compositionality has yielded very reliable software development methodologies,
in large part because the tools developed for reasoning about program
correctness have developed alongside these notions of abstraction. However,
tools for reasoning about complexity have not kept pace. The big picture of the
principle investigators' research program is to develop techniques for
compositional reasoning about complexity, thereby allowing for reasoning about
run-time cost in all its facets of large-scale programming with methods similar
to those so successfully deployed for reasoning about correctness. The research
project funded by this grant concentrates on characterizing sensible notions of
feasibility for programs that use coninductively-defined data such as streams (a
program that produces or processes streaming media is just the right model to
have in mind) and more generally quantifying, in a machine-checkable manner,
resource usage for such programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although feasibility has
been well-studied in the context of finite structures, extensions to potentially
infinite data structures such as streams have been somewhat piecemeal. One facet
of this research project is to develop principled notions of feasibility in this
setting. To do so, the PIs will extend tools such as logic and programming
language formalisms that have previously been used to give resource-free
characterizations of complexity classes for finite structures. Such tools are
already more closely tied to a compositional view of programming, and they give
a jumping-off point for analyzing notions of cost in domains where the very
definition of resource usage may not be so obvious. One such tool that they
developed in previous work is a framework for compositional cost analysis of
higher-order programs. This time-complexity semantics is essentially a
translation of target-language programs into a domain of complexities, which
encode information about evaluation and usage cost. The translation can be
automated, and so this framework not only provides a tool for reasoning
compositionally about cost, but provides machine-checkable assertions about the
cost of target programs.