* 1319755
* SHF: Small: Taming the Combinatorial Explosion of Power Management for Future Manycore Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Ricardo Bianchini, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

We will soon enter the manycore era, in which systems will
include&lt;br/&gt;hundreds of cores, large multi-level cache structures,
sophisticated&lt;br/&gt;networks-on-chip, many memory controllers, and huge
amounts of main&lt;br/&gt;memory. These systems will also embody a rich array of
power&lt;br/&gt;management mechanisms and will strive to achieve high
performance&lt;br/&gt;under various power, energy, and thermal constraints.
Unfortunately,&lt;br/&gt;the uncoordinated power management of a system's
components can&lt;br/&gt;produce oscillating behavior, higher
power/energy/temperature, and/or&lt;br/&gt;excessive performance degradation.
Given their large number of&lt;br/&gt;hardware components and the wide spectrum
of available mechanisms,&lt;br/&gt;manycore systems will have to coordinate the
actions of their various&lt;br/&gt;power managers. Moreover, to decide on a
(coordinated) course of&lt;br/&gt;action, these systems will have to
comprehensively and rigorously&lt;br/&gt;reason about various performance and
power/energy/temperature&lt;br/&gt;tradeoffs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop global power coordination (GPC) to manage
the&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial explosion of possible power management
configurations in&lt;br/&gt;manycore systems. GPC will be realized using an
engine that analyzes&lt;br/&gt;the space of possible power state configurations
for the entire&lt;br/&gt;system. It will then decide which configurations are
most appropriate,&lt;br/&gt;and use per-component power managers to actuate the
proper settings.&lt;br/&gt;To optimize the search for good configurations, GPC
will consider&lt;br/&gt;greedy search heuristics that prune the space by relying
on novel&lt;br/&gt;techniques that estimate the benefit of power state changes,
group&lt;br/&gt;resources with similar power management hooks, and leverage
prior&lt;br/&gt;observed behavior and a hierarchical
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will broadly impact society in
many ways. First,&lt;br/&gt;addressing the power, energy, and temperature
problems of manycore&lt;br/&gt;systems can greatly impact the datacenters that
run our Internet&lt;br/&gt;services and the high-performance systems that
advance our science.&lt;br/&gt;Second, tackling these problems will address one
of the key&lt;br/&gt;technological barriers in the computing industry. Third,
the project&lt;br/&gt;will educate graduate, undergraduate, and high-school
students, while&lt;br/&gt;broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups in computer&lt;br/&gt;science.