* 1319788
* AF: Small:  Learning and Testing Classes of Distributions
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Rocco Servedio, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2016
* USD 471,875.00

A long and successful line of research in machine learning deals with algorithms
that learn from "labeled" data, where a target function is assumed to provide a
label for each data point. A major focus of theoretical work has been to develop
efficient algorithms for learning different classes of target functions. Recent
years have witnessed a data explosion across many domains of science and
society, but much of this newly available data consists simply of example points
(DNA sequences, sensor readings, smartphone user locations, etc) without any
labels. A natural model of such scenarios is that data points are generated
according to some unknown probability distribution (typically over an extremely
large domain). The goal of the proposed work is to study the learnability of
different classes of probability distributions given access to samples drawn
from the distributions. This is closely analogous to the framework of learning
from labeled data sketched above, but with probability distributions playing the
role of functions as the objects to be learned.

In this project, the PI will perform theoretical research on developing
computationally efficient algorithms for learning and testing various natural
types of probability distributions over extremely large domains. (Testing
algorithms are algorithms which, instead of trying to accurately model an
unknown distribution, have the more modest goal of testing whether or not the
distribution has some property of interest.) Specific problems the PI will
address include: (1) Developing efficient algorithms to learn and test
univariate probability distributions that satisfy various natural kinds of
"shape constraints" on the underlying probability density function. Preliminary
results suggest that dramatic improvements in efficiency may be possible for
algorithms that are designed to exploit this type of structure. (2) Developing
efficient algorithms for learning and testing complex distributions that result
from the aggregation of many independent simple sources of randomness.

The algorithms that the PI will work to develop can provide useful modelling
tools in data-rich environments and may serve as a "computational substrate" on
which large-scale machine learning applications can be developed for real-world
problems spanning a broad range of application areas. Other important focuses of
the grant are to train graduate students through research collaboration,
disseminate research results through seminar talks, survey articles and other
publications, and to continue ongoing outreach activities aimed at increasing
interest in theoretical computer science topics in elementary school students.