* 1319749
* III: Small: Effective Convex Solvers for Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Daniel Boley, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 453,466.00

Many large scale machine learning problems are formulated as optimization
problems, in which some measure of error or loss is to be minimized over a
suitable training corpus. Real problems have too many data points to fit in a
single computer. Hence the data and/or computation must be distributed over a
network of computers. Often the only practical methods for extremely large
problems are so-called splitting methods, but their convergence properties are
extremely variable: sometimes very fast, sometimes very slow, in ways that can
be hard to predict. The goal of this project is to gain a better understanding
of the convergence behavior and to use this understanding to construct
accelerated algorithms with more consistent convergence properties. This will
allow the application of machine learning techniques to a much wider class of
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Splitting methods (or more precisely alternating
direction methods) are based on the idea that a general convex optimization
problem can be split into two or more parts, each of which can be solved much
more easily compared to the problem as a whole. The methods cycle through all
the variables in turn, optimizing over each subset of variables leaving the rest
fixed. The proposed work builds on a preliminary analysis of a simple model
problem using the eigen-structure of certain matrix operators. The project is
devoted to extending this analysis to more general problems, as well as
developing faster solvers using well-established computational technologies for
the matrix eigenvalue problem. Success will be measured in terms of the
generality of the theory developed and the improvements in the observed
convergence behavior on real problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With faster solvers,
discovery of major regions of influence in a global-scale social network (e.g.
Facebook or Twitter) could become practical on modest computer platforms. The
same holds for tracking disease propagation and people in video sequences. With
efficient solvers, tracking software could be deployed on local hardware without
the need for high-powered central servers. This will lead to advances in
countless areas such data mining, compressive sensing, recommender systems,
signal processing, missing data imputation, analysis of large scale social,
biological or computer networks, image reconstruction, denoising and
classification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research are to be
disseminated in papers in the principal journals and conferences in machine
learning, data mining, and optimization as well as in the form of software
packages via the WWW (http://www-users.cs.umn.edu/~boley/ML-
Optimization).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project depends on the interaction
between different disciplines and applications areas, which will attract
students from a variety of backgrounds at both the graduate and undergraduate
level. Some research tasks are suitable as projects in classes on linear
algebra, optimization, data mining, machine learning and are to be developed for
both undergraduate and graduate students. Undergraduate students, including
women and members of underrepresented groups, will see the value of mathematical
algorithms to solve real problems of interest to them.