* 1319304
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research:Compressed databases for similarity queries: fundamental limits and algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Sergio Verdu, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2017
* USD 250,000.00

Project abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information theory has had a profound
impact on the fields of data transmission and compression. In contrast, it has
yielded comparably few insights into problems such as knowledge extraction from
and efficient search of massive datasets. While current information-theoretic
tools and techniques can be applied to these problems to some extent, the
paradigms for which these tools were developed will be being carefully
reexamined in this project. Models that accurately capture the fundamental
challenges faced by efficient search in modern massive database systems will be
developed and analyzed. The asymptotic fundamental limits, which characterize
the tradeoffs between accuracy, compression rate and search efficiency, will be
investigated, along with development of practical algorithms that approach the
ultimate benchmarks. One concrete problem being pursued is that of compression
for efficient query and search. In this setting, the goal is, given a compressed
representation, to answer search queries about the data that was compressed.
This is in stark contrast to traditional compression, where the data need be
merely reconstructible from the compressed form. The approach taken is tailored
to distributed database design, but is also relevant to compression schemes that
allow search within the compressed domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental
quantities studied play a similar role to that of the channel capacity and
entropy/rate-distortion in channel and source coding, respectively. On one hand,
they yield an understanding of the fundamental limits on the performance that
any system for similarity queries based on compressed representations can hope
to attain. On the other, the insights obtained from the theory are guiding the
construction of schemes that approach these limits in practice. We will
investigate how existing practical approaches (such as various hashing and
clustering techniques) perform with respect to the information theoretic limits,
and the extent to which approaches that have proved to be practical in source
and channel coding can be used as building blocks to develop new efficient
search algorithms that significantly improve on the current state of the art