* 1319880
* CIF: Small: Rich Type Inference for Functional Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Stephanie Weirich, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 457,000.00

The correctness of computer software often relies on its adherence to
application-specific invariants during the course of its execution. These
invariants are complex, often involving relationships between many different
parts of the system, and implicit, often never formally expressed in the text of
the program. Violating these invariants, however, leads to numerous bugs and
security holes. As a result, programmers employ static type systems to capture
these invariants and enable the use of automated tools to check that they are
maintained. Algorithms for type inference allow complex types to remain
implicit, easing software development and maintenance, while still readily
available for documentation and enforcement.

While recent type system extensions greatly enrich the expressiveness of
statically typed languages, type inference algorithms have not kept pace. This
research evaluates the integration of SMT (Satisfiability Modulo Theory) solvers
into the type inference algorithm of an industrial-strength functional
programming language. In particular, in collaboration with researchers at
Microsoft Research Cambridge, it extends the type inference algorithm of the
Glasgow Haskell Compiler (GHC). GHC is a mature, open source, Haskell Compiler
that is gaining popularity in industry due to its rich type system. The project
also includes education and outreach components in the form of an advanced
undergraduate/masters level course and in the direct support of Ph.D. students.