* 1319670
* Development of Undergraduate Course in Solid State Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Camille Jones, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 10/31/2014
* USD 27,468.00

Chemistry (12)&lt;br/&gt;A new undergraduate course in solid state chemistry for
senior-level chemistry and chemical physics majors is being developed. The
rationale for the course is based on an argument that solid state chemistry and
computational methods have been sidelined in the undergraduate curriculum in
favor of qualitative approaches to understanding materials, but that there are
forms of intuition that can only be developed through including quantitative
thinking in the curriculum. The goals of the project include: 1) to develop a
suite of solid state chemistry projects for small student-led research groups
involving synthesis, structure, experimental characterization, and theoretical
modeling; 2) to create a secure website for the course to provide access to
instructional materials, computational and visualization software, and sensitive
course materials for students; 3) to develop course documentation with
theoretical background materials and instructional notes; 4) to create
assessment instruments tailored to the course; 5) to implement the course and
evaluate its success, and then incorporate feedback into a second offering of
the course; and 6) to include internal and external peer reviews of the overall
course, to contribute to the course's evaluation as well as dissemination. The
project includes developing lab-based projects built around important questions
in solid state chemistry and requiring the use of a differential scanning
calorimeter and a thermogravimetric analyzer, as well as computer modeling
programs: 1) a chemical storage materials project exploring practical ways to
store hydrogen in a solid, 2) a project on materials for sequestration and
separation technologies exploring how inclusion compounds can be used for this
purpose, 3) a nanotechnology materials project exploring whether functionalized
nanotubes can assemble into ordered, electrically conductive structures and
whether porous arrays of nanotubes or other forms of carbon can store or
separate gases, and 4) a project on microporous materials for separation and
catalysis exploring what controls the efficacy of separation and catalytic
activity in a zeolite. Evaluation consists of internal and external elements.
The internal evaluation involves chemistry and physics faculty both internal and
external to Hamilton College who are reviewing instructional materials and
course evaluations and providing a "critical friends" approach to feedback.
External evaluation is examining pre-, mid-, and post-assessments along with
course materials, and is focusing on core fidelity, program improvement,
promising and replicable practices, and sustainability. Results of the project
are being disseminated via student and faculty presentations at American
Chemical Society and other conferences and publication of the computational and
laboratory experiments in peer-reviewed journals.