* 1319110
* Robust Multilevel Preconditioning Techniques for Elliptic PDE with Variable Coefficients
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yunrong Zhu, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 85,646.00

The proposed research is to design robust preconditioners for solving the finite
element discretization of second order elliptic PDEs with variable coefficients
and then apply these preconditioners in developing efficient iterative solvers
for Maxwell's equations and H(div) equations. The PI shall develop, analyze and
implement nearly optimal iterative solvers for elliptic PDE with variable
coefficients, especially multiscale elliptic PDEs. Based on several successful
preliminary investigations, the PI will design robust multilevel preconditioners
for various types of finite element discretization, such as conforming,
nonconforming, discontinuous Galerkin discretization and mixed formulation of
second order elliptic PDEs with general variable coefficients on both structured
and unstructured bisection grids. The approach will be based on the auxiliary
space preconditioning framework. This technique will be proved to be robust with
respect to both the variations in the coefficients and the grid size for solving
general multiscale elliptic PDEs. The research will allow one to choose
different coarse grid problems other than the standard variational coarse grid
problems in the preconditioners. Upon obtaining robust preconditioners for
various finite element discretizations, the PI will then use these
preconditioners to develop robust iterative solvers for Maxwell's equations and
H(div) equations with variable coefficients using the auxiliary space
preconditioning techniques. The algorithms will be implemented as open source
software packages which will be used in collaborations with domain-specific
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has broad impact in education and
other areas of mathematics, engineering, and physics through software
development. The methods to be developed will contribute to the advancement of
numerical methods for both linear and nonlinear systems. The research results
will provide powerful tools for the exploration of important models such as
reservoir simulations and electromagnetic computation. The project enriches the
graduate program in the Department of Mathematics at ISU, especially in the area
of partial differential equations and numerical analysis. The research shall
involve undergraduate and graduate students, and excellent mentoring shall be
provided by the PI.