* 1319365
* RI: Small: Reinforcement Learning with Predictive State Representations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Satinder Baveja, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Like animals and humans, artificial autonomous agents that are able to predict
short-term and long-term consequences of their actions can then plan their
behavior, act more intelligently, and achieve greater reward. Agents that can
learn such predictive models from experience can be more robust in their
intelligence than agents that rely on pre-built models. The PI and graduate
students are focused on the particularly challenging but natural case where
observations from the agent's sensors far in the past can continue to influence
the predictions of consequences of actions long into the future. (For example,
the observation of where you park the car in the morning will help predict where
you will see the car later in the day.) There are two broad classes of
approaches to learning predictive models in such 'partially observable'
settings. Finite-history models use short-term history of observations to
predict future observations conditioned on actions; these are fast to learn but
are limited because they cannot capture the effects of long-term history.
Latent-variable models can capture the effects of long-term history by positing
hidden or latent variables that capture the true state of the environment (e.g.,
the location of the car), but such models are difficult to learn because the
latent variables have to be inferred from data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on previous work by the PI and others on a third approach, called
Predictive State Representations (or PSRs), in which the agent maintains
predictions of future observations conditioned on future actions as a summary-
representation of history; these models can both be fast to learn and capture
the effect of long-term history. This project develops new PSR-based methods and
algorithms for hierarchical models, rich-feature-based models, and local and
modular models. The project applies the new methods to challenging applications
from active perception and robotics. In addition, theoretical understanding of
these richer and newer methods will be developed. Altogether the project
significantly expands the applicability of PSR-methods as well as their
theoretical foundations and algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
New methods that allow artificial agents to robustly build predictive models
would advance the state of knowledge across the fields of artificial
intelligence, reinforcement learning, control, operations research, psychology,
and neuroscience. The PI is co-leading an effort to create a new undergraduate
degree in Data Sciences at the University of Michigan to be jointly managed by
Computer Science &amp; Engineering and Statistics. This future degree as well as
other current undergraduate research programs will be targeted to recruit,
mentor, and train students for this project.