* 1319170
* FSML: Enhancements to Internet and communication systems at the KU Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Val Smith, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2016
* USD 349,714.00

The University of Kansas Field Station (KUFS; www.kufs.ku.edu) is awarded a
grant to provide high-speed internet service to KUFS and connectivity to enhance
general research/education facilities, data network partnerships, and ongoing
researcher programs. Specifically, funds will be used to connect facilities and
research installations at KUFS to the University of Kansas main campus
(Lawrence, KS) via single-mode optical fiber (cable). This fiber connection
provides the communications backbone for high-speed internet connectivity, and a
link to campus networking and other resources. Capabilities enabled by this
award represent one part of a larger vision for KUFS to be fulfilled
incrementally, in which a greater number and diversity of students and
researchers from around the globe are attracted to world-class facilities
inspired by environmentally sound principles. KUFS provides opportunities for
research and public education within the ecotone between the eastern deciduous
forest and tallgrass prairie biomes. Enhanced connectivity at KUFS will help
satisfy five objectives critical for realizing the KUFS long-range vision.
First, it will improve the setting for individual-investigator research. Second,
it will further facilitate multi-investigator, interdisciplinary research
projects that require electronic connectivity to thrive. Third, it will provide
a mechanism for innovative and interactive on-site teaching and outreach.
Fourth, it will facilitate KUFS operations through the monitoring of energy
dynamics of buildings and facilities, and will enhance security for research
projects by allowing real-time monitoring. Lastly, it will augment KUFS' role as
a node within large-scale networks (e.g., the National Ecological Observatory
Network [NEON]; USDA Soil Climate Analysis Network; AmeriFlux; and other
networks). The communications upgrades in this project were developed by
professional engineers and designers and will be maintained by the KUFS as part
of its ongoing facilities operations, and by its parent institution.

KUFS activities encompass a broad array of teaching, public outreach, and
research programs, targeting populations ranging from university students to
school children, as well as the general public. Research at KUFS has provided
society with a broad base of knowledge about terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
in the region, and has fostered the development of scores of students and
researchers. The proposed communications upgrades will aid in the development of
the KUFS mission by 1) improving research infrastructure to enable access to
real-time data for projects spanning multiple disciplines; and 2) providing an
enhanced platform on which to base undergraduate and graduate education.
Importantly, improved facilities will help KUFS serve as a link between regional
and national-scale science and education. As NEON and other networks mature or
emerge, KUFS' historic role as a provider of long-term data sets, and as an
active player in developing new data sets critical for forecasting ecological
change will be highlighted. Scientific publications and presentations are an
obvious means of sharing information, but KUFS also supports such efforts as
database development and the generation of remotely-sensed data and images for
basic and applied research. These efforts create platforms on which a diverse
group of investigators and educators can base their work.