* 1319745
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Leonard Schulman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2017
* USD 473,942.00

The first focus of this award is the problem of inferring causal relationships.
This problem is essential to many statistical applications. Generally speaking,
causation can be inferred only by active intervention, through controlled
experiment. However such experiments may be impossible or else practically or
morally infeasible: for instance, in predicting potential effects regulations or
laws on medical, educational and economic outcomes, or, in predicting whole-
ecosystem effects of human activity. The starting point for Dr. Schulman's
research in this area is Pearl's theory of Structured Causal Models (SCM) which,
allows, in special circumstances, "identification" of a causal relationship (as
opposed to a statistical correlation) from passive observation. The proposed
research aims, in the first place, to expand the above special class of
circumstances---and thereby make the theory more widely applicable---by using a
relaxed but still useful notion of "weak identification" of causal
relationships. The relaxed notion is more robust, and enables valid inference
even if the posited SCM is slightly inaccurate. In the second place, the
research aims to provide efficient and numerically stable algorithms for weak
identification from empirical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second focus of
this award, again in computational statistics, is the representation of a large
data set (considered as an empirical measure) by a much smaller data set, in
such a way that for a specific family of integrals, all integrals of the measure
are approximately preserved. This work encompasses two separate application
areas. The first concerns clustering and related high dimensional data analysis
problems. Here the compressed data set is known as an epsilon-approximation or
core-set of the input measure. A particular focus is on "underclustering",
namely, preparation of core-sets for clustering in a normed space, before the
norm has been specified. The technical tools needed in this application have to
do with recently developed ideas about the "total sensitivity" of the family of
integrals, as well as with, on the algorithmic side, bicriteria approximations.
The second application area concerns signal processing (or approximation theory)
on compact groups. Here the methods draw on representation theory, the classical
theory of the moment problem, and convex geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will be used to train graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
research in algorithms, statistics, and underlying mathematical topics in
algebra and geometry.