* 1319770
* CIF: Small: Power-constrained distributed vector estimation in wireless sensor networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Azadeh Vosoughi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 373,306.00

Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have the potential to significantly impact many
aspects of our everyday life and are anticipated to be critically important for
environmental monitoring, health monitoring, surveillance, military, and
homeland security applications. Distributed parameter estimation serves as one
of the main challenges in WSNs, where spatially distributed battery-powered
sensors are deployed over a sensing field to monitor physical or environmental
conditions. This research will investigate distributed estimation of an unknown
vector with a general observation model, when the transmission strategy is
digital. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following three problems will tackled: (1)
Bayesian Cramer-Rao bound (CRB) and linear estimators for hard-decoding and
soft-decoding link layer designs. The Bayesian CRB will be derived and linear
estimators will be developed. In hard-decoding design, the fusion center (FC)
uses the recovered transmitted discrete messages for estimation, whereas in
soft-decoding design, the FC uses directly the continuous-valued channel outputs
for estimation. The impacts of the observation model, fading and communication
channel noises and choice of modulation on the optimization solutions will be
studied, and the existing tradeoffs between transmit power, rate, and estimation
accuracy will be explored. Contrasting the power-rate-distortion regions will
enable the investigator to quantify the performance improvement provided by
soft-decoding (compared with hard-decoding) link layer design; (2) channel
estimation problems in distributed vector estimation. The influence of wireless
channel estimation errors on the distributed signal processing designs will be
studied. Also, the investigator will study how the combined effects of channel
estimation errors and energy cost of transmitting training symbols further limit
the estimation accuracy; and, (3) distributed vector estimation in a cluster-
based hierarchical network architecture with digital transmission. The existing
tradeoffs between transmit power allocation among the clusters and the
estimation accuracy will be explored.