* 1319215
* TWC: Option: Small: FRADE: Model Human Behavior for Flash cRowd Attack DEfense
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 12/31/2016
* USD 479,487.00

Application-level, aka ``flash-DDoS'' attacks are the most challenging form of
distributed denial of service (DDoS). They flood the victim with legitimate-like
service requests generated from numerous bots. There is no defense today that is
even remotely effective against flash-DDoS attacks, thus such attacks are today
a serious and unmitigated threat to any server.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Our
project works on developing defenses against flash-DDoS attacks that can
pinpoint traffic sent by automated bots and differentiate it from human-
generated traffic. Bot IPs are then blacklisted and their traffic filtered
protecting the server under attack without any damage to legitimate users. Our
project develops novel technologies called ASTUTE (pASsive TUring TEsts) to
distinguish bots from human users, by modeling three aspects of human user
behavior: (1) dynamics of human-server interaction, (2) human preference for
server content, and (3) human processing of visual and textual cues. IP
addresses of detected bots will be blacklisted and their traffic will be dropped
during server overload. ASTUTE technologies model human behavior without
conscious human participation, thus performing Turing tests (human vs machine
differentiation) transparently to humans. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We will
implement all our code as extensions of popular open-source server platforms,
such as Apache (for Web) and bind (for DNS). At the end of this work we will
deliver working prototypes of these extensions, thus our research will directly
transition into practice for any interested party at no cost to them. All our
code will be released as open-source under the GNU GPL v3 license.