* 1319945
* NeTS: Small: Demand-Aware Dynamic Virtual Base Station Provisioning and Allocation in Cloud Radio Access Networks (C-RANs)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Dario Pompili, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2017
* USD 415,999.00

The proliferation of personal mobile computing devices along with a plethora of
data-intensive mobile applications has resulted in a tremendous increase in
demand for ubiquitous and high-data-rate wireless communications over the last
few years. Additional deployment and maintenance of a large number of stand-
alone cellular Base Stations (BSs) to meet the growing capacity demand are
highly inefficient due to excessive capital and operating expenditures.
Presently, multiple Radio Access Networks (RANs), each composed of
geographically proximal BSs, are statically configured and deployed; such an
approach, however, does not allow for any margin to handling the fluctuations in
capacity demands due to the ever transforming mobile applications landscape and
unexpected events such as emergencies. Cloud-RAN (C-RAN), composed of Remote
Radio Units (RRUs) distributed over a wide geographic region controlled by
remote Virtual Base Stations (VBSs) housed in centralized BS pools, is a new
paradigm for broadband wireless access to address the fluctuation in capacity
demand efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on designing a
dynamic reconfigurable cellular communication system that relies on elastic
VBSs, which can be dynamically resized to meet the fluctuations in per-user
capacity demands. This elasticity enables improvements in user Quality of
Service (QoS) and efficiency in energy and computing resource utilization in
C-RANs. However, Virtual Machine (VM) provisioning, i.e., determining the ?size?
of VMs that hold VBSs, as well as appropriate allocation of VMs to physical
servers are non-trivial challenges. The tasks of this project consist in the
design and development of (i) a demand-aware dynamic VM provisioning algorithm
that relies on an offline profiling of the computational complexity and memory
footprint of the communication functionalities implemented in software; (ii) a
QoS-aware VM allocation algorithm that exploits VBS co-location models; (iii) a
C-RAN testbed on virtualized enterprise-class servers for validation of the
profiling and allocation solutions through emulation
campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will generate computer-literate
undergraduate and graduate researchers with a comprehensive knowledge of energy-
efficient design and management of computing resources. The PI will create new
teaching modules on elastic resource allocation, provide opportunities for
exchange programs, leverage existing minority student outreach networks at
Rutgers University, and incorporate student exchange programs.