* 1319904
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Reliability Driven Resource Management of Multi-Core Real-Time Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Xiaobo Hu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 166,666.00

The project aims to improve the quality of service and lifetime of real-
time&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems, particularly those implemented on multi-core
platforms. In&lt;br/&gt;contrast with many other quality metrics, such as
performance and power&lt;br/&gt;consumption, reliability is difficult to
accurately estimate because it is&lt;br/&gt;influenced by design decisions,
environmental conditions, and process variation&lt;br/&gt;during integrated
circuit fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three main
technical tasks. (1) Develop a reliability&lt;br/&gt;modeling and analysis
framework that can efficiently and accurately determine&lt;br/&gt;the impact of
design and runtime management decisions on reliability. (2)&lt;br/&gt;Develop a
reliability-driven resource management framework, which
includes&lt;br/&gt;runtime algorithms for assignment and scheduling of real-time
tasks to maximize&lt;br/&gt;system lifetime while keeping soft error rates low,
and a lightweight technique&lt;br/&gt;to adaptively adjust the activation
frequency of the algorithms (i.e.,&lt;br/&gt;overhead). (3) Develop wear state
monitoring techniques and data collection&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure to enable the
runtime refinement and validation of system-level&lt;br/&gt;reliability models
that require long-term in-field system
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed in this
project will support the production of more&lt;br/&gt;reliable and/or less
expensive electronic devices, enabling integrated&lt;br/&gt;circuits, which are
susceptible to wear due to lifetime fault processes to be&lt;br/&gt;used in
special-purpose computers with strict reliability and
performance&lt;br/&gt;requirements. In particular, this project aims to ease the
use of multicore&lt;br/&gt;processors in high-reliability computing applications
with deadlines, such as&lt;br/&gt;automotive, multimedia, and health care
applications. These applications have&lt;br/&gt;historically seen slow adoption
of multicore processors, despite their price,&lt;br/&gt;performance, and power
consumption benefits. We believe this is partially due&lt;br/&gt;to gaps in
knowledge of how to control and optimize reliability on such&lt;br/&gt;systems,
some of which this project will fill. The involvement of both
industry&lt;br/&gt;researchers and university students at the undergraduate and
graduate level&lt;br/&gt;will result in a broad dissemination of the research
results.