* 1319666
* SHF: Small: Specifying, Checking, and Analyzing Applications Built with Dynamic Language Frameworks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Foster, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2017
* USD 412,714.00

The last several decades have seen tremendous progress in building program
analysis tools to detect bugs early in the software development process.
Unfortunately, existing tools neglect an increasingly important category of
software systems: those written using frameworks in dynamic languages. Such
frameworks are very popular today, e.g., many of the most popular sites on the
web are built using them. While the expressiveness, flexibility, and power of
dynamic language frameworks have encouraged their rapid and widespread adoption,
those features also defeat existing program analysis techniques. This research
aims to address this problem by developing practical tools and techniques for
detecting and preventing errors early during software development that uses
dynamic language frameworks. This research will improve our ability to correctly
and rapidly build many important software systems, including those relied upon
every day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three main components of the project.
First, this research will develop specifications to describe the high-level
semantic properties of interest. The target dynamic language framework will be
Ruby on Rails, one of the most popular web development frameworks today.
Specifications to be explored include the Ruby on Rails analogs to type- and
memory-safety; specifications supporting domain-specific languages; and
specifications that are extensible to application-specific properties. Second,
this research will develop a novel run-time wrapping and checking system to
perform program analysis while a program is executing. The resulting system will
check program properties later than a typical static analysis, but significantly
earlier than the last-moment dynamic checks that are the only option today.
Finally, this research will explore ways to deploy symbolic execution to amplify
run-time property checking even further. The developed technology will be
evaluated on open-source Ruby on Rails applications. It is expected that the
techniques developed can be applied to many other dynamic language frameworks as
well.