* 1319802
* HCC: Small: Perception of Accurate Interactions through Bimanual Integrated Forces and Motions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Kyle Reed, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 380,773.00

It is difficult to simultaneously convey the subtle forces and motions of a task
to another person when teaching a physical skill. A common technique is for the
expert to move the novice through the task. But this guiding motion is only
partially effective at portraying the full experience because the novice only
performs the task passively. To fully experience the physical interaction, an
active recreation of the actions would be much more effective. The PI's goal in
this research is to enable a person to recreate the actions performed by another
person while fully experiencing the forces that result from those actions. To
this end, the PI will explore a bimanual approach that takes advantage of our
inherent ability to synchronize motions between both sides of our bodies, to
allow a person to independently generate a desired path while feeling the task-
related forces actively. Note how easy it is to simultaneously draw a pair of
identical circles (or other shape) with both hands. Based on this observation,
and in contrast to training methods that guide the dominant hand, the PI's
method will guide the non-dominant hand and ask the individual to recreate the
motions in the dominant hand, which will receive all the forces involved in the
interaction. In this way, one arm will both receive forces while actively
generating motions and will fully experience the task forces. Prior to
implementing and testing this bimanual guidance method, several experiments will
be conducted to determine the involved sensorimotor control parameters;
specifically, hypotheses will be tested to evaluate our abilities to recreate a
motion that is applied to one hand and to evaluate whether people can be taught
to perceive passively applied forces similarly to actively applied forces. In
contrast to methods that aim to make the physical interaction with an
environment as realistic as possible, this method is transformative in that it
aims to make the perception of the physical interaction as similar as possible
to another person's actions by incorporating the human's sensorimotor control
system. The scientific challenge lies in determining how the two modalities
(force from one side and position from the other) are integrated and in
determining and overcoming the sensorimotor delays associated with perception
and recreating the force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research
will fundamentally advance our understanding of force perception, bimanual
interactions, and how forces and motions are cognitively integrated to perceive
objects in active and passive tasks. The work will enable one person to fully
experience the same physical interaction as another person, which will transform
teaching and training techniques for surgeons, athletes, and helicopter and
airplane pilots, among others. In addition to directly supporting a graduate and
an undergraduate student, this research will also impact engineering students in
the PI's class on haptics who will learn about performing psychophysical
experiments on humans.