* 1319356
* Randomized Models for Nonlinear Optimization:  Theoretical Foundations and Practical Numerical Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Katya Scheinberg, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This project involves the design, analysis, and implementation of numerical
algorithms for the mathematical optimization of large-scale, complex systems. In
particular, the novel feature of the proposed algorithms is the use of random
sampling of objective function information in the context of solving
deterministic (i.e., non-random) problems. Despite the success of randomization
in, e.g., stochastic gradient techniques for machine learning, it has yet to be
used actively in other settings as it has been deemed too expensive in
sequential computing environments. However, with parallel computing becoming
increasingly common, and with new advancements and convergence theory for
randomized algorithms, these methods have great promise. The research in this
project will focus on the use of ``accurate'' randomized models, broadening of
convergence theory, and implementation of effective software. The novelty of the
approach lies in achieving a middle ground between deterministic models that
have to be accurate at each algorithmic step, and stochastic models that are
accurate only in expectation, by exploiting random models that need to be
accurate only with sufficiently high probability. The proposed strategies will
balance per-iteration cost of the optimization routine with convergence speed
while utilizing parallel computation. The priority in the project on developing
practical, general-purpose numerical methods based on theoretically sound
methodologies solidifies the merits of the proposed
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of novel
numerical algorithms, and their analysis, for solving problems in two related
realms of engineering design. In the first, the aim is to minimize a quantity---
e.g., cost, energy, or the discrepancy between expected and observed data---that
can only be determined via a computer simulation. These "black-box" optimization
problems arise in important areas such as molecular geometry optimization,
circuit design, and groundwater modeling. The second area represents those
applications in which a given design needs to be robust under various input
conditions, which includes problems in, e.g., medical image registration and the
optimization of control systems. The project promises to advance the study of
algorithms for solving all of these types of problems via the common thread of
exploiting randomization and parallel computation.The impact of this work will
clearly be cross-disciplinary, and will benefit users of optimization methods
and software in academia, governmental research laboratories, and private
industry. It will also promote the use of rigorous, classical algorithms in
combination with randomized models for solving cutting-edge scientific
problems.Finally, the educational plan will expose undergraduate and graduate
students to modern efforts and challenges in computational mathematics, improve
the educational opportunities for students interested in scientific research,
and encourage faculty interaction in area schools.