* 1319457
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Gray Box Testing of Complex Cyber-Physical Systems Using Optimization and Optimal Control Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Sriram Sankaranarayanan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2016
* USD 249,376.00

The project develops new methodologies for testing complex Cyber-Physical
Systems that perform safety-critical tasks in a wide variety of application
domains such as automotive, airspace, medical devices and power generation. The
primary challenge in these applications lies in the complexity of the physical
system, modeled as systems of non-linear Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE)
with a large number of state variables, and the interaction of this physical
subsystem with a software-based controller. In many industrial applications,
these models are not even available in a closed-form representation and only
system simulations can be performed. In this project, ideas from optimization
and optimal control theory are employed in order to drive the process of state-
space exploration for system verification. The theory of robustness metrics for
temporal logic specifications is combined with non-smooth optimization theory
which results in gradient descent search methods for multi-modal CPS. At a
higher level, concrete and symbolic execution techniques are combined to enhance
the performance of the search methods. The verification methods can be readily
integrated into existing industrial strength simulation environments. The target
applications for such verification tools are from the domains of medical and
automotive applications.

Verification of complex CPS is a challenging problem. Continuous and multiple
recalls of medical and automotive products due to software errors across
virtually all manufacturers establish the urgency and importance of the problem.
This project results in usable verification tools integrated inside existing and
widely adopted model-based development platforms. The application focus on the
verification of medical and automotive software ultimately helps avoid harmful
losses due to errors in these safety-critical systems. The concrete benefit to
society is twofold: first, improved system safety and dependability; and,
second, reduced development times for new products. The educational aspects of
this project revolve around courses that train students on model-based design
and verification methods for safety-critical CPS. The educational mission of the
project also stresses a "safety first" approach to designing CPS wherein
specification and verification are taught as integral steps in the design rather
than post-design steps. Besides research publications, avenues of dissemination
include sharing of software, models, and course materials via cps-vo.org and
other publicly accessible websites.