* 1320547
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: A Unifying Approach for Identification of Sparse Interactions in Large Datasets
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* George Atia, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2017
* USD 215,000.00

More than 2.5 quintillion bytes of data are created daily in the form of sensor
measurements, web posts and clicks, surveillance videos, purchase transactions,
and health-care records. However, not all data collected is informative and not
all features are relevant to the outcomes of interest. While several researchers
have focused attention on compressive sampling for minimum error data
reconstruction to improve data storage and acquisition, the objective of this
research is broader and is focused on salient feature discovery. The key insight
is sparsity, namely, that there is a tight coupling between a small relevant set
of observations and the outcomes of interest. This research is focused on the
sparse identification of the most relevant observations that are essential to
predicting the outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop a
new information-theoretic framework and algorithmic tools for understanding the
intrinsic relationships and sparse interactions between outcomes of interest and
a set of features/observations in order to improve inferencing capabilities for
enhanced decision-making in the context of this data-deluge. The goal is to
discover the most relevant sparse subset of features that are essential to
predicting the outcomes, and to uncover the fundamental limits of the associated
sparse models. The approach is based on a unifying Shannon information-theoretic
framework, whereby the problem of salient feature identification is mapped to a
problem of capacity analysis for an equivalent channel model. This research
addresses challenges posed by models with correlated features, models with
missing features, models with latent variables, and the non-linearities of the
measurement processes, in a unified way. Furthermore, this research involves the
development of data-driven sparse recovery algorithms that reinforce the value
of information when the underlying statistical models are partially or
completely unknown. The investigators will use the developed methods to enhance
the detection of sparse mixtures of explosives with fluorescence sensor arrays,
and to identify high-degree hubs in computer networks using network tomography.