* 1320149
* III: Small: GeoCrowd - A Generic Framework for Trustworthy Spatial Crowdsourcing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Cyrus Shahabi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 516,000.00

Many studies foresee significant growth in the number of smart phone users, the
phone's hardware and software features, and the broadband bandwidth. Therefore,
a transformative area of research is to utilize this new platform for various
tasks, among which the most promising is spatial crowdsourcing. Spatial
crowdsourcing engages individuals, groups, and communities in the act of
collecting, analyzing, and disseminating urban, social, and other spatiotemporal
information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two major impediments to the success of
spatial crowdsourcing in real-world applications are scalability and trust
issues. Therefore, the first objective of this project is to study the issue of
scale in spatial crowdsourcing. In particular, given that the task assignment is
the main bottleneck of the system, the spatial aspects of the tasks are
exploited to reduce the complexity of assignment. In addition, a cloud-based
distributed approach to the problem is investigated for better scale-out. The
second objective is to extend the framework to incorporate trust by maintaining
a reputation score per worker and a confidence level for every spatial task.
Consequently, multiple workers can perform a task redundantly in order to
satisfy its confidence level. The spatial task assignment solutions are extended
to take redundant task assignments and confidence satisfaction into
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial crowdsourcing has applications in
disaster-response, urban planning, intelligent transportation, journalism and
intelligence. As part of this project a spatial crowdsourcing system is being
developed that can be used for real-world data collection and evaluation as well
as for social studies and educational purposes.&lt;br/&gt;Results are
disseminated through the web:
http://infolab.usc.edu/projects/GeoCrowd/&lt;br/&gt;