* 1320994
* AF: SMALL: Quorums Quicken Queries - Towards Practical Secure Multiparty Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jared Saia, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,999.00

Secure systems demand theoretical guarantees.  The problem of secure multiparty
computation (MPC) abstracts many important problems in distributed security, and
thus offers the promise of a general framework for designing distributed
algorithms with provable security guarantees.   Unfortunately, current
algorithms for solving MPC are far from efficient.  Thus, system builders, when
faced with a problem that falls under the rubric of MPC, are unable to make use
of established algorithms with well-known theoretical guarantees. Instead, they
are frequently required to design new ad hoc heuristics. The goal of this
project is to address this vacuity by designing resource efficient algorithms
for MPC.

In the MPC problem, there are n players, each with a private input. The goal is
to securely compute an n-ary function, f, over all inputs, without revealing
anything more about the inputs than can be learned from the output of the
function.  We assume that f can be computed by a circuit with m logic gates. In
this project, the PI will design algorithms for MPC that are robust in that 1)
they can tolerate up to a 1/3 fraction of the players being controlled by an
adversary; and 2) they work even in the case where all non-faulty players are
selfish but rational.  Importantly, the algorithms will have the following
resource costs: each player sends O(n+m/n + sqrt(n)) bits, and performs O(n+m/n+
sqrt(n)) computations. These resource costs are significant improvements over
state of the art MPC algorithms, which require each player to send O(nm) bits
and perform O(nm) computations.

MPC generalizes many important problems in distributed computing including
classic problems such as: auctions, threshold cryptography, voting and privacy-
preserving data mining; and contemporary problems such as: cloud computing, and
computing over peer-to-peer networks. Thus, a solution to the secure MPC problem
will likely enable progress in many fundamental problems.  A major goal of this
project is to apply efficient MPC algorithms to the problem of provably secure
and scalable anonymous broadcast.