* 1320921
* NeTS: Small: Real-Time Wireless Sensor-Actuator Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Yixin Chen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Recent years have witnessed rapid adoption of wireless sensor-actuator networks
(WSANs) in process industries. Real-world deployments of industrial standards
such as WirelessHART have demonstrated the feasibility to achieve reliable
wireless communication in industrial environments. However, existing wireless
technologies still face significant challenges in supporting process control
applications that impose stringent real-time requirements on network
communication. Moreover, optimizing control performance over wireless networks
is challenging due to the coupling between control performance and communication
delays, as well as inter-dependencies among multiple layers of the network
protocol stack. To meet these critical challenges faced by process industries,
this project is developing a control-aware network design approach for WSANs.
This holistic approach integrates wireless networking, real-time scheduling and
non-linear optimization in a unified framework with three novel technologies:
(1) an efficient local search approach that leverages real-time scheduling
analysis to optimize control performance over wireless networks; (2) an agile
multilayer optimization approach that adapts transmission scheduling, routing
and sampling rate selection in a hierarchical fashion in response to network
changes; (3) a hierarchical network architecture that enables large-scale real-
time wireless control networks. The project implements and evaluates the network
architecture and protocols using realistic industrial process control
applications on physical wireless testbeds through collaboration with Emerson,
an industrial leader of the WirelessHART
standard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research will
enable a broad range of process control applications with high societal and
industrial impacts such as oil refining, petrochemicals and water treatment.
Collaboration with industrial partners will lead to real-world deployments and
technology transfer to process industries through industrial standards. This
research will produce an open-source implementation of the real-time wireless
protocol stack, which will further broaden the impacts on research, education
and industry.