* 1320550
* Collaborative Research:   Optimal Monte Carlo Estimation via Randomized Multilevel Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Jose Blanchet, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 209,993.00

This research project will investigate a comprehensive set of tools to enable
efficient and unbiased Monte Carlo methods in a wide range of settings such as:
steady-state computations and stochastic differential equations (SDEs). The PIs
extend the applicability and power of a recently introduced technique called
multilevel Monte Carlo (MLMC), which has rapidly grown in popularity and has
shown to be highly successful, particularly in the context of numerical
solutions to SDEs. The PIs strategy rests on two basic ingredients. First, they
abstract the main ideas of MLMC. This abstraction makes it clear that MLMC can
be applied to many problem settings (beyond the SDE context), for example in
problems such as: estimating steady-state expectations of Markov random fields,
and solving distributional fixed point equations. Second, the PIs introduce a
simple, yet powerful, extra randomization step. This randomization step will
permit to not only completely delete the bias, which so far is present in every
single application of the multilevel method, but it will also permit to more
easily optimize parameters (often user-defined) that arise in classical
multilevel applications. At the core of our abstraction of the MLMC method lies
the construction of a suitable sequence of strong (almost sure) approximations
under some metric. The freedom that is implicit in constructing such
approximations yields a rich research program that touches upon many of the
elements of modern probability, including random matrices, Markov random fields,
mean field fixed point equations and Lyapunov stability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
The PIs will investigate a methodology that enables high-performance computing
in the context of simulation of stochastic systems. The PIs methodology will
substantially extend a recently developed approach, called Multilevel Monte
Carlo (MLMC), which has typically been applied only to compute numerical
solutions of stochastic differential equations (SDEs). More generally, this
research project addresses a wide range of problems that lie at the center of
modern scientific computing, beyond the important setting of SDEs which arise in
virtually all areas of modeling in engineering and science. For example, the PIs
will generalize the MLMC approach to accurately perform so-called steady-state
simulation for Markov chains indexed by trees. These computational problems
arise very often in statistical inference applications, ranging from imaging to
classification problems. The PIs research also improves upon the classical MLMC
technique by optimizing its design and allowing the study of, for example,
steady-state analysis of SDEs (i.e. combining traditional areas of study with
new methodological applications). The PIs will in particular apply these
optimized computational techniques to solve problems in service and
manufacturing engineering. The PIs plan to develop a new jointly designed
course, on the topic of this proposal, and the course material will be made
available online to increase the dissemination and the potential applicability
of the project's findings. The PIs will attempt to recruit high-quality
personnel from under-represented groups and will disseminate the scientific
output of the research via open access sites, in addition to the standard
vehicles such as conferences and journal publications.