* 1320977
* NeTS: Small: Towards an  Accurate, Geo-Aware, PoP-Level Perspective of the Internet's Inter-AS Connectivity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Bruce Maggs, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2017
* USD 531,994.00

Understanding where and how the more than 40,000 actively routed Autonomous
Systems (ASes) in today's Internet interconnect is essential for meaningfully
investigating a wide range of critical Internet-related problems such as the
vulnerability of the Internet to physical damage. However, much of the published
work on Internet topology has focused primarily on discovering the existence of
such interconnections (e.g., logical connectivity such as AS-to-AS links or
physical connectivity such as router-to-router links). Considerably less
attention has been paid to the where and in how many different locations these
interconnections have been established. For example, the often-studied AS-level
view of the Internet is too coarse as mapping entire ASes to single geographic
locations eliminates essential details (e.g. AS-level path diversity). At the
same time, the popular router-level view of the Internet is not only too
detailed, but also inherently difficult to
capture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The main goal of this project
is to design, develop and rigorously evaluate techniques to accurately map the
geographic location of all the PoPs (Point-of-Presence) of a given target AS and
determine the inter-AS connections that are established at each PoP (point of
presence) of this AS. A significant fraction of the Internet's physical
infrastructure (e.g. routers, switches) is hosted at a relatively small number
of physical building complexes, called colocation (or colo) facilities or data
centers that can be accurately geo-located. Thus, a core element of this project
is the design of new targeted active measurement campaigns specifically
developed to map a given colo facility by identifying not only all the PoPs of
all the ASes present in that colo facility, but also the corresponding inter-AS
connectivity that is visible to active probing at that location.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The inferred PoP-level maps are leveraged
to develop a new and improved simulation environment, called cBGP+, that is
built on the existing simulator (cBGP) but supports real-world AS path
diversity. This new simulator will enable many Internet stakeholders (e.g. ISPs,
DHS) to meaningfully assess, evaluate, and predict the inter-AS reachability of
the Internet in the presence of certain events or changes (e.g., political
unrests or the results of natural or man-made disasters).