* 1320444
* SHF: Small: Reliable Data Processing by Dynamic Program Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Xiangyu Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Computational Science involves computer modeling and simulation of natural
phenomena, and the validity of scientific inquiry depends on the way computers
are used to do numerical computation. Numeric errors pose a serious threat to
output validity for modern scientific data processing. Raw inputs are acquired
by physical instruments that have limited precision, leading to input errors.
Parameters used in data processing may be provided by human scientists based on
their experience, leading to uncertainty. Data may not be represented exactly
due to the limited precision of the machine used. Once these errors creep into a
computation, they may get propagated and magnified by the sequence of operations
conducted, producing unreliable output. Such instability problems may ultimately
have substantial impact on scientific research and even the economy.

This project aims to develop dynamic program analysis tools to address
instability problems caused by errors. These tools will automatically analyze
the data processing programs provided by the users and transform them to allow
online representation of and reasoning about errors. The user runs the
transformed programs on the original input data as usual, with the option of
providing additional input/coefficient error ranges. The execution will produce
regular output as before, together with an indication of whether the output is
stable in the presence of errors, including input errors, uncertain
coefficients, and internal representation errors. If the execution is determined
to be unstable, the technique will automatically report the possible
consequences induced by the errors. Another option is to automatically switch to
executing a high-precision version of the program, which is also generated by
the project's tool set.