* 1320226
* CSR: Small: Reliability as a Service (RaaS) in Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Tian Lan, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 407,968.00

Despite a projected shift to cloud computing, heightened concerns over cloud
reliability remain paramount in both private and government sectors, and urge
innovative solutions to meet the growing challenge of disparate reliability
requirements. While existing techniques allow cloud providers to offer some
fixed level of reliability to all customers, it may be either inadequate or too
expensive to fit their specific requirements. This project aims to develop a
novel framework for providing reliability as an elastic, transparent service
that can be customized and accessed by all customers in cloud computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are: (1) holistic integration of
two reliability approaches (viz., checkpointing and replication) with utility
optimization and their adaptation to a distributed cloud environment with
heterogeneous user demands, (2) the development of pricing schemes for cloud
providers to put their ?resource white spaces? to profitable use. These two
research directions collaboratively enable the realization of Reliability as a
Service (RaaS). With the introduction of pay-per-use reliability services, cloud
customers could choose reliability components they require on a feature-by-
feature basis. Achieving a desired reliability level could be a single check box
away. For cloud service providers, RaaS presents an additional source of revenue
and value to their services. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By constructing realistic
models and developing algorithms for resource allocation and optimization and
pricing, the proposed research is expected to advance the start of the art of
cloud computing. The project also includes an implementation and experimental
component that will yield valuable knowledge on best practices and the main
obstacles towards transitioning the results into the commercial world. This
project will also carry out a number of educational activities involving K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students, and make strong outreach efforts for
recruiting and mentoring under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;