* 1320545
* SHF: Small: Dynamic Power Management in the Dark Silicon Era
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Christine Shoemaker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,161.00

Future heterogeneous multicore microprocessors are expected to be so power
constrained that not all transistors will be able to be powered on at once. The
general-purpose cores will be required to nimbly adapt to severely constrained
power allocations when power is diverted to accelerators, and vice versa. In
addition, energy-aware scheduling of threads to cores is becoming imperative as
multicore architectures become more heterogeneous. This research develops power
gated multicore architectures and integrated scheduling and power allocation
algorithms for maximizing throughput given varying and potentially stringent
limits on allocated power.

One facet of the research is the design, synthesis, and evaluation of power
gated general-purpose and data-parallel accelerator microarchitectures comprised
of deconfigurable lanes--horizontal slices through the pipeline--that permit
dynamic tailoring of each core to the application. The goal is to demonstrate
tolerable performance and power-gating overheads yet flexibility in adapting to
workload behaviors. A second aspect of the work is a new optimization approach
that efficiently finds a near-global-optimum configuration of lanes and thread-
to-core assignment without requiring offline training or foreknowledge of the
workload. The approach combines reduced sampling techniques, adaptation of
response surface models to online optimization, incorporation of limited online
profiling information, and heuristic online search. The research will improve
the computational capability of future severely power-constrained devices;
involve undergraduate, graduate, and/or postdoc women engineers; and be
incorporated into computer architecture and heuristic optimization classes.