* 1320854
* Approximation Algorithms for Data Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Shuchi Chawla, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2017
* USD 354,172.00

This project seeks to develop new algorithmic techniques for
the&lt;br/&gt;design of and routing in data networks. Classical network
optimization&lt;br/&gt;problems address transportation networks that carry
physical&lt;br/&gt;commodities. Data networks are fundamentally different ---
data can be&lt;br/&gt;modified, compressed, and replicated at little cost.
Incorporating&lt;br/&gt;this flexibility in altering traffic into network
optimization&lt;br/&gt;problems can bring about a considerable improvement in
the capacities&lt;br/&gt;of communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to revisit classical network optimization problems&lt;br/&gt;within
a new model where the cost of carrying data is non-linear and&lt;br/&gt;depends
on its compressibility. It aims to provide theoretical&lt;br/&gt;underpinnings
for new WAN optimization approaches proposed in the&lt;br/&gt;networking
literature, including, for example, traffic
redundancy&lt;br/&gt;elimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI considers a model
where links in the network can compress data and&lt;br/&gt;remove duplicate
packets. For example, if two traffic streams contain&lt;br/&gt;identical data
and use overlapping routes, edges carrying both streams&lt;br/&gt;need only
transmit the common packets once; these can then be&lt;br/&gt;replicated at
routers where the streams diverge. Accordingly, the load&lt;br/&gt;on an edge is
a submodular function of the traffic streams that use&lt;br/&gt;the edge. Unlike
previous work on network optimization with non-linear&lt;br/&gt;costs, in this
model, the cost of routing depends on the identities of&lt;br/&gt;the traffic
streams involved, and not just on the total traffic&lt;br/&gt;volume. Most of
the problems considered are computationally&lt;br/&gt;intractable and the PI
aims to develop approximation algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several graduate
and undergraduate courses will benefit from this project.