* 1320798
* TWC: Small: Workflows and Relationships for End-to-End Data Security in Collaborative Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Dominic Duggan, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 498,756.00

Access control refers to mechanisms for protecting access to confidential
information, such as sensitive medical data. Management of access control
policies, in applications that involve several collaborating parties, poses
several challenges. One of these is in ensuring that each party in such a
collaboration only obtains the minimal set of access permissions that they
require for the collaboration. In a domain such as healthcare, it may be
critical that access be minimized in this way, rather than allowing all parties
equal access to the sensitive information. In practice, it is often difficult to
manage access control policies to achieve this goal of minimality. This research
will investigate new approaches to describing and reasoning about access control
policies, to ensure that information that is shared in collaborative
applications is only accessible to those parties in the application that require
it. This work will develop both the theoretical foundations of, and prototype
tools for, ensuring end-to-end security of data that is shared between
organizations, with sharing of medical data as a particular source for use-case
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On one dimension, the project will investigate
the extension of workflow languages to describe protocols for sharing
information in collaborate applications. On another dimension, relationship-
based access control can describe access to information based on parties' roles
in a collaboration. The project will investigate the use of spatial and temporal
logics for relating these two, and user interfaces for presenting and reasoning
about this information. Since ultimately software programs will perform the
access and transfer of patient medical data, formal specifications will be
extracted from workflow specifications, and used as a basis for checking
software programs for their compliance with these access control policies. The
broader impact of this research will be facilitated by the P.I.'s involvement
with the NIH International Epidemiologic Databases on AIDS for Central Africa
project (CA-IeDEA). The fruits of the research will be disseminated through
interaction with open source communities involved in healthcare IT for low and
middle income countries, as well as through interactions with lead healthcare IT
decision-makers in the countries involved in CA-IeDEA.