* 1320470
* TWC: Small: Provably Enforcing Practical Multi-Layer Policies in Today's Extensible Software Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ljudevit Bauer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 08/31/2018
* USD 505,280.00

A defining characteristic of modern personal computing is the trend towards
extensible platforms (e.g., smartphones and tablets) that run a large number of
specialized applications, many of uncertain quality or provenance. The common
security mechanisms available on these platforms are application isolation and
permission systems. Unfortunately, it has been repeatedly shown that these
mechanisms fail to prevent a range of misbehaviors, including privilege-
escalation attacks and information-flow leakage. Researchers have proposed
information-flow protections for these platforms. However, such mechanisms have
rarely been adopted in practice, partly due to the level of abstraction at which
they allow policies to be specified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We develop a formal,
case-study-driven approach that will leverage advances in information-flow
research to develop new policy-specification languages and enforcement
mechanisms for today's extensible environments. First, we develop appropriate
policy-specification languages that allow policies to be specified at an
intermediate level of abstraction. Policy specification will be easy enough to
understand and formulate to be accessible to most developers, yet sufficiently
expressive to support rich policies. Second, we develop hybrid enforcement
mechanisms to support policy that is specified at levels of abstraction that do
not neatly overlap isolation boundaries provided by the platform. Third, the
correctness of the mechanisms will be supported by formal models and proofs. To
remain grounded and ensure practical relevance, we focus our work on two
application domains: the Android operating system, and, secondarily, the
Chromium web browser.