* 1320402
* RI: Small: Large-scale Probabilistic Forecasting for Energy Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Zico Kolter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 236,946.00

How much power is a set of wind farms likely to generate over the next 24 hours?
How will occupants in a commercial building interact to consume energy? Being
able to answer prediction questions like these is vital to developing a more
sustainable energy infrastructure: If we can predict renewable energy production
and demand ahead of time, we can schedule energy resources more efficiently and
reliably, leading to significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
Unfortunately, these are also inherently uncertain quantities we need to
predict; for example, no matter how good our algorithms are, we can't predict
human behavior with perfect accuracy. In order to use such predictions, we need
to be able to properly model the uncertainty inherent in these domains. We need
to make predictions that are not only correct on average, but which capture the
complex random fluctuations and correlations between predicted quantities. Only
then can we schedule energy resources in a way that accounts for these
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops and uses a recently-
proposed framework for modeling --- sparse Gaussian conditional random fields
--- a generalization of the commonly used Markov random field. This framework
efficiently models high-dimensional distributions by exploiting sparsity in the
inverse covariance matrix. The project extends the state of the art by greatly
accelerating model learning, by extending existing theory to understand when
these models can effectively learn high-dimensional predictors, and by
generalizing the predictions to the non-Gaussian setting through copula methods.
The project uses these algorithms to build forecasting models in four crucial
domains in the energy sector: energy demand, wind power, user occupancy in homes
and commercial buildings, and personal energy consumption from smart
meters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has exemplary broader impacts. First,
the research deals directly with application domains crucial to efficient energy
management, where even small advances can have a sizable impact on
sustainability. Second, the PI leverages the research to bring the power systems
and machine learning communities closer together, disseminating the results at
both machine learning and power systems venues, and releasing material and video
lectures to practitioners in energy. Finally, the project harnesses the research
to increase diversity within STEM fields by advising under-represented
minorities at the graduate and undergraduate level, and by engaging High School
students and teachers with talks illustrating how computation can be used to
address problems in sustainability.