* 1320490
* RI: Small: Qualitative Relational Navigation using Minimal Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Mark Campbell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2017
* USD 425,000.00

The goal of this research is to develop a navigation methodology for robots
using relational geometric models that are constructed and evaluated using
minimal sensing. The use of qualitative states is both intuitive to human
perception, and amenable to long-term operations in robotics because of the
inherent scalability and simplicity in sensing. The technical approach consists
of four tasks. The first task is to create a mathematical representation that
supports relational sensing/maps/navigation. The second task is to extend the
representation and methods to include uncertainties, which allows the work to be
of practical significance. The third task is to develop a hypothesis based
navigation methodology that naturally enables planning over minimal, uncertain
relational maps and sensor data. Finally, the theory will be validated using an
increasingly complex set of experimental validation tests. This research enables
robust navigation of robots in applications such as autonomous driving and
personal robotics, as well as applications that have unstructured environments
with no GPS access, such as exploration (under water, planetary, caves),
disaster relief and search and rescue. The research is particularly well suited
to robots that have sensing and computational constraints. In the long term, it
is envisioned that the algorithms and software enable life-long learning in
robotics because of the ability to scale to long-term operations.