* 1320044
* SHF: Small: Towards Cost-Efficient Guaranteed Performance Multicast in Fat-Tree Data Center Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Massive modern data centers consisting of tens of thousands of servers, such as
Microsoft's Azure platform, Google's App engine, and Amazon's EC2 platform, have
emerged to form the backbone of a variety of powerful distributed computing
frameworks. Meanwhile, many companies are moving their services such as
e-commerce, scientific computing and social networking to the cloud, due to its
ability to offer scalable and elastic computing and storage services. In such
large-scale distributed computing frameworks, efficient communication is often
required among huge datasets stored in tens of thousands of servers across a
data center. The data center network (DCN) that connects different servers would
become the bottleneck of the system, and its performance is essential to the
successful operation of a data center. On the other hand, many online
applications and back-end infrastructural computations hosted by data centers
require one-to-many or multicast communication from a server to a group of
servers. This research aims to investigate the fundamental and challenging
issues faced in building cost-efficient multicast data center networks with
guaranteed performance. As cloud computing is penetrating into all aspects of
society, this research will have a profound impact on society and help change
the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to design
cost-efficient multicast fat-tree data center networks (DCNs) with guaranteed
performance through exploring some unique novel features and techniques in data
centers. The project combines theoretical analysis, algorithm design, network
optimization, simulation, and prototyping techniques to provide a comprehensive
working solution that enables high performance multicast in fat-tree DCNs. More
specifically, the research focuses on following closely coupled issues: (1)
cost-efficient provisioning of fat-tree DCNs to deploy guaranteed-bandwidth
multicast by exploring server redundancy and link oversubscription in data
centers; (2) leveraging the OpenFlow framework to develop practical multicast
scheduling algorithms that ensure traffic load balance and efficient network
utilization under volatile data center traffic; (3) employing virtual machine
technology to offer multicast with differentiated bandwidth guarantees tailored
to application-specific demand; (4) conducting a comprehensive performance
evaluation through extensive simulations and implementation of proposed schemes
in a network prototype. This research hopes to impact fundamental design
principles of high performance multicast fat-tree DCNs. The outcome of this
research has the potential to boost the performance of cloud computing
applications currently hosted in data centers, and to facilitate cloud adoption
for future applications that rely on group communication and demand predictable
high bandwidth. A project goal is to train graduate students and promote the
participation of female engineering students. The important findings of this
project are to be disseminated to the research community by way of conferences,
journals and web site access.