* 1320297
* Analysis of gene expression data using transitive directed graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Vinhthuy Phan, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 280,000.00

Recent advances in biotechnology have facilitated the simultaneous measurement
of response of thousands of genes, and in effect enabled comparative studies
that can identify which drugs are most effective and have fewest side effects at
the genetic level. To obtain true response patterns of genes from these studies,
researchers have often utilized a conservatively large number of samples for
each treatment, increasing the cost significantly for studies with many drugs.
Efforts aimed to reduce sample size (i.e. the number of samples in experiments)
are challenged by the difficulty to articulate relationships between sample size
and true patterns of gene response to treatments.

Intellectual merit: This project will develop new methods that elucidate the
relationships between true patterns of gene response to treatments and sample
size. First, the use of directed graphs to represent gene response patterns make
it easier for researchers to distinguish and visualize subtle gene-expression
differences resulting from similar drugs. Further, properties of these graphs
are exploited to isolate false patterns from true ones, enabling accurate
predictions of true patterns of gene response even in cases where there are few
samples. Accurate prediction of true response patterns of genes further leads to
accurate prediction of gene function. Consequently, this work will pave the way
for cost-effective experimental designs of comparative studies with many drugs.

These results also help develop new methods that improve clustering analysis of
gene response patterns. Unlike prominent conventional methods that treat all
observed patterns as true, the advantage of this approach lies in the ability to
quantify the degree to which each observed pattern could be true. This advantage
will ultimately result in more accurate determination of groups of genes that
cooperate in same pathways or share similar functions.

Broader Impacts: This project will generate the materials that promote
interdisciplinary teaching, training and research beyond the standard
curriculum. Additionally, these materials will be refined and incorporated
seamlessly into two separate events: the Computer Science Open House and the
Programming Challenge, which have been organized annually by the PI for the past
several years. Targeting high school students in the Memphis/Mid-South areas,
these events aim to raise awareness, attract talent and foster interest in
computing and computational sciences.