* 1320537
* CGV: Small: Creating Information Visualizations without Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Stasko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 485,510.00

An ever-growing number of people and organizations find themselves awash in
data. Virtually every domain has been affected by our increasingly powerful
ability to monitor and record any kind of data that might be relevant.
Unsurprisingly, a strong desire to better understand the data and communicate to
others has accompanied this widespread access. Visualization is one technique
that can be particularly effective for data analysis and presentation. The
ability to represent data and its attributes in a visual manner often allows
people to more easily grasp important characteristics of the data and to reach
conclusions about its value. Similarly, people frequently prefer to represent
data visually when explaining it to others. Unfortunately, to create a data
visualization today, a person either needs to be a programmer and use libraries
and toolkits developed for that purpose or the person needs to use (typically
commercial) systems that provide limited visual representations. Neither
solution is appropriate for data scientists who are not programmers but seek to
design custom visualizations for the unique aspects of the data they explore.
This research is developing new methods of creating visualizations without
requiring the use of programming. An initial step of the research is identifying
the core primitives of the data visualization process, both with respect to
representation and interaction. The research is also formulating a theory and
model of how to represent these primitives so that people can easily specify
their design intent, thus providing an expressive framework for constructing
visualizations. Ultimately, the framework is embodied through the development of
a prototype visualization construction system that empowers users to create
custom visualizations. Evaluations of the effectiveness of the primitives, the
conceptual framework, and system complete the project.

The results of this project are expected to have broad impacts in a variety of
domains and applications. When people from a variety of fields such as
journalism, business, science, and health are able to rapidly develop
visualizations of their data, the disciplines themselves will benefit from
stronger abilities to analyze data and communicate knowledge from the data. The
ability to construct visualizations without programming also enables younger
students who have not yet studied computer science to engage in data analysis
and visualization design. This research will create learning modules about
visualization and data analysis for local high schools and students with a goal
to grow interest within the students for areas such as data science,
visualization, and human-computer interaction. Additionally, this project
provides education and research experience for graduate students. Recent
noteworthy national research agendas have identified the need for more students
and young researchers trained in STEM-related disciplines. The resulting
visualization construction system being created will be freely available on the
internet for anyone to use. All results of the research will be communicated
through academic venues and the publicly-accessible website
(http://www.cc.gatech.edu/gvu/ii/designvis).