* 1320263
* SHF: Small: Light-weight Architectural Schemes for Resilient  High-performance Microprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Irith Pomeranz, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 06/30/2017
* USD 492,844.00

In future technology generations, smaller and more transistors operating at low
supply voltages and high clock speeds will be increasingly susceptible to many
different resiliency problems, such as soft errors, wear-out issues, hard
errors, and off- and on-chip bus bit errors. These errors may cause silent data
corruption, application aborts, or system crashes in high-performance
microprocessors and computer systems. Previous techniques for addressing these
errors incur significant performance and power overheads despite optimizations,
and often require invasive changes that incur high implementation complexity.

In this research project, the investigators propose a novel, light-weight, yet
highly-effective architectural approach to processor reliability that incurs
much lower overheads than existing approaches by leveraging key architectural
observations about the problems.

This project's innovative approach for the detection of soft errors, wear-out,
and hard errors is based on detecting execution anomalies that are triggered by
errors, without using redundant execution. By exploiting the notion of value
locality, this project generalizes anomalies to include unexpected values as
well as conditions (e.g., memory access exceptions) and provides significant
coverage which includes the most problematic cases of silent data corruption.
For recovery from soft errors, the project's investigators propose a retry-based
scheme that avoids adding any hardware overhead to achieve recovery by using
existing spare speculative resources in the processor. For off-chip bus bit
errors, the investigators propose a novel bit interleaving scheme that reduces
the chances of multiple bits in a single error correcting code (ECC)-protected
data unit being corrupted undetectably or uncorrectably. Like the other schemes,
this interleaving imposes minimal power, performance, and complexity overhead.

This project targets achieving reliability while keeping power, performance, and
hardware overheads low, an important goal for the U.S. microprocessor and
computer hardware industry. The project's investigators are committed to
releasing the research artifacts as open-source software to be used by the
research community. The graduate students working on this project will be
trained in architecture and reliability issues and will be well-positioned to
join the U.S. computer hardware industry. This project will also support
educational activities such as homework and term projects in undergraduate and
graduate courses as well as outreach activities of various centers at Purdue
with which the investigators are involved. With a woman as one of the
investigators, the project will act as a basis for encouraging women to join
graduate programs in electrical and computer engineering.