* 1320814
* AF: Small: Algorithms Based on Discrete and Algebraic Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Martin Furer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,367.00

This research is concerned with discrete computational tasks, mainly
mathematical decision and optimization problems. Often such problems can be
attacked directly by discrete methods. The focus of this research is to study
situations where algebraic approaches produce better solutions. Even though the
problem formulation can be entirely discrete, significant insight and efficient
algorithms might be obtained by applying sophisticated algebraic methods. It is
not uncommon that combinatorial problems have simple and elegant formulations,
yet the obvious algorithms are too slow for their solutions except for very
small instances. In such situation, algebraic methods might provide the decisive
insights. The graph isomorphism problem exemplifies a combinatorial problem
where algebraic methods have successfully produced efficient algorithms. This
research also deals with other foundational mathematical problems having these
characteristics, like efficient multiplication of long integers and the monomer
dimer problem, and the counting of matchings in grid graphs. Typical algebraic
tools used are group theory, the discrete Fourier transform, as well as the zeta
transform and its inverse, the Mobius transform. Usually, there is no obvious
way of how to apply these tools most effectively. For example, the fastest
integer multiplication algorithms are all based on Fourier transforms, but the
efficiency heavily depends on the type of Fourier transform applied.

This project deals with fundamental combinatorial and algebraic tasks for which
efficient algorithms are desirable. This research is significant, because it
contributes to a better understanding of the mathematical structures behind
these problems and leads to the discovery of more efficient algorithms.

An important goal of this project is to contribute to the development of a new
generation of graduate students, who appreciate the development of mathematical
insight into difficult combinatorial and algebraic problems with the goal of
producing efficient algorithms. In particular, integer multiplication is such a
fundamental arithmetic task that understanding and improving it is an obvious
basic intellectual challenge. Such theoretical goals are foremost in this
project. But there is a potential for an impact on the search for Mersenne
primes and on general purpose computations with high degree polynomials. Other
aspects of this research involve topics with applications in Physics and
Chemistry.