* 1320589
* III: Small: Causal and Statistical Inference in the Presence of Confounding Factors
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Eleazar Eskin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 499,919.00

Technical: The presence of unmeasured confounding factors can result in
incorrect statistical and causal inferences if the confounding factors are
correlated with the observed data. This phenomenon has been well documented in
at least two important applications. One application is identifying genetic
variation involved in disease from populations of related individuals. A second
application is identifying genes active in a disease when comparing disease and
health samples. In this proposal we propose a new approach to correct for
unobserved confounders in taking advantage of insights into how confounders
affect high dimensional data. These insights motivate a formal definition for a
specific type of confounder which we term a 'low-rank confounder.' Formalizing
this definition allows us to motivate methods for correcting for the effects of
these types confounders even when the confounders are not observed. Our proposal
will develop a theory of how confounders affect data and under what conditions
unobserved confounders can be corrected. The proposed theory is related to
recent developments in understanding sparsity which has been well studied in
electrical engineering, computer science and statistics. The result of our
proposed methods will lead to improved methods for applications where such
confounders are present.

Non-technical: Inference of knowledge from high dimensional data is a
fundamental problem affecting virtually all areas of science including physics,
astronomy, chemistry, computer science, social science and many areas of
biology. Many of these problems are driven by recently available large sources
of data and advances in measurement or data collection technologies. A major
challenge is the presence of unknown (and unmeasured) confounding factors.
Confounding factors are variables that are often not observed in the data, but
are correlated with various features of the data. Unfortunately, confounding
factors can cause incorrect inferences. This phenomenon has been well documented
in at least two important applications: one application is identifying genetic
variation involved in disease from populations of related individuals, and a
second application is identifying genes active in a disease when comparing
disease and health samples. There are traditional approaches to perform
inference if the confounders are observed in the data. However, dealing with
unobserved confounders is more difficult. This project will develop and study a
new approach to correct for unobserved confounders, taking advantage of insights
into how confounders affect high dimensional data. The project has broad impact
due to its utility in a wide range of scientific questions, through the
interdisciplinary research opportunities provided to undergraduate and graduate
students, and through the distribution of software and data.