* 1320603
* SHF: Small: Bench-testing Environment for Automated Software Tuning (BEAST)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Jack Dongarra, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2016
* USD 499,995.00

In the world of high-performance scientific computing, the rapid emergence of
hybrid processors that make heavy use of accelerator technologies, such as
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) or the Intel Xeon Phi (a.k.a., Many Integrated
Cores, MIC), raises critical new challenges for computational scientists. Their
research applications typically depend on computational kernels (i.e., software
implementations of one or more of the basic patterns of scientific computing)
that are optimized for speed. Such programs spend most of their computing time
executing one or more of these kernels, and long experience has taught
developers that tuning their kernels for the architecture of a given processor
is absolutely essential to achieving excellent performance at the level of the
individual computing node. Since scientists want to run these applications on
supercomputers with thousands of such nodes, high performance at the node level
is essential to high productivity for the application at large. Unfortunately,
for the vast majority of computational kernels, the three classic approaches to
performance tuning?compiler-driven code transformations, low-level manual
programming, or empirical autotuning?have always been very difficult, often
producing mixed results; and the emerging era of hybrid processors makes all
three techniques less effective still. The Bench-testing Environment for
Automated Software Tuning (BEAST) makes a substantial contribution to solving
this important problem. &lt;br/&gt;BEAST creates a framework for exploring and
optimizing the performance of computational kernels on hybrid processors that 1)
applies to a diverse range of computational kernels, 2) (semi)automatically
generates better performing implementations on various hybrid processor
architectures, and 3) increases developer insight into why given
kernel/processor combinations have the performance profiles they do. To achieve
this three-fold goal, it applies the model used for traditional application
benchmarking in a completely novel way: it combines an abstract kernel
specification and corresponding verification test, similar to standard
benchmarking, with an automated testing engine and data analysis and machine
learning tools, called the BEAST workbench. Using a new method for specifying
language-neutral code stencils and a prototype BEAST workbench, the project
explores alternative tuning methods and strategies for a diverse range of
computational kernels. &lt;br/&gt;Experiments carried out under this project are
expected to show that the BEAST framework can dramatically improve the
performance of many computational kernels that are of fundamental importance to
scientific computing. As this software and the techniques for using it are made
widely available to the science and engineering community, they will help to
ensure the timely delivery of performance- optimized kernels for many domains
and many types of hybrid processors, making the impact of the BEAST bench-tuning
software infrastructure very broad indeed. Scientists and engineers, across a
vast array of intellectually, economically and socially important domains, will
be able to rapidly tune the underlying kernels in their applications to the
characteristics of the latest platform, and thereby quickly gain the
productivity benefits of each successive generation of accelerator technology.