* 1320987
* CIF:  Small: Realizing Chip-scale Bio-inspired Spiking Neural Networks with Monolithically Integrated Nano-scale Memristors
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Vishal Saxena, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Computer processing power is so integrated into our daily lives that we hardly
notice how it enables everything from a routine text message to solving "large
data" problems that mandate immense supercomputing resources. And yet, the
processing power of today's computers pales in comparison to that most advanced
processor - the human brain. It is now believed that technological progress
would enable us to take up the challenge of developing a new kind of computing
architecture that functions more like the brain. In recent years, scientists
have examined the electrical interaction between brain synapses and how
biological neurons interact. They have also derived mathematical models to
explain how these processes work. By employing these models in combination with
a new device technology that exhibits similar electrical response to the neural
synapses, this project will design entirely new computer processing chips that
mimic how the brain processes information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
envision these chips performing pattern recognition with machine complexity an
order of magnitude higher than traditional computing and digital signal
processor (DSP) architectures. And even though the chip physical size and weight
will match current processors, their power consumption will be orders of
magnitude lower than with the von Neumann computing architecture that forms the
basis for most of today's computer processors. Therefore, by mimicking the
brain's billions of interconnections and pattern recognition capabilities, we
may ultimately introduce a new paradigm in speed and power, and potentially
enable systems that include the ability to learn, adapt, and respond to their
environment.