* 1320229
* CGV: Small: A General Framework for Expressing, Navigating, and Querying Uncertainty in Data Analysis and Visualization Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Kwan-Liu Ma, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 498,196.00

This project addresses fundamental challenges in incorporating and conveying
uncertainty in the process of data analysis and visualization. In order to
compute uncertainty, the project aims to develop a general model for uncertainty
analysis that is independent of the visualization method and application domain.
An important and novel aspect of the technical approach is the division of
uncertainty into high and low conceptual levels, with separate but complementary
methods of analysis for each level. The ultimate goal is to allow assessment of
uncertainty at the level of tasks and queries, aided by effective visualization.
The project focuses on three principal research problems: (1) development of a
hybrid probability-possibility uncertainty analysis framework for representing
low-level computational uncertainty, along with methods for displaying this
uncertainty in various visual modalities; (2) formulation of a fuzzy analysis
for representing high-level, task-related uncertainty that handles human input
and visual/perceptual uncertainty, while bridging the gap between low-level
uncertainty and high-level uncertainty; and (3) investigation into ways to
visually display the evolution of uncertainty in computation, enabling
uncertainty navigation, in which exploration and modification of uncertainty can
occur in the same context. The resulting framework is expected to effectively
enable verifiable visualization of uncertainty in data analysis.

This project draws from many fields of research outside of visualization,
including management of uncertainty, fuzzy logic, information theory, data
analysis, simulation, computer vision, human-computer interaction, computer
graphics and high performance computing and its potential impact extends to
these areas and beyond. The ultimate goal of verifiable visualization is
beneficial to visualization and visual analytics, but also facilitates the
adoption of visualization in other fields, such as medical imaging,
computational biology, and visual analytics to name a few. The project results
will be disseminated to the visualization community and beyond through annual
conferences, workshops, and tutorials, and also through the project website
(http://vis.cs.ucdavis.edu/NSF/IIS1320229), which will include project status
updates and deliverables such as images, videos, and prototype software.
Complementing the proposed research is an educational agenda, consisting of
integration of research results into teaching, arrangement of summer internships
for participating students at the collaborating scientists' laboratories, and
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in research.