* 1320580
* III: Small: Investigating Spatial Big Data for Next Generation Routing Services
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Shashi Shekhar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,860.00

Increasingly, location-aware datasets are of a size, variety, and update rate
that exceed the capability of spatial computing technologies. This project
addresses the emerging challenges posed by such datasets, which sometimes are
also referred to as Spatial Big Data (SBD). SBD examples include trajectories of
cell-phones and GPS devices, temporally detailed (TD) road maps, vehicle engine
measurements, etc. SBD has the potential to transform society. A recent McKinsey
Global Institute report estimates that personal location data could save
consumers hundreds of billions of dollars annually by 2020 by helping vehicles
avoid congestion via next generation routing services such as eco-routing. Eco-
routing may leverage various forms of SBD to compare routes by fuel consumption
or greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions rather than total distance or travel-time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop next-generation eco-routing services, this
project innovates in three areas. Frist, Lagrangian Xgraphs, a novel concept in
computer science, is explored at conceptual, logical and physical database
levels to model traveler's frame of reference, a major departure from
traditional binary relationship (e.g., adjacency) graphs. Second, it probes the
concept of route-collections, and scalable algorithms for finding route-
collections. For example, to identify a route-collection over all possible
start-times of a given time-interval, the project explores a critical time point
approach which divides a given time-interval into a set of disjoint sub-
intervals of stationary-rankings among alternative routes. The approach is not
only novel but also very important for the field. Critical time points may
become a vital component of dynamic programming (DP) solutions, which would need
reconsideration in the face of emerging temporally detailed SBD that violate DP
assumptions about stationary ranking of alternate solutions. Third, to address
the increasing diversity of SBD methods, algorithm-ensembles and flexible
architectures that allow rapid integration of new data sources and routing
algorithms are developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work serves
national goals for energy independence and sustainability by laying the ground
work for eco-routing and other travel-related services that reduce fuel
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. By increasing the availability of SBD,
the project also enhances the research infrastructure for other researchers.
Educational activities include curriculum development and training of students
in the emerging area of SBD and Eco-routing. Result dissemination is planned via
publication in relevant peer-reviewed conferences and journals. More details are
available on the project website (www.spatial.cs.umn.edu/eco-routing/).