* 1320237
* CIF: Small: Structured-Network Coding: Fundamental Limits via Submodular Function Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Tie Liu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 486,711.00

Distributed and cloud storage are emerging technologies that transform the way
personal and enterprise data are managed today. This project proposes network
coding as a modeling tool to study efficient design and operation of distributed
and cloud storage systems. The principal aim of this project is to develop
mathematical tools that build upon the submodularity of Shannon entropy to
capture the structure of such engineering network coding problems, yielding
strong yet easy-to-compute network coding bounds. Two specific focuses of this
project are: 1) combinatorial characterization of subset entropy inequalities;
and 2) generalized cut-set bounds for broadcast
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed study of network coding represents a
significant deviation from the traditional view, where network coding is seen as
a collection of pure mathematical problems. This deviation allows us to focus on
the appropriate tools from combinatorics and information theory and draw
strength from engineering intuitions. Both the theoretical development and the
engineering results from this project are expected to impact how the field of
network coding evolves over the next few years. The proposed research programs
are hand-in-hand with our continuing efforts in training undergraduate and
graduate students, broadening the participation of women and African Americans
in engineering, and encouraging future scientists through outreach to high-
school students.