* 1320617
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Conflicts to Harmony: Integrating Massive Data by Trustworthiness Estimation and Truth Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Jiawei Han, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2017
* USD 211,115.00

Big data leads to big challenges, not only in the volume of data but also in its
dynamics and variety. Multiple descriptions about the same set of objects or
events from different sources unavoidably lead to data or information
inconsistency. Then, among conflicting pieces of data or information, it is
crucial to tell which data source is reliable or which piece of information is
correct. Accurate information is referred to as the truth and the chance of a
source providing accurate information is denoted as source reliability or
trustworthiness. The objective of this project is to detect truths without
supervision, by integrating source reliability estimation and truth finding. A
unified framework is developed to model complex trustworthiness factors,
heterogeneous data types, incremental and parallel computation, and source and
data dependencies so that truth and trustworthiness can be inferred from
multiple conflicting sources of heterogeneous, disparate, correlated, gigantic,
scattered, and streaming data.

This project makes tangible contributions to data integration, information
understanding and decision making, and benefits many applications where critical
decisions have to be made based on the correct information extracted from
diverse sources. Research results of this project are integrated into course
materials and projects, and into training students and new generation
researchers, especially female and minority students. For further information
about this project, please refer to the project website:
http://www.cse.buffalo.edu/~jing/truth.htm