* 1320219
* III: Small: Organizational Responsiveness to Open Outside Input: A Modeling Approach based on Statistical Text and Network Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Hanna Wallach, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 479,628.00

This project focuses on the development of new analytical tools for modeling the
relationships between intra-organizational communication networks and open,
external sources of text data. The massive quantities of textual communications
generated within organizations constitute a largely untapped source for
insightful, timely organizational analytics. The tools under development for
this project are designed to jointly analyze the content of communications and
the socio-organizational structure comprised by communication ties, thereby
allowing researchers and practitioners to identify and analyze the ways in which
government officials' extra-governmental communications are related to intra-
governmental communications and operations. In producing these tools, this
project builds upon extant textual and network analysis methods by focusing on
novel probabilistic methods for identifying topics that cut across network
domains (e.g., informal email communications, official meeting minutes, and
final policy records) and representing the complex flow of topics through
government decision and policy-making processes. These methods, along with data
collected during the course of this project, enhance organizations' ability to
connect streams of external input to their internal operations. In conjunction
with a new, publicly available database of local government communication
records, this project showcases and builds upon the success of recent efforts,
encompassing the gov2.0 movement, to improve government responsiveness through
the solicitation of open outside input.