* 1320531
* CSR: Small: High-Performance and Energy-Efficient Single-Level Stores: Efficient Coordinated Management of Storage and Memory
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Saugata Ghose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 516,000.00

Modern computing systems require manipulation of persistent&lt;br/&gt;data.
However, the mechanisms to access persistent data are separated&lt;br/&gt;from
the mechanisms to manipulate such data in a traditional two-
level&lt;br/&gt;storage model: persistent data is stored in non-volatile
storage, such&lt;br/&gt;as hard disks or solid-state disks, whereas it is
manipulated in&lt;br/&gt;volatile memory, such as DRAM. Unfortunately, this
decoupled model of&lt;br/&gt;system design leads to large amounts of
inefficiency in terms of both&lt;br/&gt;performance and
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research undertakes a rethinking of the memory
and storage&lt;br/&gt;systems in the presence of new and emerging non-volatile
memory&lt;br/&gt;technologies such as phase-change memory , spin-transfer torque
RAM,&lt;br/&gt;and memristors. These technologies promise large capacities at
low&lt;br/&gt;latency, making them prime candidates for the design of a single-
level&lt;br/&gt;coordinated memory and storage system where the manipulation
and&lt;br/&gt;storage of all data are unified. Yet, there are
significant&lt;br/&gt;application-level and system-level efficiency and
correctness&lt;br/&gt;challenges in devising such a single-level store with
emerging&lt;br/&gt;technologies. The central goal of this project is to
develop&lt;br/&gt;hardware/software cooperative techniques to enable high-
performance&lt;br/&gt;and energy-efficient single-level stores in computer
systems targeting&lt;br/&gt;a wide range of applications in cloud computing,
client systems, and&lt;br/&gt;mobile systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
expected that research performed in this project will enable
new&lt;br/&gt;applications and much more robust and efficient data storage
systems,&lt;br/&gt;making our daily lives that increasingly depend on data
processing&lt;br/&gt;better and more productive. Enabling unified memory and
storage for&lt;br/&gt;modern computing systems can largely reduce wasted work
and take&lt;br/&gt;advantage of emerging low-power technologies, thereby taking
a large&lt;br/&gt;step in making computing more energy efficient.