* 1320347
* III: Small: Discovering Complex Anomalous Mappings
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Artur Dubrawski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 499,282.00

A 2000 report by the Institute of Medicine indicated that 100,000 patients die
in the U.S. each year due to suboptimal treatment decisions made by healthcare
professionals who operate under pressure of time while processing overwhelming
amounts of data, particularly in the operating rooms and intensive care units.
Corrective measures and new regulations have not led to improvements yet. In
developed countries, about 6% of the economy is spent on upkeep of
infrastructure, and about 50% of the original acquisition cost is spent on
maintenance of equipment. Managers of, e.g., fleets of aircraft, are too often
unable to maintain the required levels of equipment availability due to
unexpected, but identifiable in data, crises in maintenance and logistics: only
about 2/3 of the U.S. military aircraft can be flown at once. Expediting
solutions often causes hundreds of millions in avoidable expenses. These two
examples, as well as many other societally, economically, and scientifically
important domains of human activity, involve large amounts of multi-stream data,
which may carry information helpful in mitigating some of the adversities.
Existing research efforts produce algorithms that extract useful information
from individual sources of data. Substantial new benefits, however, could be
realized by exploiting relationships between streams of data. This research
program will comprehensively and pragmatically explore that opportunity, and
impact communities of healthcare practitioners, equipment managers, as well as
users in other domains wherever multiple streams of corroborative evidence are
available, it will also benefit students and trainees, and the scientific
community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop and
extensively evaluate new algorithms to identify informative correlations between
multiple and diverse streams of large, multivariate, numeric and symbolic,
potentially sparse data. These algorithms will identify subsets of features and
records of data that follow distinct cross-stream relationship patterns, enable
descriptive and predictive analytics in static and temporal settings, and allow
robust forecasts. The proposed work will build on prior efforts towards
detection of complex anomalous patterns in single streams of multidimensional
data, and expand it towards cross-stream analysis of multiple data sources.
Expected results will allow, e.g., detection of patterns of change in
relationships between vital signs measured at the bedside of intensive care
patients and their records of treatment or medication, and outcomes. These
patterns may be indicative of non-standard responses of a patient to a
treatment, or signal emergence of a health crisis. In a broader perspective,
this effort will substantially expand capabilities of current techniques of
cross-stream analytics such as Canonical Correlation Analysis, it will develop a
new variant of Gaussian Processes framework to model inter-stream dynamics,
produce new information-theoretical modeling of correlations between streams of
symbolic variables (with an extension to handle datasets with a mix of numeric
and symbolic features), and it will provide a framework for identifying
multimodal structures of cross-stream relationships, including disjunctive and
conjunctive-disjunctive patterns. It will take on highly challenging
intellectual endeavors while aiming for significant benefits of societal
importance, with the primary impact demonstration areas in bed-side informatics
and equipment health management. Resulting software implementations of the new
algorithms and illustrative examples of their use will be shared with the
general research community. The bulk of the proposed work will be performed by
graduate students and medical fellows who will immediately use the acquired
knowledge in their careers. The PIs will include the results in outreach
activities and in their training and teaching course materials.