* 1320860
* SHF: Small: Computer-Aided Grading, Feedback, and Assignment Creating in Massive Online Programming Courses
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Swarat Chaudhuri, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 298,319.00

Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are widely regarded as
a&lt;br/&gt;revolutionary innovation; however, traditional
instructional&lt;br/&gt;techniques do not scale to MOOCs with tens of thousands
of students.&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to design a set of algorithmic tools to
partially&lt;br/&gt;automate three of the most basic instructional processes -
grading&lt;br/&gt;assignments, giving students personalized feedback, and
creating new&lt;br/&gt;assignments - in MOOCs that teach computer programming.
Such tools&lt;br/&gt;have the potential to significantly raise the productivity
of&lt;br/&gt;instructors in these courses, and give students a far more
effective&lt;br/&gt;educational experience than what they currently receive.
They can also&lt;br/&gt;guide the development of future MOOCs on programming,
and play a role&lt;br/&gt;in making the MOOC model reach its full
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms developed in this project draw on
ideas from several&lt;br/&gt;different areas of computing. They leverage
advances in automated&lt;br/&gt;reasoning about software like automatically
finding bugs in&lt;br/&gt;student code and suggesting fixes, and exploit
statistical learning&lt;br/&gt;techniques that mine databases of previously-
completed assignments and&lt;br/&gt;infer aggregate statistics about a class.
Finally, the research has a&lt;br/&gt;dimension of human computation, for
instance seeding logical and&lt;br/&gt;statistical analysis techniques with data
obtained through peer&lt;br/&gt;evaluation. These methods apply to any
programming course; however,&lt;br/&gt;the investigators will evaluate them by
deploying them in a specific&lt;br/&gt;MOOC on Python programming that they
teach.