* 1320231
* AF: Small: Data Synchronization : Theory, Algorithms, and Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Michael Mitzenmacher, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,370.00

This project addresses the growing need for improved synchronization methods for
large-scale, multi-party distributed systems.  As users migrate information to
cloud storage, cloud providers may use multiple loosely consistent replicas
because of the overhead of keeping replicas synchronized at all times.  Further,
users themselves may create loosely synchronized replicas on laptops, tablets,
or other devices when they are disconnected from the cloud storage.  Periodic
synchronization, or reconciliation, becomes a requirement in such settings.

Reconciliation has been most studied in the specific setting of two connected
users, each containing a set of keys, and both desiring the union of the sets. 
The costs of these protocols is typically in terms of the size of the symmetric
set difference between the two sets.  The Principal Investigator (PI) will focus
on generalizing reconciliation methods to settings where many parties
communicate over a network represented by a graph.  The new framework will aim
to encompass standard problems such as rumor spreading and network coding, as
well as generalize to other objects such as sequences with other measures such
as edit distance. The primary theoretical and practical challenge the PI will
pursue is to develop schemes where the amount of communication necessary for
object synchronization depends only on the size of the difference among objects
that need to be synchronized, and not the sizes of the objects themselves.  For
example, for large databases, the synchronization cost should depend on the
delta between the databases, which will generally be much smaller than the
databases themselves.  A further goal is that the framework will have practical
consequences for modern cloud-based deployments, especially large-scale big data
systems. Because the goals of reconciliation include both algorithmic efficiency
as well as communication efficiency, the PI will work to bring ideas from both
the theoretical computer science and information theory communities together in
this work.  The new algorithms and data structures developed for these problems
are expected to have significant additional uses for other problems as well.