* 1320941
* SHF:  Small: Software-Driven Hardware Resiliency
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Sarita Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Moore's law continues to provide abundant devices on chip, but they are
increasingly subject to failures from many sources. The hardware reliability
problem is expected to be pervasive, affecting markets from embedded systems to
high performance computing. There is an urgent need for research to address this
problem with extremely low overheads in area, performance, and power (precluding
traditional redundancy based solutions). Recently, researchers have proposed a
software-driven hardware reliability solution that handles only the device
faults that become visible to software and cause anomalous software behavior.
This line of work has been quite successful in detecting most faults at
extremely low cost. Unfortunately, some hardware faults escape detection by the
proposed anomaly monitors, resulting in silent data corruption or SDC. These
remaining few SDCs have been the Achilles heel of the software-driven hardware
resiliency approach and a hindrance to widespread adoption. The proposed
research seeks to overcome this obstacle. The research includes methodological
innovations that can determine application sites vulnerable to SDCs within a
practical workflow and resiliency solution that uses this information to develop
low cost detection and recovery techniques to mitigate the impact of SDCs. It
builds on a recent resiliency analysis tool developed by the Principle
Investigator's group called Relyzer. The key insight is that instead of trying
to determine the outcome of each fault site, Relyzer can seek to determine which
application sites will produce equivalent outcomes. This enables pruning a large
number of sites and focusing on fault injections for just one site per
equivalence class, resulting in significant reduction in resiliency evaluation
time. In addition to providing a list of SDC vulnerable instructions, Relyzer
also provides a wealth of information on why they are vulnerable. This motivates
the use of inexpensive application-specific detectors that exploit this
information. However, Relyzer has several limitations in speed, accuracy, and
generality, precluding its use in a practical workflow. This research will first
develop new techniques to address these limitations and to implement them in a
tool. Second, this research will explore systematic techniques to develop
practical resiliency solutions that exploit the wealth of fault-propagation
information exposed by Relyzer. It will develop systematic low-cost detection
and recovery techniques, with quantifiable tradeoffs between resiliency and
performance overheads, that can be incorporated in a practical workflow for real
applications. If successful, this work will address a key challenge in meeting
the expectations of Moore's law performance for a wide variety of societal
advances. Besides the research benefits, it will provide a concrete tool for
practical full application resiliency analysis and will also train graduate
students.