* 1320029
* EXP: Collaborative Research: Gesture Enhancement of Virtual Agent Mathematics Tutors
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Neff, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 283,000.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education EXP project, PIs from computer
science and mathematics education are collaborating to investigate the use of
gestures by teachers (both human and virtual) and learners in support of
mathematics learning. They are investigating the ways teachers' gestures
influence learning of mathematics concepts and how to design gestural supports
for learning that a computer avatar might use in communicating with a learner.
Their conceptual foundations come from embodied cognition, and they are aiming
towards understanding the integration of two types of gestures: those that are
used to promote understanding of content and those used for social purposes. The
project focuses on learning of proportion, and the technological innovation in
this project is creation of a gesturing pedagogical agent/avatar that has a rich
repertoire of both types of gestures that it uses while interacting with a
learner and helping the learner to deepen his or her understanding of the
mathematics of proportion. In a series of design studies, the PIs are designing
software and extracting principles for augmenting pedagogical agents with new
gesture-enriched capabilities and gleaning insights into the nature, types, and
roles of gesture in educational interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
consistent reform efforts, U.S. students still lag behind their global peers in
mathematics understanding and capabilities. Intelligent tutoring systems can be
used to provide one-on-one help to students who are struggling as they learn
mathematics, but such interactions lack the social cues that help learners
maintain their attention and know they are being understood and lack, as well,
full means of expressing concepts in ways that learners might need for
understanding. Good teachers use gestures for these purposes, and this project
focuses on design of pedagogical agents (avatars) that will also be able to use
such gestures. Infusing interactive tutoring systems with the ability to gesture
in naturalistic and domain-appropriate ways may provide a missing link in making
tutorial interactions effective for more learners. At the same time, insights
gleaned about the pedagogical roles of gesturing can be leveraged in educating
teachers of the future.