* 1320468
* NeTS: Small: FreeNet: Cognitive Wireless Networking Powered by Green Energy
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Nirwan Ansari, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,933.00

The project aims to liberate wireless access networks currently constrained by
spectral and energy scarcity via a new framework, referred to as FreeNet, by
exploiting cognitive networking and green energy. FreeNet will be designed and
optimized using a series of novel techniques such as dynamic network
architecture optimization, network resource aware traffic scheduling, and
spectrum sharing. The network architecture optimization framework will apply
advanced probability theory to investigate inherent relationships between the
optimal network architecture and the availability of spare spectrum and green
energy, and adopt control theory to adapt the network architecture according to
the dynamics of the spare spectrum and green energy. The network resource aware
traffic scheduling and spectrum sharing algorithms will be designed based on
optimization theory. Finally, theoretical analysis will be reduced to practice
and translated into communications protocols in enabling and prototyping
FreeNet. The theoretical analysis will elicit a series of theorems to direct the
utilization of green energy in communication networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
communication protocols design and FreeNet prototyping will provide guidelines
for designing resource aware communication systems. The research activities will
advance the understanding of inherent relationships among the network
architecture, traffic scheduling, spectrum utilization, and energy consumption.
FreeNet will be deployed for offloading mobile traffic in urban areas,
delivering content in rural areas, and enhancing emergency communication
capacity during natural disasters. FreeNet will improve the availability and
capacity of wireless networks, broaden the benefits of wireless networking, and
enhance the living environment, the earth, by reducing the release of carbon
footprints. Research outcomes from this project will be disseminated via
publications and a website with frequent updates. Other broader impacts include
integration of research and education through participation of both
undergraduate and graduate students in the project, incorporation of research
outcomes into course work, interactions and exchanges with invited speakers, and
seeking involvement of REU students and under-represented groups.