* 1320991
* Next-Generation Modeling of the Geodynamo: Development of the First Multi-Scale Dynamo Model
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Keith Julien, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 540,000.00

The Earth's magnetic field is now known to be the result of fluid motion within
the Earth's molten iron outer core. This "dynamo" process remains one of the
least understood phenomena in the Earth sciences, however, due to the lack of
direct observations. Computer simulations have proven to be valuable tools for
advancing our understanding of dynamos. Nevertheless, it is not currently
possible to capture all the temporal and spatial scales of dynamical relevance
in the Earth's core given modern-day technological constraints. The PIs are
overcoming these limitations by developing the first multi-scale mathematical
model of the geodynamo. In this respect, the proposed work can be viewed as a
new computational and modeling framework that will allow for the highest
resolution simulations of the Earth's core to date. Additionally, these methods
will be broadly applicable to a range of other scientific problems ranging from
molecular physics to cellular dynamics.

Three-dimensional numerical simulations have vastly improved our understanding
of convection driven dynamos, yet computational constraints currently limit them
to physical parameters that are distant from those that characterize the Earth's
liquid outer core. This fact highlights a serious gap in our understanding of
the geodynamo, and severely limits our ability to relate directly geomagnetic
field observations and the output of numerical dynamo models. The proposed work
will, for the first time, employ the methodology of multiple scale asymptotics
to planetary dynamo systems for purpose of developing a model that is capable of
reaching parameter values and physical properties of Earth's core. In this way,
the asymptotic regime of the proposed model will provide a more complete
understanding of geomagnetic field observations. Findings of the research will
be directly applicable to other rapidly rotating, turbulent fluid systems on and
within stars, extrasolar planets, and the other planets within the Solar System.
Moreover, the mathematical methods employed for development of the reduced
equations are broadly applicable to a range of other scientific problems ranging
from molecular physics to cellular dynamics.