* 1320717
* SHF:Small: Hardware/Software Support for Debugging of Scaling Limiters in Many-Core Execution
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Milos Prvulovic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 499,848.00

Until recently, a cost-effective way to make a program run faster was to buy a
computer with a more recent processor, without making any changes to the program
itself. However, in recent years this approach no longer works - instead of one
ever-faster processor core, recent processors rely on increasing numbers of
cores to provide better performance. To benefit from these new multi- and many-
core processors, programs must be explicitly written to "scale," i.e., to keep
getting faster as they run on more cores. Re-design for scaling is time-
consuming and costly, especially considering that most programmers are not used
to (nor trained for) writing programs that use more than one core. This NSF-
funded project will analyze scaling problems in programs and report them to
programmers with enough accuracy to help rapidly deal with the problems. An
important aspect of this approach is that it also helps educate current
programmers and future ones (e.g., college students) to anticipate scaling
problems and avoid them in the future. Additional outreach activities are
planned in middle and high schools in Atlanta (where minority students are the
majority of the population) to educate both students and their teachers about
key concepts in computer hardware and software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
technical challenge in this project is that there are many types of scaling
problems. Some scaling problems are related to the application itself, e.g.,
serial sections, lock contention, etc., and some are hardware-related, such as
contention for interconnect bandwidth, serialization in directories, contention
for capacity in shared caches, etc. The symptoms of these problems are often
ambiguous, which makes them even more difficult for programmers to identify and
correct. This project will provide hardware support for profiling that will help
disambiguate some of the symptoms and attribute them to specific parts of the
code, along with software tools that will analyze and report both software- and
hardware-related scaling limiters. Our reporting will be specific enough to lead
programmers directly to the code that should be "fixed" and help them understand
why and how this code needs to be modified.