* 1320453
* NeTS: Small: Spectrum Sensing, Allocation, and Charging for Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Qun Li, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 11/30/2017
* USD 508,000.00

The objective of this project is to conduct a holistic protocol design for
large-scale cognitive radio networks. To support a large number of wireless
devices as secondary users that able to dynamically access available channels,
it is necessary to design decentralized architecture and solutions for cognitive
radio networks. Based on the decentralized architecture, this project addresses
important problems in spectrum sensing, spectrum allocation and pricing, and
spectrum usage monitoring and charging in dynamic spectrum access networks. More
specifically, this project focuses on three research thrusts: (1) A robust
collaborative spectrum sensing algorithm to tolerate arbitrary false data
reports from adversaries, (2) An efficient spectrum allocation and pricing
scheme for a large number of secondary users to share spectrum resources based
on localized and approximation algorithms, and (3) A scheme for monitoring and
charging the spectrum usage of secondary users without sacrificing secondary
users' privacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed architecture and the
solutions to the relevant problems have the potential to significantly advance
the state-of-the-art of cognitive radio networking research, in particular, in
improving the efficiency of spectrum sharing. The technology developed in this
project will facilitate a wide variety of scientific and engineering
applications and result in a significant impact on the society. The project will
perform a wide range of education and outreach activities, including integration
of research findings into courses and curricula, and involving under-represented
students in research projects. Research results will be broadly disseminated
through conference and journal publications, research talks, and via the
Internet.