* 1320651
* RI: Small: Statistical Perceptual Inference in Visual Cortical Neural Circuits
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Tai Sing Lee, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,961.00

This interdisciplinary research project seeks to elucidate the computational
machinery and algorithms in our brain that enables us to perceive 3-dimensional
surfaces of objects in visual scenes based on the 2D images projected on our
retinae. The first conjecture of the project is that the neural circuitry
underlying perceptual inference in our brain can be predicted by the statistical
structures in our natural environment. To prove this conjecture, statistical
studies on 3D natural scenes will be carried out and their predictions on neural
connectivity will be compared with the functional connectivity and tuning
properties of depth-sensitive neurons in the primate visual cortex obtained
using large-scale multi-electrode recording techniques. This will provide deeper
insights into how the brain represents and builds models of the structures of
the external world to enable perceptual inference. To understand what such
circuits can compute, the investigator conjectures that neural circuits realize
a class of generative models in computer vision and computational neuroscience
called Markov random fields and Boltzmann machine. This second conjecture will
be evaluated by exploring the theoretical link between the neural circuits and
these computational models, by comparing experimental neural observations with
behaviors of these computational models, and by evaluating the computational
performance of the inferred neural circuits in solving stereo computation and
surface interpolation problems in real world data. The research combines
techniques in machine and statistical learning, computer vision, neural networks
and neurophysiology to dissect neural circuits from a functional perspective. By
linking real circuits to a powerful class of computational models in statistical
inference, the project will have broader impacts by providing novel evidence and
fundamental insight to the neural mechanisms and computational algorithms
underlying statistical perceptual inference in the brain. This interdisciplinary
project will be a catalyst for the development of educational initiatives to
bring bringing computer science and neuroscience together for undergraduates and
graduate students, and to promote the awareness and involvement of students from
multiple disciplines, including under-represented groups, in the field of
computational neuroscience.