* 1320635
* CGV: Small: Scalable high-quality surface parameterization and resampling
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Denis Zorin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Processing geometry efficiently is crucial for many domains including computer-
aided design, scientific computing, urban planning, and cultural heritage
preservation, to name just a few. As a consequence, the amount of geometric data
generated and stored is rapidly increasing. Raw geometric data comes in a
variety of forms (e.g., range images, LIDAR data, and volumetric data), and most
commonly is converted to unstructured meshes which enjoy many attractive
features but inherently limit efficiency and accuracy of algorithms for
geometric processing, processing data on surfaces and physical simulation.
Conversion of geometry to an image-like, regularly sampled form has been
demonstrated to have significant advantages in these contexts. Mesh
parameterization is the fundamental technique used both for resampling surfaces
on structured grids and for mapping data to surfaces. Global parameterization
algorithms can generate seamless tilings of arbitrary surfaces with
quadrilateral domains enabling regular resampling everywhere excluding isolated
points. The continuing progress in this area has led to increasingly reliable
and high-quality algorithms, yet no fully robust automatic method is available
yet. The PI's goal in this project is to tackle this problem and to develop
fundamental algorithms for global parameterization supported by rigorous
analysis, as well as robust and scalable implementations of these algorithms.
Specifically, he aims to address the following closely interconnected problems:
Quality (optimization of suitably chosen distortion measures, and explicit
guarantees on local distortion); Robustness (direct parameterization and
resampling of possibly noisy geometric data avoiding intermediate mesh
representations, with guarantees on the resulting parameterization structure);
and Scalability and Efficiency (to enable meshes with hundreds of millions of
sample points to be processed on a desktop computer). Although the PI will build
on the substantial recent advances in the area, achieving the stated goals will
require rethinking some of the core aspects of the problem.

Broader Impacts: This research will lead not only to the development of
practical and efficient algorithms, but also to advances in our fundamental
understanding of related geometric problems (for example, intrinsic limitations
on distortion and geometric resampling). The software the PI plans to develop
has the potential to enable new approaches to a variety of tasks in geometric
processing, which can be performed on structured grids and in the parametric
domain if a robust tool for parameterization can be assumed to be available. The
interest in robust and scalable parameterization techniques extends far beyond
the domain of geometric processing, to many domains of science and engineering
where complex geometric models are used (e.g., large-scale fluid flow simulation
in complex geometry, which requires high-order approximation of surfaces
extracted from different sources).