* 1320385
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Proposal: Efficient Computer Algebra Techniques for Scalable Verification of Galois Field Arithmetic
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Florian Enescu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2018
* USD 188,241.00

With the spread of Internet and mobile devices, transferring information safely
and securely has become more important than ever. The hardware and software
systems utilized in such applications, e.g. cryptography, perform arithmetic
computations over Galois fields. The specialized nature and the high complexity
of the hardware architectures require manual, custom design, which raises the
potential for errors/bugs in the design implementation. Hardware bugs in
arithmetic circuits not only cause unintended operation, but they also make
cryptosystems vulnerable to security attacks. Validating the correctness of, and
bug-catching in, arithmetic hardware is imperative. This project investigates
the use of modern Symbolic Computer Algebra techniques for formal verification
of Galois field arithmetic circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Verification of
cyber-security is a problem of great importance, and it is attracting a lot of
research at the software-level. However, hardware verification of primitive
Galois field computations in crypto-systems has not seen much breakthrough. The
main reason for this is that the arithmetic circuit architectures employed in
cryptography are very complex and their size is extremely large. Conventional
verification techniques are unable to scale with respect to the large size. To
address these problems, the project aims to integrate computer algebra with
circuit analysis techniques for verification. By exploiting the circuit design
information, the project will attempt to overcome the complexity of symbolic
computation. This research enables design of domain-specific computer-aided
verification tools for efficient, scalable verification of Galois field
circuits. The project impacts computer-aided verification technology, secure
system-design and validation, and it advances fundamental knowledge in both
computer algebra and design verification of arithmetic circuits. Enabling the
validation of security and privacy of data also, in general, impacts the
society.