* 1320615
* Nanoscale Surface Adsorption and Disordering in Battery Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Jian Luo, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 191,790.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: High-power lithium ion batteries have great potential
for applications in electric vehicles or even electrical grid stabilization
systems. Moreover, adopting plug-in hybrid electric vehicles for commuting in
metropolitan areas can reduce CO2 emission by as much as 50%. While many
conventional materials engineering techniques, such as carbon coating, doping,
and particle size reduction, have been used to improve the performance of
battery materials, meeting the grand challenges demands new transformative
approaches. This project aims to develop an unconventional approach to use
nanoscale 'surface phases' of self-regulating thickness to tailor battery
materials to achieve superior properties that are not attainable by using the
normal three-dimensional bulk materials or nanoparticles. This project also aims
to bridge an important gap in the fundamental interfacial science by extending
the well-established low-temperature surface science theories to high-
temperature ceramic materials. Integrated research and education activities have
impacts on high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The research objectives
of this project are twofold. The first (technological) objective is to develop a
new method of using nanoscale 'surface phases' to improve the rate capability of
battery materials. Compared with the conventional coatings, these 'surface
phases' have several advantages: (a) they form spontaneously upon annealing as
the thermodynamic equilibrium configurations; (b) they exhibit a self-selecting
or "equilibrium" thickness that is tunable by changing thermodynamic potentials;
and (c) surface doping can be introduced to increase the ionic and electronic
conductivity, improve the morphological stability during electrochemical
cycling, and suppress the formation of the detrimental thick solid-electrolyte
interface layers. This new approach is expected to be applicable for engineering
a wide variety of oxide based cathode materials (including many emerging
materials), as well as some anode materials. The second (scientific) objective
is to use battery materials as model systems to investigate a potentially
transformative concept of utilizing nanoscale 'surface phases' to achieve
properties unattainable through bulk phases, and to advance to the fundamental
interfacial science by establishing new theories of high-temperature surface
adsorption and disordering in ceramic materials. Broad impact activities include
involving high school students in summer research programs; assembling a
multidisciplinary undergraduate team to develop free-access online educational
materials; and mentoring doctoral students in both cutting-edge energy-related
research and outreach activities.