* 1320758
* NeTS: Small: The MOLES: Enabling Wireless Sensor Networks in Underground
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 09/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Wireless Underground Sensor Networks (WUSNs), i.e., networks of wireless sensor
nodes that operate below the ground surface, are the enabling technology of many
emerging applications, such as intelligent agriculture, underground pipelines
and power grid monitoring, oil reservoir monitoring, concealed border patrol,
earthquake and landslide forecasting, and underground mine disaster prevention
and rescue, amongst others. Despite their potential advantages, the realization
of WUSNs is very challenging. The peculiarities of the underground environments
prevent the direct use of most, if not all, existing wireless communication and
networking solutions, mainly due to the very high path loss, small communication
range, and high dynamics of electromagnetic (EM) waves in the underground
environment. The objective of this project is to address the unique challenges
for the realization of WUSNs in challenging underground environments. The
proposed research is built on top of novel Magnetic Induction (MI)-based
communication mechanisms as well as system architectures in underground soil
medium, oil reservoirs, and mines and tunnels. This particular project has
contributions along four major thrusts. First, a cross-layer communication
framework based on the MI channel characteristics is proposed to achieve high-
throughput, energy-efficient, and reliable underground communications. Second, a
new Received Magnetic Filed Strength (RMFS)-based localization paradigm is
proposed to exploit the unique multi-path and fading-free propagation properties
of MI-based signals, which guarantees the accuracy, simplicity, and convenience
of the localization strategy. Third, an optimal MI-based network deployment
strategy is proposed for different WUSNs applications with the objective to
minimize the coil density while maintaining the required bandwidth constraint
and reliability requirements. Finally, a physical MI-based WUSN testbed is
developed, which consists of our own designed MI-based sensor devices and an
engineered underground environment, to validate our proposed solutions.

The proposed research is expected to pave the way for the realization and
implementation of emerging WUSNs applications, which bring significant advances
in the industrial productivity and homeland security, e.g., concealed border
patrol. This project will bring together researchers in the areas of information
theory, radio design, and networking, and enable the establishment of new
research connections and interpretations. The project will support two graduate
students. The solutions of the project will also result in patents for the
proposed techniques and novel system architectures. The research results will be
disseminated in important scientific conferences, journals and premier magazines
of the field. The developed simulation tool and physical testbed will serve as
the evaluation platform for the research community.