* 1320298
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Realizing the Vision of Information-Theoretic Security for Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Matthieu Bloch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 05/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

A significant amount of sensitive data communicated over wireless media makes
wireless communication security an issue of paramount importance. The standard
implemented solution to security over wireless networks is based on a modular
approach in which transmission and encryption are carried out separately. State-
of-the-art encryption algorithms are thus agnostic to the characteristics of the
underlying network, but this separation approach is increasingly hard to justify
as fast and reliable communications over wireless networks require more
effective security architectures.

Several theoretical insights have been obtained from information theory in the
past few years that suggest that fundamentally secure transmission in wireless
interference networks is possible by jointly designing for reliability and
security at the outset. This project takes a distinctive approach to accelerate
the deployment of information-theoretically secure design of wireless networks
by analyzing models with realistic assumptions, developing practical coding
schemes and validating with a wireless test-bed. The project investigates two
intertwined research tasks: (i) overcoming modeling assumptions, by providing
security guarantees irrespective of adversaries' channels, modeling and
countering adversaries that can manipulate channel conditions to their
advantage, and removing idealized assumptions in implementation; (ii) providing
explicit channel code designs that ensure strong secrecy and developing secure
codes for multi-terminal wireless networks.

Additional activities related to the project include : (i) outreach to the
computational security community towards integration of information-theoretic
and computational security principles; (ii) dissemination of research results in
various forms; (iii) a research exchange program between Georgia Tech and Penn
State; (iv) a jointly taught graduate level course by the PIs that incorporates
the research results of this project; and (v) recruitment of and mentorship for
women in engineering and science. The research conducted in this project will
facilitate the implementation of information-theoretic security principles on
wireless systems and lead to novel cost-effective security techniques at the
physical-layer.