* 1320016
* CSR: Small: XooMR: Cross-Layer and Cross-Phase Cooperation for Fair and Efficient MapReduce
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Weikuan Yu, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 10/31/2015
* USD 491,000.00

MapReduce has been widely leveraged as a new programming model to tap the power
of parallel data processing for Big Data. More and more systems are being
deployed to serve data-intensive analytics applications written in MapReduce.
Many jobs can show up at the same time on a system with conflicting resource
requirements. This project investigates cross-layer cooperation techniques to
achieve system efficiency, cross-phase techniques to enhance job fairness and
system throughput, and cross-job task co-scheduling techniques to exploit the
temporal relationship among jobs for better throughput and services to analytic
queries composed of multiple MapReduce jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has profound impacts in several aspects. These include (1) strengthening
computer science courses at Auburn University, and enhancing instruction
effectiveness with student research projects on MapReduce; (2) recruiting and
cultivating students of diverse backgrounds, particularly under-represented
minority and female student groups for careers in computing; (3) disseminating
research results as publications, presentations, conference tutorials and
demonstrations, releasing open-source software codes, and eventually pushing
them for integration into the official Hadoop code base; and (4) collaborating
with industry, strengthening research partnerships, and cultivating
opportunities for technology transfer to industry.