* 1320953
* CIF: Small:  Theory and Algorithms for Scalable Learning of Sparse Representations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Yoram Bresler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 499,740.00

Many applications in signal and image processing and imaging depend critically
on sparse representations for natural signals or images. This research addresses
the development of improved sparse representations that are directly adapted to
the data, rather than being fixed a priori by general theoretical
considerations. Such data-driven learning of sparse structure has been finding
broad applications. The improvements over fixed representation are especially
significant for high-dimensional data. This research aims to overcome
limitations of the current methods by reducing the computation to enable scaling
to big data problems, improving robustness and predictability of outcome, and
developing a theory quantifying the expected performance and the factors
affecting it. Applications are foreseen in all areas of science and engineering,
including medical diagnostics, multimedia, defense, manufacturing,
communications, database retrieval, and data analytics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this research leverages a new formulation recently
introduced by the PI for data-driven learning of "sparsifying transforms", which
are relatives of analysis dictionaries. Initial results in image denoising show
slightly better PSNR than with learnt synthesis dictionaries, but at orders of
magnitude less computation. Theory predicts better scaling with exemplar size,
and experiments demonstrate robust convergence irrespective of initialization.
Specific objectives of this research are: (1) develop theory and scalable
algorithms for learning sparsifying transforms; (2) develop theory for joint
learning of sparsifying transforms and signal recovery in compressed sensing and
other inverse problems; and, (3) demonstrate key large-scale applications with
real data. These applications include: (i) denoising, restoration, and
compressed sensing of 3D and 4D data in magnetic resonance imaging, in
computerized tomography, in microscopy, and in video; and (ii) image
classification and recognition.