* 1320943
* RI: Small: Automated Planning of Experiments for Design Optimization
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Alan Fern, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 483,840.00

Many engineering and scientific projects require planning experimental
activities in order to optimize an objective. Such planning involves jointly
reasoning about both the budget-limited resource constraints among activities
along with the utility of potential information that they may provide.
Unfortunately, for many real-world planning problems, with rich structure among
potential activities, tools from classic experimental design are not directly
applicable due to their simplifying assumptions and poor scalability. This
project aims to transform the practice of experimental planning by developing
new algorithms that account for the complexities exhibited in a wide range of
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three key activities. First,
the experimental design description language (EDDL) is being created for
formally modeling complex real-world experimental domains. Second, novel
planning algorithms are being developed for efficiently computing high-quality
solutions to problems expressed in EDDL. Third, work with bioengineers is
assessing and improving the usability of the tools and producing benchmark
problems based on real and simulated bioengineering data. The creation of the
language and benchmarks will help facilitate algorithm comparisons for continued
progress by the wider research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the project is to facilitate experiment planning in a wide range of
experimental domains for which there are currently no available computational
tools. Currently, in such domains, planning is largely ad-hoc and often done
without computer support. Our research has broad economic impact potential by
helping engineers and scientists to get the most value out of limited
experimental resources. The project also advances high school, undergraduate,
and graduate education in the areas of computer science and bio-engineering,
with an emphasis on recruiting female students. The students will get the unique
experience of working across disciplines and research labs.