* 1320520
* HCC: Small: Social Agents and Robots for Open-Ended Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Brian Magerko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2018
* USD 545,789.00

Recreational activity is a fundamental aspect of human existence and an
important part of the human condition within familial and social groups, where
it serves to strengthen social ties by increasing affect between individuals and
as a form of education in creative thinking. Despite a sizable accumulation of
knowledge about such activity from sociology, anthropology, and psychology,
"play" as a first-class concept has not been studied through the lens of
computation. When today's agents engage with humans, they do so in the context
of structured environments and are highly dependent on well-defined goals and/or
behaviors. Contrast this to the domain of pretend play, which involves non-goal
directed peer-to-peer activity in a shared imaginary second reality that is
continually altered. Pretend play is a common form of engagement that is
relevant to an array of social domains, such as elder care, peer learning, or
social skills therapy for children with autism spectrum disorders. The PI's goal
in this research is to imbue robot systems with procedural and declarative
representations of play so that they are capable of engaging in such activity
with humans as peers. The work aims to discover how to develop humanoid robots
with the ability to engage, improvise, and create with humans in unstructured
environments. Such robot capability would foster perceptions of lifelikeness,
social acceptance, and companionship similar to the experience of playing with
other people. These agents would encourage spirited behaviors and creativity in
people. They would elicit high levels of interest, intrinsic motivation, and
positive affect, which in turn would lead to better concentration, learning, and
personal investment by the human participant. To achieve these goals, the PI
will leverage his prior work on creativity and cognition to conduct a study of
adults engaging in object-based pretend play to elicit a formal understanding of
it in dyads. The findings will subsequently be applied to building social robots
that engage, based on the team's expertise in human-centered AI and human-robot
interaction. The resulting robot architecture will be evaluated to see how it
can enhance robot affect and social acceptance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This research will create a new academic research direction of
Computational Play within the field of social robotics that has the potential to
contribute a solid and unique advance to the field, and also to change how we
interact with intelligent agents thereby increasing agents' social value and
acceptance by the humans around them. The work will increase via empirical study
our understanding of human engagement, and in particular of the knowledge and
social dynamics involved in pretend scenarios. The playful robots to be
designed, implemented and formally evaluated in this work will inform the human-
robot interaction community as to how such activity can be used within HRI
contexts to increase affect. This work also has the potential of improving the
learning and creativity of those that interact with social agents, making
computational play a valuable research direction for education. The project will
provide a fertile ground for interdisciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students, and a wealth of interaction data that will be shared
with the scientific community.