* 1320357
* III: Small: Cumulon: Easy and Efficient Statistical Big-Data Analysis in the Cloud
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Ward, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,992.00

"Big data" have been growing in volume and diversity at an explosive rate,
bringing enormous potential for transforming science and society. Driven by the
desire to convert data into insights, analysis has become increasingly
statistical, and there are more people than ever interested in analyzing big
data. The rise of cloud computing in recent years offers a promising possibility
for supporting big data analytics. However, it remains frustratingly difficult
for many scientists and statisticians to use the cloud for any non-trivial
statistical analysis of big data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first challenge is
development---users need to code and think in low-level, platform-specific ways,
and, in many cases, resort to extensive manual tuning to achieve acceptable
performance. The second challenge is deployment---users are faced with a
maddening array of choices, ranging from hardware provisioning (e.g., type and
number of machines to request), software configuration (e.g., number of parallel
execution slots per machine), to execution parameters and implementation
alternatives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to build Cumulon, an end-
to-end solution for making statistical computing over big data easier and more
efficient in the cloud. For development, users can think and code in a
declarative fashion, without worrying about how to map data and computation onto
specific hardware and software. For deployment, Cumulon presents users with best
"plans" meeting their requirements, along with completion time and monetary cost
to help them make decisions. A plan encodes choices of not only implementation
alternatives and execution parameters, but also cluster resource and
configuration parameters. This project develops effective cost modeling and
efficient optimization techniques for the vast search space of possible plans.
Cumulon addresses the challenges of uncertainty and extensibility (in terms of
not only functionality but also optimizability). Cumulon also features a
performance trace repository, which collects data from past deployments and uses
them to improve cost modeling and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cumulon
aims to make statistical computing over big data easier and more cost-effective
for a wide range of users including scientists and statisticians. Besides
leveraging the cloud to provide on-demand, pay-as-you-go access to computing
resources, Cumulon further simplifies development and deployment, reduces
reliance on programming and tuning support, and accelerates data-driven
discoveries. More than a one-shot solution, Cumulon is designed as a basis for
an evolvable, open-source ecosystem that keeps up with advances in big-data
analytics. Its repository of performance traces benefits the community in
independent ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the growing importance of
quantitative, data-driven methods, Cumulon can impact many domains. The
interdisciplinary team of PIs---from computer science, statistics, etc. ---is
applying Cumulon to concrete applications in biomedical research and
computational journalism. Through collaboration, the PIs seek to attract diverse
talents, motivate them to work on problems with potential societal impacts, and
help prepare them for the new challenges of big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
further information see the web site at: http://db.cs.duke.edu/projects/cumulon