* 1320652
* Collaborative Research: Scalable and accurate direct solvers for integral equations on surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Per-Gunnar Martinsson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 219,187.00

The goal of the proposed research is to develop faster and more accurate
algorithms for computing approximate solutions to a broad class of equations
that model physical phenomena such as heat transport, deformation of elastic
bodies, scattering of electromagnetic waves, and many others. The task of
solving such equations is frequently the most time consuming part of
computational simulations, and is the part that determines which problems can be
modeled computationally, and which cannot. Dealing with complicated shapes (e.g.
scattering from complex geometry or flow through channels of complicated shape)
adds difficulty to the computational task.

Technically speaking, most existing large-scale numerical algorithms for solving
partial differential and integral equations on complex geometries are based on
so called "iterative methods" which construct a sequence of approximate
solutions that gradually approach the exact solution. The proposed research
seeks to develop "direct methods" for solving equations. A "direct method"
computes the unknown data from the given data in one shot. When available,
direct methods are often preferred to iterative ones since they are more robust,
and can be used in a "black-box" way. As a result these are more suitable for
incorporation in general purpose software, and in many cases work for important
problems that cannot be solved with existing iterative methods. The reason that
they are today typically not used is that existing direct methods for many
problems are often prohibitively expensive. However, recent results by the PIs
and other researchers have proven that it is possible to construct direct
methods that are competitive in terms of speed with the very fastest existing
iterative solvers. The new algorithms will be applied to the simulation of fluid
flows and biomolecular simulations, and their performance will be demonstrated
by the execution of simulations on complex geometries.