* 1320662
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Enabling Network Agility Through Virtualized Infrastructure Migration
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ehab Al-Shaer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,999.00

Virtualized infrastructure is becoming increasingly routine, and so the ability
to manage it well is important. Cloud computing is built on virtualized
computing infrastructure. Software Defined Networks are virtualized data
networks. The combination of virtualized computing and communications
constitutes the next wave of innovation in provisioning bespoke infrastructure.
This project addresses ways of making such virtualized infrastructure more
reliable, by planning and managing the migration of the virtual network
structure and associated computation from one set of supporting physical
infrastruture to another. Triggers for VN migration include attacks, massive
failures, performance collapse or degradation, or changes in the service demands
that require an increase or decrease in resource allocation in order to both
satisfy users and reduce power consumption. This ability to adapt to network
dynamics is referred to as VI migration (VIM).

There are many challenges in deploying VIM for the applications above. First,
different network agility objectives might require different VIM models and
techniques. For example, the trigger to migrate for proactive defense to defeat
reconnaissance would need to be time based , whereas, for power management the
trigger would be signi&#64257;cant change of network traf&#64257;c load. Second,
VN migrations may need to be planned in advance (for example, in the case of
proactive defense) but in some cases they cannot be planned in advance and need
to be deployed in real time (in response to faults, for example). Third,
although most existing theories permit reasoning about correctness of network
operation only once as the system stabilizes to a static state, investigating
formal frameworks that support migration strategies that are correct-by-
construction under continuous movement is a prime research task. To address
these challenges this project will develop a VIM architecture that is designed
to work in the context of the GENI and PlanetLab virtualization technologies,
but which could be used as the basis for other industrial systems. The
architecture consists of two main components: a Strategy Synthesizer block and a
Migration Mechanism block. The inputs to the Strategy Synthesizer block uses
models of the VI and the Migration Mechanism block interacts directly with the
substrate to implement the desired migration.

VIM is a powerful technique for energy control in Cloud infrastructure and
effective tools for managing VIM are expected to facilitate significant savings
in IT energy consumption. In addition to the potential commercial and network
security impacts of the work, the PIs have identified local and outreach
activities that further the participation of women and minorities. The
experimental and evaluation aspects of the work will be incorporated as project
elements in graduate courses.