* 1320783
* SHF: Small: BugX: In-house Debugging of Field Failures to Improve Software Quality
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Alessandro Orso, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 434,999.00

A recent survey conducted among developers of the Apache, Eclipse, and Mozilla
projects showed that the ability to recreate field failures--failures of the
software that occur after deployment, on user machines--is considered of
fundamental importance when investigating bug reports. Unfortunately, the
information typically contained in a bug report, such as memory dumps or call
stacks, is usually insufficient for recreating the problem. Even more advanced
approaches for gathering field data and help in-house debugging tend to provide
too little information to developers and to be therefore ineffective.

The overall goal of this project is to improve the state of the art by allowing,
supporting, and partially automating, actual in-house debugging of field
failures. Specifically, this research will develop novel techniques and tools
that let developers reproduce, analyze, and understand, in-house, failures
observed in the field. Given a field failure, the developed techniques will (1)
collect a suitable set of data about the failure on the user machine, (2)
generate one or more inputs that can be executed against the failing application
and result in a failure analogous to the one observed, and (3) provide hints on
the root causes of the failure and possible fixes for these causes. To achieve
this goal, the research will combine static and dynamic program analysis
techniques and leverage and extend techniques for testing deployed software,
input generation and anonymization, and software debugging. If successful, this
research will provide unprecedented advantages to developers by allowing them to
debug field failures in the same way in which they debug in-house ones, which
will improve software quality and benefit all segments of society that depend on
software. Furthermore, the project will develop and make available to the
broader scientific community educational materials that incorporate research
findings, tools that implement the techniques developed within the project, and
samples of the software benchmarks used in empirical evaluations. The
availability of curriculum materials, tools, infrastructure, and benchmarks will
advance knowledge, enable additional research in the area, and ultimately
further benefit society.