* 1320416
* CIF: Small: Distributed Storage Systems from Combinatorial Designs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Aditya Ramamoorthy, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2018
* USD 399,999.00

Large scale content sharing, social networking sites and cloud storage providers
require massive amounts of data (on the order of hundreds of petabytes) to be
stored in a distributed manner. In these systems, node failures and loss of data
are the norm rather than the exception. Thus, it is of critical importance to
investigate storage techniques and algorithms that (a) allow for data recovery
in the presence of node failures and (b) allow for efficient regeneration of
failed nodes. It is, of course, desirable to perform the regeneration in a
distributed manner and optimize performance metrics associated with it. For
instance, it is desirable that the regeneration process be fast and that only a
few nodes be contacted for the repair. The investigator will research storage
methods that allow for very simple and efficient repair while simultaneously
allowing for data recovery in the presence of a large number of failures. The
research involves the investigation of distributed storage systems that are
resilient to multiple failures and can be repaired in an exact and uncoded
manner; i.e., the new node may produce an exact copy of the failed node by
simply downloading packets from the surviving nodes, with no computational
overhead.

Replication codes are increasingly deployed in large-scale data centers in use
by major internet companies. Advances in reconstruction codes are expected to
translate into millions of dollars in savings in maintenance costs in such data
centers. To ensure accessibility of the results of this research, implementation
will be carried out using the open source Hadoop distributed file system, the
preferred platform for cutting-edge research and development in distributed
cloud storage.