* 1320585
* SHF: Small: Lithography Aware Physical Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Martin Wong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Micro-chips are at the heart of modern microelectronic systems for computing,
communication, entertainment, and other consumer electronics. In order to design
and manufacture the next generations of complex microelectronic systems, major
innovations in the design of Electronic Design Automation (EDA) software are
needed. This project focuses on developing novel EDA software. In the past 50
years, the exponential growth of the semiconductor industry has been primarily
fueled by the continuous advancement in Integrated Circuit (IC) manufacturing
technology, allowing the industry to produce chips with ever-increasing numbers
and ever-decreasing sizes of transistors and wires. Today, the most advanced
silicon chips have billions of transistors and tens of miles of wires, and the
minimum feature size on a chip is less than 20nm. Lithography continues to be
the backbone of chip manufacturing. In advanced IC technology, lithography has
become the bottleneck for the chip design process. Design for Manufacturing
(DFM) is no longer an option but a necessity. Since physical design determines
the locations and geometries of all the transistors and wires, it must
understand the down-stream lithography process so that the layout patterns
generated are printable on silicon. This is a challenging problem and the
requirements oftentimes are non-intuitive to the designers. In this proposal, we
study lithography-aware physical design for several leading next-generation
lithography (NGL) technologies. The NGL technologies considered here are triple-
patterning lithography (TPL), self-aligned double patterning (SADP), directed
self-assembly (DSA) and extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography. All the proposed
topics are critical to their respective NGL technologies and their solutions are
expected to greatly impact future generations of micro-chip design for years to
come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will advance knowledge in
Electronic Design Automation (EDA). It will also add new knowledge to other
fields such as scientific computing and combinatorial optimization since
ultimately we will need to solve large scale optimization problems. The broader
impacts of this project include Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) technology
advancement and the education of next generation engineers. VLSI circuits are at
the heart of modern information and communication systems. The proposed research
improves the design and manufacturing of VLSI circuits, which will benefit
society at large. New research results will be passed on to undergraduate and
graduate students through dissertation research, course projects, homework, and
classroom teaching.