* 1320122
* CSR: Small: System and Middleware Approaches to Predictable Services in Multi-Tenant Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Xiaobo Zhou, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2016
* USD 310,147.00

Datacenter-based cloud services exhibit unpredictable performance variations due
to multi-tenant interferences and the heterogeneity in datacenter hardware. The
investigators attribute the causes of such performance unpredictability to
missing two important service guarantees from existing cloud providers: resource
capacity and application agility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide guaranteed
resource capacity and enhanced application agility, this project develops
independent but complementary approaches at system and middleware levels to
reduce performance variations of in-cloud applications without compromising
other objectives such as high datacenter utilization and good average
performance. Anticipated deliverables include new system support in cloud
resource management to account for interferences and hardware heterogeneity in
shared infrastructures and middleware approaches to perform agile, non-invasive
and application-centric resource provisioning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research methodology combines architectural knowledge on the complex interplay
between simultaneous multi-threading, multicore, and non-uniform memory access
architectures with statistical learning algorithms to quantify interference and
heterogeneity, and integrates the strength of self-optimizing learning and
control techniques to automate resource provisioning under dynamic workloads.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project broadens impact by exploring inter-
disciplinary techniques in computer system design and enhancing cloud services
with predictability guarantees. The success will guide resource management and
metering in future cloud systems. This project also involves industry
collaboration, curriculum development, and provides more avenues to bring women,
minority, and underrepresented students into research and graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;