* 1320478
* CSR: Small: PROM in Clouds: Exploiting Scheduling for PeRformance OptiMization in Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 495,157.00

Cloud computing is emerging as an attractive computing paradigm, where both
hardware and software resources can be leased from a cloud provider to achieve
better economy of scale, elasticity, availability, and flexibility for a
plethora of services. A major challenge in designing such cloud platforms is in
providing high and predictable performance along with Quality of Service (QoS)
guarantees. The performance unpredictability is attributed to a myriad of
factors including system scale, workload dynamism, virtualization overheads,
resource sharing and contention. The objective of this proposal is to
investigate performance enhancement and performance quantification techniques in
a cloud environment through three intertwined tasks. First, a comprehensive
scheduling framework consisting of a high-level job scheduler and a fine-grained
resource manager will be developed for efficient management of cloud resources
for performance enhancement. Second, performance prediction models will be
developed for estimating job completion time (JCT) in a cloud platform. Third,
for providing QoS guarantees, a control-theoretic model incorporating the
proposed scheduler and analytical models will be developed. Measurements on real
platforms with MapReduce and other representative cloud workloads will be used
to validate the proposed ideas.

This research addresses one of the main concerns of cloud computing - What are
the performance implications if my application is moved to a cloud? If
successful in answering this question, it would have a tremendous impact on the
cloud-enabled application domains. The cross-cutting nature of this work can
foster new research avenues. In addition to undergraduate and graduate student
training in areas such as architecture, distributed systems, and performance
modeling, special attention will be given to involving women and minority
students in this project. The modeling tools and techniques developed in this
research will be made publicly available.