* 1320442
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Theory, Algorithms, and Experiments for Frequency-Agile Beamforming Mesh (FabMesh)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Joseph Camp, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2017
* USD 249,000.00

The FCC seeks to connect 19 million unserved Americans to broadband by 2020.
These rural areas have yet to be fully connected to the Internet due to wireline
infrastructure costs which exceed potential revenue opportunities. Even in
heavily-populated environments with sufficient wireline infrastructure, capacity
issues remain in congested stadiums, disaster recovery zones, and public
transportation. Each aforementioned access challenge seemingly is well-suited
for wireless mesh networks, but have yet to be fully solved. However, recently,
there has been a sizable growth in radios operating in diverse frequency bands
(e.g., TV white spaces) with emerging multi-antenna schemes. In this project,
multi-user beamforming and diverse frequency bands are leveraged to
significantly build upon the flexibility originally sought by mesh networks. In
doing so, frequency-agile beamforming mesh (FabMesh) networks seek to truly
scale in complexity and cost according to the user population and traffic
demand. The work includes three key innovations: (i) client-side, beamforming-
aware, and frequency-agile protocols to improve performance and reliability of
clients, using contextual information and advanced physical layer techniques,
(ii) analysis of spatial reuse and capacity for media access control in mesh
networks which leverage multi-user beamforming, and (iii) scalable network
deployments which leverage multi-user beamforming along the backhaul and
adaptation across multiple frequency bands according to network demand. The
project includes a number of hands-on courses for university students at all
levels, "just in time" pedagogical approaches to thousands of online students,
outreach to under-represented students and communities, and key industrial
collaborations to accelerate the commercial adoption of FabMesh networks.