* 1320278
* NeTS: Small: Resilient and Efficient Data Access in Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Guohong Cao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 12/31/2016
* USD 460,762.00

In cognitive radio networks, to avoid interference with licensed users,
unlicensed users must vacate the spectrum accessed by the primary users. Since
it takes some time for the unlicensed users to detect and switch to other
available spectrum, the ongoing data transmission may have to be interrupted,
leading to poor data access performance. Although there is a lot of research on
cognitive radio networks, not much work has been done on data access. This
project focuses on three intertwined issues to support resilient and efficient
data access: (i) Various topology control protocols which carefully assign
communication channels considering network robustness and channel interference
to achieve better data accessibility, are designed and evaluated; (ii) Delay-
constrained caching techniques are introduced to deal with primary user
appearance, where data is cached/replicated at appropriate nodes to
statistically limit the data access delay; (iii) Spectrum-aware data replication
schemes are designed to improve data access performance in intermittently
connected cognitive radio networks, by considering both node mobility pattern
and primary user appearance. This project will make significant theoretical and
technological advances in understanding and supporting resilient and efficient
data access in cognitive radio networks. The success of this project is likely
to have a broader impact on making cognitive radio networks more affordable and
amenable to commercial, civilian, and military applications. The results of the
project will be disseminated widely through high quality publications and
presentations. The proposed research will also be integrated with the education
curricula at the Pennsylvania State University.