* 1320752
* CSR: Small: Profiling and Optimizing Embedded Software for Soft Real-Time Behavior and Responsiveness
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Santosh Pande, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 477,724.00

This project aims to develop a framework for performance characterization,
representation, optimization and debugging for the emerging domain of soft real
time computing. Key elements include a new metric, called "variance", that
characterizes the timing properties of such workloads, and a "variant
characterization graph" (VCG) that represents the relationships among the
variance contributing functions in a software system. The VCG is subjected to a
combination of static analysis, dynamic profiling and statistical analysis. The
results of these analyses are applied to the problems of debugging performance
bottlenecks, and dynamic performance optimization making use of predictive
methods and contextual information obtained at run time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactive, response-time sensitive applications such as
video games, computer vision, and multi-media encoder/decoders are an important,
growing class of emerging applications on mobile devices such as the smart-
phones. A proliferation of powerful new devices is driving up the scale and
pervasiveness of applications. The diversity of new devices and the number of
kinds of resources present in them, accompanied by a market-driven demand for
shorter application development cycles, are making performance tuning more
challenging and more essential. Success of this project would provide a
practical conceptual backbone for converting the optimization of such soft real
time systems from an art to a science. Transition of the results of this
research to practice is furthered through open source distribution of software
tools implementing and applying the VCG-based analyses, and an on-line graduate
course titled "Optimizations for Interactive Embedded Software".