* 1320235
* CSR: Small: Multi-Version Concurrency Control (MVCC) for Main Memory and its Implications for Deterministic Concurrency
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Jakob Eriksson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 469,734.00

The objective of this project is to investigate version consistency, a new
concurrent programming consistency model, as a means of enhancing the
performance and scalability of concurrent systems. Under version consistency,
which can be seen as a relaxation of release consistency, processes are
guaranteed to see the same memory contents (only) if they are accessing the same
version of the memory. Such versions are created, retrieved and/or merged
through calls analogous with version control systems for source
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important class of applications that benefits
substantially from version consistency is deterministic concurrency runtimes,
where the goal is to ensure that a program produces the same output given the
same input, independent of any non-deterministic timing effects. In prior work,
the PI achieved up to 50% performance gain for the deterministic runtime
DThreads, using version consistency. In this project, one of the goals is to
achieve ``pthreads parity" for a deterministic runtime, where enforcing
determinism incurs only negligible performance impact. When and if this is
achieved, ``determinism by default'' becomes a feasible option for mainstream
computer systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As computer processors continue to evolve
from a centralized single ``core'' architecture to highly distributed and
parallel ``multi-core systems'', writing correct programs that make efficient
use of this extremely powerful hardware is becoming increasingly difficult. This
results in a number of detrimental effects ranging from poor resource
utilization, to seriously flawed programs where loss of data, or even loss of
life may result. This project investigates (a) a means of reducing the
complexity of programming highly parallel systems to combat these problems, and
(b) a means of guaranteeing that even an incorrect parallel program produces the
same result every time. This latter part will help programmers write correct
programs, and to fix software flaws that may otherwise be intermittent and
difficult to identify.