* 1320659
* NeTS: Small: Flange: A Domain Specific Language for Network
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Douglas Swany, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2017
* USD 298,292.00

An increasing amount of software depends on the network, and at the same time
networks themselves are becoming more programmable via technologies like
OpenFlow, opening a wide range of opportunities both for network efficiencies
and in-network computation. While new programming models seek to make network
reconfiguration easier, none provide tools to solve the joint problem of
software-controlled routing and placement of in-network computational services.
This project will design and build a domain specific language (DSL), called
Flange, for managing services in networks. The project's approach marshalls
configurable forwarding and computing devices in the network, with pervasive
monitoring to support service adaptation. The project includes building and
releasing a prototype compiler, runtime, system and front-ends that enable
Flange programming both with dedicated syntax (standalone DSL) and embedded in
host languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success criteria for this project is
that a network administrator using the prototype is able to set a new service
(e.g. video-transcoding) using less than a page of Flange code. Using the same
mechanism, a network engineer should be able to launch a persistent function
that monitors network conditions and responds to saturation by redirecting
traffic to an alternate path. The novelty of the project is twofold. First, the
semantic foundation at the root of the project treats both hardware and software
aspects of networks uniformly, as constituting a single process network. For
example, the project models forwarding as an in-the-network service, while
considering it in the same light as other potentially instantiated services in
the network such as transcoding or compression. Second, the Flange language will
provide novel global view programming abstractions for large networks. Flange
programs will be able to inspect network entities, aggregate information, signal
and respond to events, all without reference to their own place of execution
(which is often physically distributed). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed
here stands to impact network operational efficiency and flexibility for
national science-focused cyberinfrastructure as well as in commercial
applications, where the economic impact of networked computing is clear. In
addition, the design decisions the underly Flange are pedagogically relevant and
will be presented in courses taught by the PIs.