* 1320586
* III: Small: Is Imprecise Supervision Useful? Leveraging Ambiguous, Incomplete or Conflicting Data Annotations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jinbo Bi, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 351,836.00

Supervised machine learning approaches to building predictive models from data
traditionally rely on labeled samples. However, in many real-world applications,
samples are either unlabeled or labeled imprecisely labeled, i.e., labels are
often ambiguous, conflicting, or incomplete. This presents the problem of
learning predictive models under imprecise
supervision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop effective
algorithms to address three different scenarios that lead to imprecise
supervision (1) multiple labelers with varying expertise are employed to
annotate samples; (2) annotated labels are associated with a set of samples
instead of an individual sample; (3) annotations are derived by modeling
multiple expert assessments. The project introduces a general bi-convex
programming, minimax optimization, and multi-objective optimization based
framework for learning predictive models from imprecisely labeled data. The
resulting algorithms will be evaluated on a number of real-world applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results of this research are likely
to impact a range of biomedical applications, including medical image labeling,
longitudinal behavioral studies, genomics, and drug safety. The project offers
enhanced opportunities for curriculum development and research-based advanced
training of grauduate amd undergraduate students in machine learning and its
applications. Dissemination of open source software implementation of algorithms
resulting from the project also contribute to the project's broader impact.
Additional information about the project can be found at:
http://www.labhealthinfo.uconn.edu/home/MachineLearning.jsp