* 1320884
* CIF: Small: Optimal Estimation and Network Inference for Boolean Dynamical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Ulisses Braga Neto, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2017
* USD 400,921.00

This research concerns complex dynamical systems based on networks of logical
gates updated and observed at discrete time intervals. Examples of such systems
in contemporary technology abound, including digital logic systems, digital
communication systems, and more. This is also the case, notably, of many
biochemical systems, such as DNA regulatory circuits. In fact, Norbert Wiener,
one of the pioneers of the modern information age, famously wrote about ?the
essential unity of the set of problems centering about communication, control,
and statistical mechanics, whether in the machine or in living
tissue.?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research studies a novel signal model, and
corresponding optimal estimation methods, for Boolean dynamical system models
under noisy observational conditions. The optimal recursive MMSE estimator for
the proposed model is called the Boolean Kalman Filter (BKF). The terminology
comes from the fact that this estimator is reminiscent of the (extended,
unscented) Kalman filter for continuous state-spaces. The BKF also has
similarities with the forward (and backward) algorithm used for state estimation
in Hidden Markov Models (HMM). The methodology is applied to the inference of
biochemical regulatory networks, in collaboration with the Translational
Genomics Research Institute (TGen), the University of Pittsburgh, and the
Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), in Brazil.