* 1320694
* NeTS: Small: MobiBench: Benchmarking Mobility Models for Simulation and Design of Future Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Ahmed Helmy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 377,466.00

With the explosion of new mobile apps, protocols and services, there is a
compelling need for new tools to evaluate and test mobile networks. This project
aims to establish a systematic framework to produce benchmarks (called
MobiBench) in the form of evaluation scenarios and test-suites for mobile
networking protocols and services for user and vehicular mobility. Two threads
of research are pursued. First, a multi-dimensional metric space is introduced
for characterization of user (human) mobility, to be applied to mobility
measurements and models. The metrics span: i. individual, ii. pair-wise and iii.
collective mobility dimensions, and facilitate comprehensive analysis and
evaluation of mobility models and networking protocols. Novel, trace-driven
models are developed to accurately capture user mobility metrics and mobile
network performance. The COBRA model is designed to capture collective communal
behavior in mobile social networks. Second, new extensive vehicular traces are
collected and analyzed, including vehicular imagery data from thousands of
webcams around the world. Vehicular density distributions and models are
developed to aid in establishing realistic vehicular mobility models and
benchmarks. Estimation of vehicular density uses adapted background subtraction
algorithms for image processing. This work will result in the establishment of a
library of benchmarks, traces, models and test-suites for pedestrian and
vehicular mobility, to be used for the realistic evaluation of future mobile
protocols, networks and services. Results of this research will impact mobile
networking research and aid in traffic control and transportation congestion
mitigation.