* 1320583
* SHF: Small: Integrating separation logic and SMT for better heap verification
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Clark Barrett, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Heap-allocated pointer structures are a common source of software errors. In
particular, pointer safety errors, like memory leaks and dereferencing null or
dangling pointers, often cause programs to fail or leave them vulnerable to be
exploited by malware. Tools that are able to detect such errors at compile time
have long been considered impractical because they scale badly to large
programs. This has started to change recently with the advent of verification
tools based on separation logic (SL), which scale to software components of
industrial size. The aim of this project is to increase the degree of
automation, precision, and soundness of today's SL-based verification tools and
broaden the scope of tools that could use separation logic. Because heap-
allocated data structures are among the most difficult software constructs to
reason about, this work has the potential to make a significant impact on the
reliability of software.

SL-based tools depend on theorem provers for separation logic to automatically
discharge proof obligations concerned with properties about pointer structures.
Today's tools implement tailor-made provers for this task. However, the analysis
of real-world programs involves reasoning about other data types including, for
instance, integers, arrays, and bit-vectors. To cope with this, existing
separation logic tools make simplifying (and in general unsound) assumptions,
rely on interactive help from the user, or implement ad-hoc and incomplete
extensions of their tailor-made provers. The PIs will investigate a more
systematic approach towards combined reasoning about heap and other data types
by integrating an SL theorem prover into a satisfiability modulo theories (SMT)
solver. This research is motivated by the observation that reasoning about
separation logic fragments can be reduced entirely to reasoning in decidable
first-order theories that fit well into the SMT framework. Modern SMT solvers
implement decision procedures for many first-order theories that are relevant in
program verification, such as linear arithmetic, arrays, and bit-vectors. A
reduction to first-order logic enables a seamless combination of separation
logic with these theories. Moreover, SMT solvers are already an integral part in
the tool chain of many existing verification tools. These tools could directly
benefit from an integrated SL prover. In addition, we expect that specific
capabilities added to the SMT solver as a result of the project will be useful
to a broad set of SMT users.