* 1320125
* SHF: CSR: Small: A Cooperative Framework for Topology Awareness on Large-Scale Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Zhiling Lan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 510,377.00

As the number of computer nodes increases, so does the size of the interconnect
network. Historically, floating point was the most costly component of a system,
but this is no longer the case. Systems today, and those anticipated in the
future, are increasingly bound by their communication infrastructure and the
power dissipation associated with data movement across the rapidly growing
number of nodes. How to address the increasing cost of data movement on ever-
growing systems is becoming critical.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a framework named COTA, a COoperative framework for Topology Awareness.
COTA will be an integrated framework that coordinates across the hardware, job
scheduler, runtime, and application to jointly attack the increasing concern of
data movement for communication- and power-efficiency on large-scale systems.
Most importantly, the framework will support topology awareness not only at job
startup, but also during job execution. The newly developed mapping algorithms,
topology-aware methods and tools, and topology-aware models will provide a
critical foundation for the realization of topology awareness on current and
future systems. This research will have a direct impact on system productivity
as well as a broad range of application domains that use parallel systems for
simulations. The project will also enhance the curriculum at Illinois Institute
of technology, broaden the participation by underrepresented groups, and
outreach to the surrounding communities.