* 1320959
* CGV:  Small: Digital Forensic Facial Reconstruction from Incomplete Datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Warren Waggenspack, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 479,611.00

In forensic investigations, the skeletal evidence analysis and facial
reconstruction play important roles in identification of the decedent. In
current practice, effective skull processing and facial reconstruction are
accomplished manually. This project studies 3D geometric analysis and modeling
algorithms to automate and augment fragmented/incomplete skull restoration and
craniofacial reconstruction and advocates a potential evolution of manual
processing to a digital platform for better efficiency, robustness, and
objectivity. Two key challenging problems to solve in these forensic tasks are
geometric restoration (from small fragmented pieces) and geometric shape
synthesis (with complex geometric and semantic constraints). This project
studies effective 3D shape matching and transformation techniques to tackle
these problems. Geometric restoration is solved through reliable partial
matching and symmetry guidance; geometric synthesis is explored via
heterogeneous volumetric deformation that enforces given geometric constraints
on non-uniform interior layers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new geometric
algorithms can benefit incomplete data modeling and analysis in many computer
graphics and vision tasks. In this project, computer scientists are
collaborating with forensic specialists to build a digital computational
platform and evaluate the application of these new geometric algorithms in
forensic skull processing and craniofacial reconstruction. This project
facilitates incomplete data analysis and reconstruction in forensic law
enforcement, archaeology, biological anthropology, and craniofacial orthopedics.
The research and education are integrated by taking research advances into
existing and future courses, involving RET/REU/K-12 students in geometric
modeling research and graphics/visualization system development; and attracting
K-12 and under-representative students into STEM education.