* 1320397
* NeTS: Small: Participatory Software Defined Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Rodrigo Fonseca, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Network configuration and management today is a complex and error-prone task,
done by expert administrators, who implement policies as a brittle composition
of independent control rules on heterogeneous devices. Networks become stifled,
as changes to configuration have hard-to-predict consequences in the resulting
policies. At the same time, there is pressure in the opposite direction for more
dynamic networks, as increasingly distributed applications can benefit from
network flexibility, and actually have information about the semantics of their
traffic that can inform network configuration.

The goal of this project is to enable end-user applications to take active part
in the configuration, provisioning, and management of the network, and, in turn,
have more visibility into the network state to better reconfigure themselves.
The proposed approach, Participatory Software Defined Networking, aims to be a
unifying and extensible framework to expose network control mechanisms and state
to end-user applications. It leverages the emerging paradigm of Software Defined
Networking, with its logically centralized and programmable control plane, and,
in an analogy to Operating Systems, provides the "user-level system calls to the
network". Applications request current and future service properties, gain
visibility into network properties, and provide hints about future demands to
the network. The research will combine programming languages techniques to
define the semantics of policy and query language and compilation, with systems
design and experiments on a real programmable network testbed, guided by real
applications.

Intellectual Merit: The contributions of this project are to expose the control
plane of the network to end-user applications through a unifying and extensible
framework, to solve the challenges to make this safe and efficient, and
ultimately to allow for radical joint optimization of applications and the
network. More specifically, this work will: (1) define the semantics for the
delegation of privileges necessary for the safe exposure of the control plane to
end-user applications. (2) define a high level hierarchical representation of
policies, with flexible semantics for policy composition from different users,
across several network resources. (3) produce a sound compilation strategy from
the high level combined policies to efficient sets of distributed rules on
switches and (4) propose and evaluate the joint optimization of applications and
the network given the flexibilities and requirements of the former, and the
constraints and load of the latter.

Broader Impacts: The results of the proposed research will be broadly applicable
to regular network users, with direct, tangible benefits in efficiency,
security, sharing, and ease of use of the networking infrastructure.
Participatory networking will enable home users (or their applications, on the
users' behalf), to effectively configure the network according to intuitive
policies. Network queries can provide the foundation for a ubiquitous "weather
service" for networks, which can have positive effects on user expectations.
Heavy users on campus networks, such as physicists, will be able to safely share
the network without the need for physically separate networks. Enterprise users
will be able to install firewall rules deeper in the network without requiring
human intervention. Co-optimization of applications and datacenter networks will
enable significantly more efficient large-scale data processing, helping advance
science and business at large. The PI will integrate undergraduate students in
the research, and will create a course on Advanced Networking focused on SDNs
and in datacenters. He will continue to speak about networking and the Internet
to the 9th-grade girls at the NSF-sponsored Artemis program.