* 1320519
* RI: Small: Mechanics, Manipulation, and Perception of Deformable Objects for Robotic Manufacturing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Timothy Bretl, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

The project is motivated by the need of small-to-medium sized businesses in the
United States to automate handling and assembly of compliant parts. As a case
study, it focuses on robotic installation of a wire harness (a bundle of wires
that terminate in electrical connectors). This manufacturing task is ubiquitous
but hard to automate because it requires reasoning about deformation of the wire
harness. The project is addressing this challenge with new algorithms for
manipulation and perception of deformable objects that are based on novel
representations of object shape. It considers first the manipulation of a single
wire (one piece of a wire harness). It expresses the shape of this wire as the
solution to a geometric optimal control problem, and shows that the set of all
solutions to this problem is a smooth manifold that can be parameterized by a
single coordinate chart. This result leads to an algorithm for manipulation
planning that works well and is easy to implement. Objectives include extending
this model to consider variable stiffness, plastic deformation, and branching;
making manipulation plans robust to perturbation; estimating material properties
and shape from sensor data; and experimentally demonstrating robotic
installation of a wire harness. Outreach efforts include co-directing a week-
long summer institute for high school students, mentoring undergraduate
researchers, and organizing an industrial forum.