* 1320132
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Compressed Network Tomography and Data Collection in Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Yao Liang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2018
* USD 233,108.00

Our physical world presents an incredibly rich set of observation modalities.
Recent advances in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) enable the continuous
monitoring of various physical phenomena at unprecedented high spatial densities
and long time durations, hence opening exciting new opportunities for numerous
scientific endeavors. Since sensor nodes are unattended and batterypowered,
network monitoring/tomography from indirect measurements at the sink(s) and
energy conservation are critical in the deployment of large-scale environmental
WSNs. Therefore, a viable framework for energy-efficient network monitoring and
data collection is fundamentally important to significantly improve WSN
management/operations and reduce its deployment costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates the energy-efficient network monitoring/tomography and data
collections in large-scale outdoor WSNs, based on the recent breakthrough of
compressed sensing (CS) through an integrated theoretical and empirical
approach. The project studies WSN topology tomography for dynamic routing under
wireless link dynamics due to channel fading and interference. The objectives of
this project are to develop a novel and rigorous framework of topology
tomography for real-world WSNs operated in highly noisy communication
environments. Dynamic routing topology recovery algorithms are devised for both
complete indirect measurements and incomplete indirect measurements received at
the sink(s). The accuracy of the tomography approach is studied both
analytically and empirically. The developed WSN topology tomography framework
can be essential not only for WSN's routing improvement, topology control, hot
spot elimination, and anomaly detection in practice, but also for emerging CS-
based data collection. This approach extends the current CS technology to form a
unified framework for network tomography and data collection in large-scale
WSNs, upon which energy-efficient WSN topology tomography and data gathering
protocol suite is developed. The developed framework and protocol suite will be
validated and evaluated in a real-world environmental WSN testbed in a hilly
watershed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to create a new paradigm of
optimal design, development, and management/operations for large-scale WSNs to
significantly extend their lifetime. This would lead to a substantial reduction
of the prohibitive cost of large-scale WSN deployments for scientific, civic,
national security, and military purposes in the near future. The project creates
an interdisciplinary educational practice for both undergraduate and graduate
students through hands-on experience with a real-world WSN testbed. The outreach
includes summer camps and scientific projects for school students using the WSN
testbed.