* 1320543
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Security in Dynamic Environments: Harvesting Network Randomness and Diversity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Shuangqing Wei, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 166,644.00

The project aims at quantifying a general network's inner
potential&lt;br/&gt;for supporting various forms of security by achieving secret
common&lt;br/&gt;randomness between pairs or groups of its nodes. Statistical
and&lt;br/&gt;computational secrecy measures are being considered against a
general&lt;br/&gt;passive adversary. Common-randomness-achieving protocols are
classified&lt;br/&gt;into two groups: culture-building and crowd-shielding. The
former achieves&lt;br/&gt;common randomness between nodes situated in close
proximity of each other,&lt;br/&gt;from correlated observations of specific
(natural or induced) network&lt;br/&gt;phenomena. The latter ties together the
security of multiple communication&lt;br/&gt;links, to the point where an
adversary can no longer isolate and attack&lt;br/&gt;a single link without
attacking the group as a whole. The broad range of&lt;br/&gt;investigated
protocols cover multiple topics, from multipath diversity&lt;br/&gt;to network
tomography, from secure network coding to protocol coding,&lt;br/&gt;and from
anonymous routing to the spread of epidemics. The protocols&lt;br/&gt;harvest
network randomness from diverse sources like ciphertext
blocks&lt;br/&gt;originating at various terminals, contention protocols (delay
randomness)&lt;br/&gt;or network topology (in highly-dynamic, or ad-hoc
networks).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communication networks are naturally dynamic,
inherently redundant,&lt;br/&gt;and largely unpredictable. While the former two
features have long&lt;br/&gt;been recognized as a valuable resource for
integrity, efficiency&lt;br/&gt;and confidentiality, network unpredictability is
often regarded as an&lt;br/&gt;incommodity. This project shows how network
randomness can be harvested,&lt;br/&gt;and, together with diversity, exploited
to enhance communication&lt;br/&gt;security. In doing so, it develops a more
profound understanding about&lt;br/&gt;the statistical nature of networks, which
can be applied to a broad range&lt;br/&gt;of information-assurance objectives.
The technical approaches and the&lt;br/&gt;general philosophy developed in this
project, and disseminated through&lt;br/&gt;conferences and seminars, have the
potential to inspire an abundance of&lt;br/&gt;related research. The project
will directly impact dozens of students&lt;br/&gt;through Senior Design
projects, a research-and-open-project approach to&lt;br/&gt;curriculum
development, and three new graduate courses containing related&lt;br/&gt;topics.
The PIs are actively involved in programs aimed at increasing&lt;br/&gt;the
involvement of women, underrepresented minorities, and persons
with&lt;br/&gt;disabilities in engineering and computing sciences.