* 1320719
* AF: Small: Massive Graph Analysis via Linear Measurements: Towards a Theory of Homomorphic Co
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Andrew McGregor, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 456,640.00

Massive graphs arise in any application where there is data about both basic
entities and the relationships between these entities, e.g., web-pages and
hyperlinks; neurons and synapses; papers and citations; IP addresses and network
flows; people and their friendships. Graphs have become the de facto standard
for representing many types of highly structured data. However, the size of
these massive graphs is such that existing graph algorithms in traditional
computational models are typically not applicable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the PI investigates the utility of random linear projections that
compress massive graphs into a lower-dimensional space where computation becomes
more tractable. An advantage of this approach is its widespread applicability;
the linearity of the projection leads to algorithms appropriate for parallel and
distributed computation, online processing, and various compressed sensing
models. A rich body of analytic and empirical work exists on using linear
projections in the context of numerical data such as feature vectors and
frequency counts. For example, such projections have been studied in the context
of research on locality sensitive hashing and nearest neighbors, fingerprinting,
sparse signal recovery, metric embeddings, spatial partition trees, and low-rank
matrix approximation. The goal of this project is to extend this powerful
technique to highly structured graph data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
research components are: A) Investigating the types of graph structure that can
be measured linearly. This includes designing new projections and proving bounds
on the dimensionality required to preserve graph properties such as distances,
eigenvalues, the size of cuts and matchings, and the frequency of induced
subgraphs. B) Developing new applications of the framework including fast
algorithms for processing dynamic graphs, graph sampling and property testing,
graph fingerprinting, and MapReduce-style distributed computing. C) Taking steps
towards a theory of homomorphic compression. Linear projections are homomorphic
with respect to linear operations and the main challenge in designing
projections for graph compression is recasting the relevant graph operations as
linear operations. The PI will develop this idea further and explore compression
schemes where it is possible to compute directly on the compressed data without
the need to first uncompress the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conjunction with
these research goals, the project includes educational and broader impact
initiatives that are designed to ensure a wide dissemination of research results
and to train graduate and undergraduate students.