* 1320351
* CIF:Small:Collaborative Research:Security in Dynamic Environments: Harvesting Network Randomness and Diversity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* George Amariucai, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 07/31/2017
* USD 159,998.00

The project aims at quantifying a general network's inner potential for
supporting various forms of security by achieving secret common randomness
between pairs or groups of its nodes. Statistical and computational secrecy
measures are being considered against a general passive adversary. Common-
randomness-achieving protocols are classified into two groups: culture-building
and crowd-shielding. The former achieves common randomness between nodes
situated in close proximity of each other, from correlated observations of
specific (natural or induced) network phenomena. The latter ties together the
security of multiple communication links, to the point where an adversary can no
longer isolate and attack a single link without attacking the group as a whole.
The broad range of investigated protocols cover multiple topics, from multipath
diversity to network tomography, from secure network coding to protocol coding,
and from anonymous routing to the spread of epidemics. The protocols harvest
network randomness from diverse sources like ciphertext blocks originating at
various terminals, contention protocols (delay randomness) or network topology
(in highly-dynamic, or ad-hoc networks).

Communication networks are naturally dynamic, inherently redundant, and largely
unpredictable. While the former two features have long been recognized as a
valuable resource for integrity, efficiency and confidentiality, network
unpredictability is often regarded as an incommodity. This project shows how
network randomness can be harvested, and, together with diversity, exploited to
enhance communication security. In doing so, it develops a more profound
understanding about the statistical nature of networks, which can be applied to
a broad range of information-assurance objectives. The technical approaches and
the general philosophy developed in this project, and disseminated through
conferences and seminars, have the potential to inspire an abundance of related
research. The project will directly impact dozens of students through Senior
Design projects, a research-and-open-project approach to curriculum development,
and three new graduate courses containing related topics. The PIs are actively
involved in programs aimed at increasing the involvement of women,
underrepresented minorities, and persons with disabilities in engineering and
computing sciences.