* 1320051
* Infinite-dimensional relaxations of mixed-integer optimization problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Matthias Koeppe, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 219,850.00

Mixed-integer linear optimization is a mature discipline of mathematical
optimization and a key technology of Operations Research and Mathematical
Analytics. Key ingredients of the state-of-the-art solver technology are so-
called cutting planes. Strong cutting planes for combinatorial optimization
problems (e.g., the TSP) arise from sophisticated studies of the polyhedral
combinatorics of convex hulls. In contrast, the state-of-the-art solvers for
mixed-integer optimization problems use cuts such as the Gomory's mixed-integer
cut, which are derived by integer rounding principles from a single row of the
simplex tableau. The performance of cutting planes has stagnated since the
computational breakthroughs of the late 1990s, early 2000s. To meet the
challenges of ever more demanding applications, it is desired to make use of
information from several rows of the tableau. Finding such "effective multi-row
cuts" is the most important open question in mixed-integer linear optimization.
The PI proposes to study Gomory Johnson's (1972) k-row infinite group problem.
This problem is infinite-dimensional; its convex geometry is notoriously hard to
study. Finding a characterization of extreme functions corresponding to facet-
defining inequalities of polyhedral combinatorics) even for k = 1 had eluded
researchers for the past four decades. The methods used in the breakthrough
algorithmic classification by the PI and coauthors of the 1-row rational
piecewise linear extreme functions show a route for further work: The arithmetic
aspect of the problem (neglected in the literature) leads to the study of
reflection groups and their action. The arithmetic interacts closely with the
discrete geometry of the problem, where certain periodic polyhedral complexes
arise. On the analytic side of the problem, one needs to consider solutions to
functional equations of several variables that generalize the one studied by
Cauchy and its generalizations by Aczel, Baker, Chung. On the computational
side, besides the development of new numerically stable cutting plane
procedures, computer-based search will be employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
revival of industrial manufacturing in America is closely tied to the field of
Analytics, which is the science of making the best decisions in manufacturing
and business processes, on the basis of the ever-growing amounts of available
data. Mathematical Optimization is one of the key hard sciences of Analytics. It
provides powerful computational technologies (optimization algorithms and
software). One such technology are so-called "mixed-integer linear optimization
solvers," which are used by thousands of Analytics experts in all of our
industries, including manufacturing, biotechnology, and sustainable
infrastructure. However, one key component in today's mixed-integer linear
optimization software has not kept up with the demand to use more and more data
in order to come to better decisions, and thus to increase the dimension of the
optimization problem: Today's mixed-integer "cutting plane separators" still
only look at one row of an array of data called the "simplex tableau" at a time.
As the number of rows grows, this technique is becoming weaker and weaker.
Researchers have long sought to find effective "multi-row cutting plane
separators". The PI proposes to study an innovative approach, using the "k-row
infinite group problem," which will extend his recent breakthrough work on this
topic with students and collaborators. This will lead to new mathematical
insights, more efficient algorithms and new, more powerful optimization
software. This project also has a strong educational impact. The PI plans to
train several undergraduate and graduate students in this research area. One
component of the training will be to create new course material on the topics of
this proposal, and to use it for new classes for undergraduate and graduate
students. The second component of the training consists of direct involvement of
students in this research project, involving theoretical work, computer
experimentation, and software implementation, all of which lead to undergraduate
and graduate theses. All of this will prepare the students for far-reaching
careers as experts in Mathematical Analytics, who are able to use the most
cutting edge optimization technology.