* 1320725
* SHF: Small: Compiling Custom Hardware Accelerators from Graph Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* James Hoe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Many emerging applications in machine learning and data mining can be cast as
graph computations. Efficient low-power implementations of graph computations
promise disruptive capabilities for the increasingly ubiquitous embedded and
mobile platforms. The project is building the GraphGen compiler to overcome the
complexity and difficulty of creating graph computation hardware accelerators
that are needed to meet the demanding power and performance constraints of
embedded and mobile systems. The GraphGen compiler is a general-purpose compiler
(within the graph computation domain) to handle arbitrary graph applications
based on varying graph structures (e.g., grid-shaped, planar, natural graphs)
that may be static or dynamically changing (e.g., updated by streaming data)
following different execution strategies (e.g., synchronous vs. asynchronous).
GraphGen implementation mapping makes use of reusable hardware implementation
templates to allow the same graph computation specification to be efficiently
mapped onto different target platforms. Overall, the GraphGen compiler captures
knowledge from both application developers (in graph specifications) and
hardware designers (in the reusable implementation templates), and bridges the
gap between the two camps through automatic mapping of a specification to a
template to yield a highly efficient embedded implementation tuned to the
application developer's design objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continued
exponential increase in transistors-per-die, coupled with advances in sensors
and breakthrough algorithms in machine learning and data mining, have resulted
in a revolution in the embedded and mobile application space. Graph computation
is an important enabling computation paradigm for many of these emerging
applications. The GraphGen compiler can facilitate rapid adoption of these
applications into embedded and mobile devices by allowing domain experts to
automatically translate their graph computation algorithms onto efficient FPGA-
accelerated embedded platforms. This new capability has the potential to spark
new research in graph computation and embedded hardware architectures by
providing a common design automation environment that bridges the gap between
application domain experts and hardware designers, thus benefiting industry.