* 1320643
* CIF: Small: Limitations of  communication and control and over noisy feedback links
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Nicola Elia, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 377,376.00

The widespread availability of communication networks fosters interactions among
nodes that constantly affect each other by exchanging information over the
available communication links. This dynamic, interactive, aspect of
communication is common to many networked systems, from social networks to
biological networks. Its causal nature differs from the batch coding and
processing of classical communication systems and is not handled well by the
traditional information theory results. These settings are more appropriate for
the functioning and the understanding of control and regulation processes and,
more generally, processes of learning and adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objective of the proposed research is to characterize the fundamental
limitations of interacting dynamical systems over noisy communication links. We
start analyzing the problem of interactive point-to-point communication where
the encoder has access to noisy feedback from the receiver based on a new
information theoretic quantity that captures the actual information flow in the
forward channel when the feedback channel is noisy. From it, we propose to
derive computable bounds on the noisy feedback capacity for common channels, to
develop control-inspired practical coding schemes that are robust to noise in
the feedback link, and to characterize costs and benefits of using noisy
feedback. Further, we propose extensions of the theory to other new noisy
feedback structures motivated by remote guidance and virtual reality
applications. The resulting dynamical systems are both communication and control
systems at the same time. We aim to study properties and limitations of these
interacting dynamical systems, in an integrated way, by extending the relevant
results in networked control systems.