* 1320738
* CSR: Small: A Device-Array Based Flash Storage System for Emerging Data-Intensive and Mission-Critical Mobile Applications: from Architecture Redesign to New File System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Tao Xie, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 440,727.00

Flash memory manufactures are aggressively scaling up NAND flash density in
order to increase capacity and reduce the cost per gigabyte using either MLC
(multi-level cell) or TLC (triple level cell) technologies. However, other
metrics like reliability, endurance, and performance are all declining. As a
result, developing a high-performance and highly reliable embedded flash storage
system on top of increasingly larger but inferior NAND flash memory devices has
become both indispensable and challenging. Utilizing a holistic approach from
hardware re-architecting to software redesign, this project designs, implements,
and evaluates a new flash storage system for emerging and future data-intensive
mobile applications such as wireless healthcare and live sport broadcast. In
particular, this project will replace the existing single-device hardware
organization with a multiple-device array architecture. Next, this project will
develop a new flash file system that can access multiple flash memory devices in
parallel. Also, a wide spectrum of new techniques including garbage collection
method, wear levelling mechanism, ECC protection, and data recovery scheme will
be developed. Finally, a hardware prototype that can empirically evaluate the
new flash device array architecture and all software modules will be built. The
new flash file system including source code and documents, all new techniques,
and the hardware prototype, the outcomes of this project, will be released to
the public. This project will also promote teaching, learning, and training by
exposing students to technological and scientific underpinnings in the field of
mobile storage systems.