* 1320785
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Coordination and Cooperation in Networked Multi-Agent Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Joerg Kliewer, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2014
* USD 246,157.00

Networked wireless systems have significantly affected society, as cellular and
WiFi networks are now ubiquitous in our daily life. An important class of
networks is that of decentralized networks, which are characterized by a lack of
fixed infrastructure, a multi-hop nature, and node mobility; such features
provide significant flexibility, but also introduce a variety of design issues.
A fundamental problem in decentralized networked systems is the coordination of
activities of different nodes, where the availability of sufficient
communication resources is critical in order for agents to cooperate and
coordinate. This project takes a distinctive approach to develop a fundamental
understanding of the interplay between communication and cooperation to achieve
coordination and addresses the communication and coordination of probabilistic
actions in networked multi-agent systems. This can be seen as an instance of
network-based stochastic open loop control where a single communication message
is sent to the agents to control their behavior in the absence of feedback. The
project investigates two interrelated research tasks. First, the PIs wish to
understand both the fundamental information-theoretic limits of coordination in
small multi-terminal networks and the dependency of these limits on the
communication network topology. The second research goal addresses the design of
explicit coordination codes from error correction codes and to assess their
performance under stringent delay and complexity constraints.

The proposed research has the potential to enable advances in applications where
actions must be communicated to ensure a specific behavior. Examples are multi-
agent systems for the exploration of an unknown topology, distributed
surveillance applications, automatic traffic control applications, and load
balancing in large computer networks and in power grids. Additional activities
related to the project include the integration of research outcomes in courses
at the undergraduate and graduate level and the mentorship of minorities and
women in science and technology.