* 1320690
* HCC: Small: FIDO - Facilitating Interaction for Dogs with Occupations: Wearable computing for two-way communication with assistance dogs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Melody Jackson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,258.00

Assistance dogs have improved the lives of thousands of people with
disabilities. Guide dogs, service dogs, and hearing dogs can provide
independence and significantly enhance quality of life. However, communication
between human and canine partners is currently limited. Handlers give commands,
and dogs respond with behaviors, which can sometimes have ambiguous meanings to
the handlers. For example, a guide dog stops while walking with his handler, but
the dog has no definitive way to tell the handler there is a new barrier on a
familiar path. A hearing dog alerts his handler, but can't easily report that
the fire alarm has sounded and they need to evacuate. A service dog may need to
receive a "lie down" command silently in a dark, crowded theater, or from a
distance, which would preclude verbal or hand signals. The PI's goal in this
research is to explore fundamental aspects of wearable technologies to support
two-way communication between assistance dogs and their handlers. To this end,
the PI will investigate on-body interfaces for dogs in the form of electronic
textiles and computers integrated into assistance dog clothing, such as vests
and harnesses. Studies will assess the abilities of dogs to interact with
affordances worn on their bodies, and determine what stimuli dogs can sense and
comprehend from wearable technology. The work will be divided into three
thrusts: Dog-to-handler communication (to determine to what extent dogs can
activate affordances on their harnesses, vests, coats, or collars, such as
"touch points" which can be activated by a dog's nose touch, and "pull points"
which can be activated by tugging); Handler-to-dog communication (to investigate
the sensory capabilities of dogs to respond to simple stimuli incorporated into
a dog vest or harness, such as small vibrating motors); Handler feedback and
control (the team will implement a head-mounted visual and/or auditory display
to allow handlers to receive input from their dogs, as well as control
interfaces that can be integrated into a harness handle, leash, or a piece of
clothing worn by the handler). Design and testing of the on-body interfaces for
the dogs will be carried out using an iterative approach, and the final designs
will be validated with three assistance-trained dogs in laboratory and real-
world environments. The PI will also stress-test the designs with dogs at speed
on an obstacle course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Project outcomes
will extend the state of the art in wearable interfaces to animals, and will
contribute pioneering work to the nascent fields of Animal Computer Interfaces
and Inter-species Interaction, as well as discovering more about the physical
and cognitive abilities of dogs. Adapting usability analysis and design
techniques from the human realm to apply to animals will expand the body of
knowledge in Interactive Computing. In addition to the direct impact of
improving the quality of life for people with disabilities, the technologies
developed in this project could have application to other working dog teams
(e.g., in military or police canine units, and in search and rescue), and they
may ultimately allow all pet owners to better communicate with and train their
dogs.