* 1320808
* SHF: Small: Ultra Low Power Neuromorphic Computing with Spin-devices
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Kaushik Roy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

MOS (metal-oxide-semiconductor) transistors, being on/off switches, have served
as an ideal match to the abstractions of switching functions and Boolean logic,
which (together with von Neumann architecture) form the underpinnings of modern
computing. While current computing platforms are well-suited to applications
that involve arithmetic computations and storing and retrieving large amounts of
data, they are known to be highly inefficient - requiring orders of magnitude
more energy consumption - for performing tasks that humans routinely perform,
such as visual recognition, semantic analysis, and reasoning. The key insight
behind the proposed research is that emerging spin torque based devices make it
possible to realize the neuron functionality in a highly energy efficient
manner, well beyond the capabilities of CMOS (complementary MOS). This is due to
two factors - the inherent match between the characteristics of these devices
and the functionality of a neuron (leading to a drastic decrease in the number
of devices required), and the possibility of ultra-low voltage operation
(~20mV). Inspired by this vision, the PIs (principal investigators) propose a
research program that spans from devices to architectures to investigate spin-
based neuromorphic computing. The goals of the proposed research are to (i)
establish the benefits of spin-based device technologies for neuromorphic
computing (where CMOS implementations are energy-inefficient), (ii)
synergistically explore spin devices, circuits and architecture in a regime
where these devices are integrated with CMOS to augment its capabilities and
(iii) incorporate the findings from the proposed research in education and
outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage outreach
programs at Purdue, including the outreach program at NCN (Network for
Computational Nanotechnology), and the Women and Minority in Engineering
programs in the College of Engineering, to involve undergraduates and minority
students in the proposed research. The PIs will develop a summer REU (Research
Experiences for Undergraduates) program that builds on their prior experience in
integrating undergraduate students into their research groups. The broad nature
of the proposed project provides an attractive opportunity for undergraduate
students to not only explore novel research, but also get exposed to the
emerging fields of spintronics and neuromorphic computing. The project will also
establish research, mentoring and education partnerships with primarily
undergraduate and minority serving institutions.