* 1320934
* SHF: Small: Generic Dependently Typed Programming by Reflecting a Predicative Hierarchy of Universes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Tim Sheard, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2017
* USD 374,960.00

The prevention of bugs in software continues to be a major challenge. One
approach is to prove the correctness of software with respect to a
specification. This approach is both too challenging and unfamiliar to most
programmers because of the varied knowledge needed (knowledge about
specifications, programs, and theorem provers). A functional language with a
dependent type system supports writing programs, specifications, and proofs that
the programs adhere to their specifications in a single language, which reduces
the amount of specialized knowledge required and minimizes the number of tools a
programmer must learn to be able to effectively write and prove software
correct. While the benefits of programming in a dependently typed language are
appealing, several issues prevent the immediate adoption of this practice.
First, writing dependent types (for example, to encode specifications) involves
creating new and highly specific types. Hence, it becomes difficult to reuse
existing code when manipulating values of these specialized types. Second,
writing proofs in a dependently typed language directly can be painful owing to
the lack of proof automation. Because of these issues, existing systems often
use a separate language for automating the writing of
proofs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to create a new dependently
typed language that addresses both of these problems. The set of types in this
language is closed, making it possible to have an eliminator for all types in a
predicative hierarchy of universes. Thus, the entire language is reflected as a
Martin-Lof universe, supporting generic programming over the entire language.
The language addresses the first problem by making it possible to reuse generic
functions over newly defined types. It addresses the second problem by
interpreting the problem of writing tactics for a proof state as the problem of
writing generic functions over a Pi-type. The goal of this proposal is to
produce a mechanically verified dependently typed programming language with a
principled reflection mechanism that lowers the cost of dependently typed
programming.