* 1320620
* RI: Small: Expressiveness and Automated Bundling in Mechanism Design: Principles and Computational Methodologies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Tuomas Sandholm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 425,000.00

Mechanism design is the science of designing the rules of a game (e.g., auction
or election) so that good outcomes ensue despite each participant (human or
computational) acting based on self-interest. Intuitively, allowing individuals
or organizations to express richer preferences should yield better outcomes.
Billions of dollars of annual savings from outcome efficiency improvements due
to increased expressiveness have indeed been observed, for example, in
combinatorial sourcing auctions by the PI and others. What is missing is a
rigorous methodology for designing appropriately expressive mechanisms. This
project combines new theoretical results in mechanism design - including
computational measures of expressiveness - with custom search algorithms and
machine learning techniques. The goal is to create knowledge about mechanism
design with varying levels of expressiveness. The work also involves developing
an operational methodology to guide the design of appropriately expressive
mechanisms across a broad class of combinatorial and multi-attribute domains.
Furthermore, the work will yield new theory and computational methodologies for
bundling. The objects of study are rational agents and agents with forms of
bounded rationality.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While many of the results will be
general, the work will be validated in qualitatively different applications such
as combinatorial auctions, advertising markets, and catalog-offer-based (web)
commerce. In the US alone, combinatorial multi-attribute sourcing auctions give
rise to tens of billions of dollars in annual trade. Annual volumes associated
with advertising markets, spectrum auctions, consumer-to-consumer auctions, and
catalog-based commerce are all in hundreds of billions or trillions of dollars.
Improvements would thus offer substantial economic and societal benefits.