* 1320389
* NeTS: Small: Liquid Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Eric Keller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

One of the major advances in information technology infrastructures in the past
decade is the use of server virtualization technology. By decoupling the server
software from the underlying physical hardware, virtualization helped open up
new business models and bring about more efficient computing infrastructures.
With virtualization, (virtual) servers are freely able to be started and stopped
on demand, and, through live VM migration, even change physical servers at run
time without affecting the operating system or applications running on those
servers. This dynamic repositioning of servers is used to consolidate servers to
save energy, balance load, perform planned maintenance, and optimize user
performance (among other benefits). The network, unfortunately, is still tied to
the physical resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project introduces
liquid networking, which provides the ability to morph a network dynamically,
much like migration provided dynamic morphing in the server space. Supporting
this raises many challenging research questions that this research project will
address. First, understanding how to provide primitives that efficiently
transform the network without affecting the correct operation of the network is
an important research challenge. Through implementation of multiple
applications, a deep understanding of the limitations and capabilities of liquid
networking will be explored. With it, new algorithms and tools will need to be
developed. Second, understanding the impact future network technology has on
liquid networking, namely software-defined networking, and the impact liquid
networking will have on future networking technology is an equally important
challenge that will be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will open up an entirely new set of possibilities in the management of a
computing infrastructure. With a liquid network, networks will have greater
flexibility, lower IT costs, and better security. Additional important broader
impacts for society resulting from this project are expected to include
enhancing the curriculum of advanced graduate systems courses and enabling
undergraduate students, underrepresented minorities and women to participate in
the project through programs such as the Discovery Learning Apprentice (DLA)
program run by the college of engineering at the University of Colorado, and the
Colorado Diversity Initiative.