* 1320273
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Haplotype Assembly from Next-Generation Sequencing Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Haris Vikalo, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Humans are diploid organisms with two sets of chromosomes: 22 pairs of autosomes
and one pair of sex chromosomes. The two chromosomes in a pair of autosomes are
homologous, i.e., they have similar DNA sequences and essentially carry the same
type of information but are not identical. The most common type of variation
between chromosomes in a pair is that where the base in a specific location
differs between the two sequences, i.e., the corresponding alleles on the
homologous chromosomes are different. The complete information about DNA
variations in an individual genome is provided by haplotypes, the list of
alleles at contiguous sites in a region of a single chromosome. Haplotype
information is essential for medical and pharmaceutical studies, including
understanding variations in gene expressions and recombination
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to develop and analyze novel algorithms for haplotype assembly
from next-generation sequencing data. It consists of three main thrusts: (1)
Haplotype assembly from next-generation sequencing data is computationally
challenging. The first thrust proposes branch-and-bound algorithms that exploit
certain structural features of the problem to efficiently find the exact
solution. (2) As the size of the haplotype assembly problem grows, the exact
solution is increasingly more difficult to obtain. The second thrust is focused
on the development of fast heuristic methods with guaranteed performance bounds
that enable explicit complexity-accuracy trade-offs. (3) Existing haplotype
assembly schemes process DNA fragments comprising nucleotides whose order is
already determined by the sequencing platform. The third thrust is focused on
the development of algorithms for finding joint solution to the base-calling and
haplotype assembly problems, enabling significant improvements in
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this research will have a major impact on a number of fields that rely on
accurate haplotype assembly, including medicine and pharmacogenomics, and will
enrich the educational experience of engineering students at the University of
Texas at Austin.