* 1320279
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Wireless Networks with Dynamic Links
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Calvin Newport, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 319,461.00

With the increasing quantity and diversity of wireless devices, the study of
network algorithms that communicate over radio links has received renewed
interest. Most of the models used to analyze these algorithms assume static
links (i.e., link quality is fixed over time). In real wireless networks, by
contrast, it is common to encounter links that exhibit dynamic behavior (e.g.,
rapid, unpredictable changes in quality) due to changing environmental
conditions and/or interference from unrelated protocols in shared spectrum. This
project aims to reduce this gap between theory and practice by studying wireless
models that include varying degrees of dynamic behavior -- seeking new algorithm
strategies for solving fundamental problems efficiently and proving new lower
bounds that establish the limits of such efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
detail, this project focuses on dynamic variants of both graph-based and Signal-
to-Noise-and-Interference-Ratio models of wireless communication. In both
settings, it seeks new upper and lower bounds for fundamental communication
problems under varying degrees of dynamic behavior. There are three goals for
the lower bounds: (a) to determine the threshold of dynamism at which existing
solutions fail; (b) to determine the (presumably greater) threshold at which no
efficient solutions are possible; and (c) to develop new general methods for
proving fundamental limits in this setting. The project also seeks new upper
bounds that are more robust than existing solutions in dynamic settings,
including an exploration of the power of the recently introduced link detector
formalism -- an abstraction that captures the low-level link probing services
common in real wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will impact
both the theory and practice of wireless networks. On the theory side, it
introduces new models that include precisely-bounded amounts of dynamic
behavior, and develops new upper and lower bound techniques for these settings.
On the practice side, it will lead to new, provably correct and efficient
communication algorithms that are robust to significant amounts of unpredictable
link behavior. Such algorithms are crucial for the migration of mission-critical
tasks (e.g., as required in healthcare, first responder, military, and
coordination/control applications) to wireless platforms.