* 1320693
* EXP: Digital Lofts: Online Learning Environments for Real-World Innovation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Elizabeth Gerber, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 564,253.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education EXP project, researchers focus on
developing the civic innovators of the future. To become civic innovators,
learners must gain experience tackling complex, ill-structures design challenges
that are not easily solved by a single individual within a fixed time frame.
Such education is challenging, and these researchers take advantage of Web 2.0,
crowdsourcing, badges, and social media to design means of supporting the
learning of young engineers as they tackle civic problems. Supporting learning
from design and complex problem solving activities includes providing support
for successfully solving problems and achieving goals as well as providing
support for reflecting on those experiences to grasp the collaboration and
communication skills and begin to learn strategies and tactics for innovating.
The Digital Loft being designed for this purpose includes facilities for
identifying peer experts who might collaborate on new problems, assigning
expertise badges to make it easy to identify potential experts, extracting key
design principles from design and problem solving cases and illustrating and
indexing them in a case library that is made available as a resource, helping
participants identify when they need instruction, and providing means of finding
appropriate mentors to provide necessary help. Research focuses on the
identifying important characteristics of the human-machine learning ecosystem
that promote successful design and problem solving, successful learning,
successful innovation, and sustainability of the infrastructure. The research
will produce empirically-grounded principles for designing Digital Lofts for
civic innovation education and advance understanding of the roles that digital
badges, crowd-sourcing, learning by cases, design practice, and social
networking can play in promoting innovation learning. Research and development
is being done in the context of Design for America, a multi-university
collaborative focused on promoting civic innovation among undergraduate
engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent need for educating
civic innovators who can solve our greatest societal challenges. This project
explores the feasibility of a Digital Loft for supporting such education. In
such a learning environment, engineering students at the undergraduate level
participate in addressing community issues together with both local students and
participants in other locations who are solving problems in their own
communities. Software tools support the kinds of interactions between student
engineers that are needed to promote success and learning and the creation of
shared resources that will allow participants to build community knowledge that
will help them become better innovators. Research addresses issues in the design
and integration of several software functions for successfully promoting
innovation education.