* 1320092
* SHF: Small: Foundations for User Interface Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jaakko Jarvi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,994.00

More than one-third of all program code exists to implement user interfaces and
this code contains an even larger portion of all defects. This is no surprise;
user interface code is seldom reusable and current event-handling-based
approaches to user interface programming require programmers to manage a large
number of details; too many to consistently produce correct and rich user
interface behaviors. The impact is experienced by all computer users: user
interfaces get stuck, behave illogically, lose information, lack crucial or
useful functionality, or are simply confusing. The result is user frustration
and wasted effort, a very significant cost when aggregated over all users, and
significant even to one user when aggregated over all of his or her computer
use. This project seeks advances in user interface programming, studying a
declarative approach where many behaviors of user interfaces can be expressed as
reusable algorithms encoded in software libraries. This drastically reduces the
details that an application programmer needs to be concerned with; application-
specific "event handling" code is not necessary at all. The goal is to
significantly reduce the cost of producing high quality user interfaces, and,
indirectly through better user interfaces, to make our interactions with
computers less frustrating and more productive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed declarative programming approach is based on multi-way data-flow
constraint systems, which are applied to model the data directly manipulated by
user interfaces and the dependencies within that data. The project seeks to show
that once an application programmer specifies such a constraint system and
connects it to the visual elements of a user interface, a large class of the
interface's behavior can be derived from reusable algorithms parametrized over
the constraint system. Examples of such behaviors include updating values of
elements based on user interaction on other user interface elements, enabling
and disabling user interface elements, keeping the user interface maximally
responsive by concurrently executing computations triggered by users'
interactions, managing changes in the structure of the user interface, and
correctly orchestrating all of the above.