* 1320360
* SHF: Small: Localized DNA Hybridization Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2016
* USD 440,000.00

This project focuses on an emerging challenge in computation: to extend
programmatic control over matter and phenomenon at the nanoscale. Nanosystems
making use of DNA-based reactions are a promising technique to achieve this
since they are feasible to design, simulate and test experimentally. DNA
computation systems of increasing complexity have been demonstrated over the
past two decades. Most of these systems involve multiple strands of DNA that
interact with each other via diffusion based hybridization chemistry. While this
paradigm has many advantages and merits, there are fundamental limits to
diffusion based DNA hybridization computations, particularly due the increased
time for larger-scales of complexity. This work seeks to study an alternate
paradigm of DNA hybridization-based computations that operate locally on a
substrate. Locality allows reactions to proceed at higher speed due to increased
local concentration of reacting species - this localization could potentially
speed up DNA hybridization-based computations by an order of magnitude. Also,
since each of the local reaction pathways do not interfere with each other, it
is also possible to simultaneously execute multiple pathways in parallel. This
also allows one to reuse DNA sequences in spatially separated regions that
increase the modularity and scalability of the reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research work spans both theory
and experimental techniques, and includes development of biophysical
mathematical models, design software, computational simulations, small-scale
experimental demonstrations. In particular, the work will develop biophysical
models of localized hybridization, which will be simulated, and also verified
via simple kinetic experiments. The experiments provide crucial data about the
rate constants involved in the hybridization chemistry of localized molecules.
The simulation model will be further refined based on the experimental data,. A
major challenge addressed as a center-piece of this effort is leaks: the
unintended reactions that cause the nanosystem to significantly deviate from its
programmed trajectory that might occur in localized hybridization systems.
Multiple leak models will be tested in the lab via simple experiments.
Continuing an on-going collaboration with Dr. Andrew Phillips (Microsoft
Research Cambridge), funded internally by Microsoft, this work will also create
software systems that will simulate localized hybridization networks. The
simulation software development will be tightly coupled to the experimental
progress by constantly refining the simulation models and parameters based on
experimental data. Finally, this work will experimentally implement a series of
small to moderate scale localized hybridization systems to demonstrate the
feasibility and the potential of localized hybridization reactions. The work
will also investigate the broader issues of the use of locality to speed-up
other related molecular-scale computation processes, including reactions that
make use of enzymes, or other protein-based reactions, in addition to DNA
hybridization reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: There is
substantial multidisciplinary impact to nanoscience, biochemistry and chemistry,
which will profit from the introduction of key methodologies derived from
mainstream computer science, such as mathematical modeling, software
engineering, algorithms and modular design methodologies. Educational impact
includes cross-disciplinary training of four PhD students, carefully supervised
mentoring and summer internships for undergraduates.