* 1320538
* RI: Small: Bayesian Thinking on Your Feet---Embedding Generative Models in Reinforcement Learning for Sequentially Revealed Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Hal Daume, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Machine learning algorithms cannot "think on their feet". When applied in
practice, most approaches developed using traditional machine learning
techniques wait for an entire input to arrive before they are able to provide an
answer or react. While sufficient for some tasks, this is inappropriate for a
large class of problems that require more immediate or incremental responses.
This project develops new algorithms to address machine learning problems that
require an algorithm to "think on its feet". These algorithms combine guesses
about what input is likely appear in the future with actions that the algorithm
should take now to provide useful, effective output in a timely
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One application of these new methods is
simultaneous translation. This is the problem of taking problem of "observing" a
sentence one word at a time in a foreign language, such as German, and providing
a real-time running translation in a target language (like English). This is
particularly difficult for language pairs that have significant syntactic
divergences, such as object-verb order differences between foreign languages
like German or Japanese (verb final) and target languages like English (verb
medial). Like human simultaneous translators, machine learning algorithms must
learn to predict the words that will appear at the end of a sentence. The
project facilitates this prediction using a framework that combined word
prediction and machine translation system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also
uses the newly developed algorithms in academic settings to provide significant
outreach to high school students and undergraduates, particularly in
underrepresented communities.