* 1320259
* EXP: GeoGames - online map games for teaching and learning through a real-world spatial perspective
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Neelam Soundarajan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2016
* USD 249,999.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education EXP project, the investigators are
aiming to learn how to promote geo-spatial thinking skills and ability to use
data gathered geo-spatially to solve complex problems. The technology being
refined leverages on-line maps to situate scenarios in GeoGames so that learners
have access to real GIS, remote sensing, socioeconomic, agricultural and other
data and models as they engage with others to solve real-world problems in the
GeoGame. The focus is on helping learners gain and use a spatial perspective in
their thinking and problem solving. Geogames present real-world challenges that
require large-scale data collected across geographical areas in game-like ways
to draw in the learners; the learners solve problems using the data found
through navigating the maps and in conjunction with each other. Research is
carried out in the context of a particular GeoGame called Green Revolution. In
that simulation, students take on the roles of rural farmers in a developing
country and interact with each other to deal with water and weather issues.
Learners navigate geo-spatial representations (world maps) to access real data
that allow them to make predictions together and develop strategies together for
making it through coming storms, pest infestations, and other real-world
hazzards. Already learned in that project is that solving problems together in
such a simulated real-world context promotes better understanding of the
difficulties involved in the lives of farmers in developing countries and some
of strategies that might lead to success. Research in this new project focus on
trade-offs between complexity of the factors that might be considered in solving
complex real-world problems and learning outcomes. The GeoGame technology and
its use integrate the strengths of geo-spatial technologies, gaming, and social
networking with availability of real-world data to promote learning about real-
world facts and also complex, interlinked human, environmental, and
technological systems in an experiential, collaborative, and engaging way. The
focus is at the college level but ultimately could be appropriate for high-
schoolers, middle-schoolers, and the general
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policy people tell us that a geo-spatial
perspective is essential in addressing many of society's pressing issues (e.g.,
economics, agriculture, climate change, transportation, relief, urban planning,
emergency services). This approach of GeoGames may provide an engaging and
broadly-applicable way to educate future policy makers in taking a global
perspective on both the global and local problems they address. The approach may
also provide a way to help the public appreciate the connectedness of the world,
the broad implications of local policy decisions, and the issues that must be
considered in policy making.