* 1320628
* CIF: Small: Fundamental Performance Limits And Design Techniques For Sub-Sampled Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Andrea Goldsmith, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Current radio receiver designs are pushing the boundaries of Analog-to-Digital
conversion and digital signal processing technology in terms of speed and energy
efficiency. These technology limitations present a major bottleneck in
transferring promising wideband and energy-efficient receiver design paradigms
from theory to practice. This project investigates whether these bottlenecks can
be circumvented by designing digital communication system receivers that are
sampled at sub-Nyquist rates. By sampling below the Nyquist rate, current
technology can be used for very wideband communication systems and energy
consumption can be significantly reduced below that required for Nyquist-rate
sampling. The proposed research brings together the areas of Shannon theory and
sampling theory by exploring the fundamental capacity limits of single-user and
multi-user subsampled channels as well as the optimal sampling mechanisms that
achieve these limits. In addition, the project will extend the ideas of sub-
sampled communication to determine the rate-distortion trade-off of sub-sampled
sources along with joint source-channel coding when both the source and channel
are undersampled. The proposed activity will develop a broader understanding of
communication system design subject to hardware constraints by exploring an
important and unanswered question at the intersection of two important fields
within electrical engineering: signal processing and information theory. The
results of the proposed work can enable low-complexity high-performance radio
designs for 60 GHz wideband communications and for cognitive radios.
Furthermore, these results impact other engineering systems such as radar,
optical systems, medical imaging and more, since the mathematical machinery and
hardware insights developed in the proposed research can provide important
insights into related areas in which reduced rate sampling and processing is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity will include significant enhancement of the communications capabilities
beyond the current state of the art in wideband, cognitive, and energy-efficient
radio design. Wideband radios are of key importance to meet the significant
demand for multimedia wireless communications, especially video. Cognitive
radios have the ability to more efficiently utilize the limited available radio
spectrum. In addition, there is a great need to design communication systems
that consume minimal energy, especially sensor networks, which have application
to enable smart buildings, enhance homeland security, and improve the
reliability and robustness of our power grid.