* 1320791
* III: Small: Managing Spatial Data in a Distributed Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 508,000.00

Advances in distributed computing enable the pooling of resources located across
the Internet to provide a scalable, and robust solution for many computational
needs. Distributed key-value store systems like Google's BigTable and Amazon's
Dynamo allow the indexing and retrieval of a large amount of data in parallel,
while distributed computing frameworks like MapReduce and Pregel provide a
fault-tolerant way to process a large amount of data using distributed computing
resources. These distributed computing techniques are applied to the spatial
database domain. Specifically, issues involved in storing and retrieving spatial
data in a distributed environment, as well as, processing spatial queries in
parallel using a distributed computing framework are investigated. All of these
methods rely on variants of hashing in order to obtain near constant time
behavior in distributing the data and it is preferable that they are as close as
possible to being distance-preserving. Specifically, spatial objects in
proximity should have similar hash values. In particular, it is desirable to be
able to estimate how far apart two objects are (within a given error bound) by
just considering their hash values. Such hash functions enable performing an
approximate range query using simple hash table lookup operations. Other issues
involve the parallel processing of spatial queries. Some easy examples are the
distance join query which finds pairs (p,q) of objects (from two different sets)
where the distance between p and q is less than a given threshold, or computing
the shortest paths from each node to every other node in a road network. More
difficult are the spatial problems which can not be easily decomposed into
multiple tasks running in parallel, e.g., the distance semi-join query, and
network Voronoi diagram construction. This requires developing a generic method
to traverse a graph or a tree in parallel to solve these query problems.
Ideally, the method should require little or no communication between parallel
tasks which will be accomplished by allowing the parallel tasks to produce
redundant results which can then be pruned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed
tools will help improve the robustness and scalability for spatial data
management. The parallel query processing results can be useful for query
problems which requires traversing a tree or a graph which are often spatially
embedded. Having a method to traverse a graph or a tree in parallel that
requires little or no communication enables processing of many types of spatial
queries using distributed computing resources where currently communication can
be very costly. Specifically, it can be expected that the tools will enable
spatial applications such as online mapping, computer aided design, online
gaming and scientific simulations to handle terabytes of spatial data while it
is impossible or inefficient to do with the current technologies. This is of
utility to all organizations that process spatial data and attempts will be made
to use it in some government agencies. In addition, the project provides
educational and research opportunities for graduate and undergraduates. The
project web site (http://www.cs.umd.edu/~hjs/distributed-spatial.html) will be
used to disseminate results.