* 1320542
* III: Small: Managing and Mining Uncertain Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* George Kollios, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

Network and graph data appear in many diverse applications such as social
networks, biological networks, and mobile ad-hoc networks. In many cases, there
is an inherent uncertainty in the available graph data either due to the data
collection process or the preprocessing of the data. Furthermore, uncertainty or
imprecise information becomes a critical impediment to understanding and
effectively utilizing the information contained in such graphs. In this project,
we address the problem of managing and mining such uncertain graphs. To do that,
we adopt the possible-world semantics to probabilistic and uncertain graphs and
within this framework we study algorithms for well-established data-mining
problems. Motivated by real-life applications, we focus on specific data-
analysis tasks. However, we make our framework general enough so that it can be
used for a wide set of tasks and applications. In particular, we develop
scalable and efficient algorithms and approaches to address a number of
important tasks including nearest neighbor retrieval, clustering and
partitioning, finding important nodes and edges, and summarizing large uncertain
graphs. We expect the results of this project to have an impact on several
application domains. For example, they can help internet-based and social-media
related companies to analyze their data and improve their targeting
advertisement policies and practices. This will create opportunities for making
these companies viable and help the economy of internet-based business. In
medicine, biology and biochemistry, networks play a very important role and many
of these networks can be better modeled as uncertain networks. Our project can
help analyze these networks and lead to new biological insights. The results of
this project are disseminated as follows: (1) we develop publicly available
prototypes; (2) we include the results of our work in our classes/lectures; (3)
we communicate our results to scientists of computer science and other fields
and our industry collaborators through publications and demos. We also actively
try to engage in our research graduate and undergraduate students, including
women and minorities.

For further information see the web site at:
http://www.cs.bu.edu/~gkollios/ugraphs/