* 1320356
* CSR: Small: A Practical Data Dependence Profiler for Program Characterization and Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* James Tuck, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,143.00

Society relies on an ever broadening array of computer systems for productivity,
communication, entertainment, safety, and health. Systems capable of processing
at faster rates and with greater efficiency are necessary to sustain the pace of
innovation. A key part of achieving this goal is the development of tools and
techniques that make it easier to build sophisticated software with a desired
set of requirements. One aspect of these tools, the focus of this work, is data
dependence profiling. A data dependence profiler (DDP) conveys to a programmer,
compiler, or other program analysis tool the likelihood of a data dependence
between two arbitrary memory operations while the program is running. DDPs are
critical since compilers and programmers often do not know or cannot determine
all such relationships simply by analyzing the source code; hence, DDPs provide
important information for further optimization and
tuning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the design of a fast
practical DDP that works effectively for a wide range of applications and for a
wide range of program analysis needs. The first goal is speed: that the DDP
impose only a small slowdown, the target being a factor of two. A second goal is
to maintain accuracy: bounding the uncertainty and imprecision inherent in
profiling, and providing information about the accuracy with the profiler
feedback. The third goal is integration of the DDP into a feedback-directed
optimization framework, to explore and understand its
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the goals of the project are met, DDPs are
expected to become more widely integrated into program development tools in
support of existing technology and enabling new technologies that ultimately
will benefit society. Open source distribution of the tools developed by the
project strengthens and extends the available open-source software
infrastructure relied upon by both academia and industry. The project integrates
education with research through involvement of graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students.