* 1320655
* Structured Dictionary Models and Learning for High Resolution Images
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Elizabeth Honig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 02/28/2017
* USD 240,001.00

We will develop novel techniques for the multi-resolution analysis of high-
resolution images, to obtain novel efficient and information representations.
These representations will take into account natural invariances in images, and
will lead to novel dictionary learning constructions and algorithms for images
and in signal processing in general. These representations will then be used to
analyze, search, and recognize similar objects or features in collections of
(scans of) paintings, in particular a large collection by the baroque artist Jan
Brueghel. The distances between images and portions thereof, the features
learned by the extensions of dictionary learning we will construct, and the
associated statistical similarities, together with labels provided by experts to
be used to train classifiers and algorithms that learn similarities among items
to match those provided by expert, will enable us to enrich the current set of
capabilities in building these large networks of paintings, to search through
them more easily and with more general search patterns, and to visualize them
according to different metrics by using dimensionality reduction
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The automatic learning of templates and
patterns, and their statistical relationships, in images and signals in general
is crucial in a wide variety of applications, such as automating object
recognition, and in defining visually meaningful similarities between images,
needed to enable searches in large image databases. We will both develop novel
techniques for automatically learning good templates for images, that
incorporate natural invariances such as translations and scalings, and novel
ways of exploiting these templates for analyzing large collections images,
measuring the similarities between then, and finding and characterizing
recurrent patterns in them. These novel techniques will be applied to the data
on the Jan Brueghel Research site, that allows scholars to investigate and
conceptualize a very different notion of old master pictures. Instead of
creating absolute categories of genuine and not-genuine, the team will be
drawing a map of interconnections between the thousands of paintings produced in
the workshops of early modern Antwerp. These pictures were made over several
generations, in the shops of masters ranging from world-famous (Pieter Brueghel,
Rubens) to utterly obscure. The website will chart how ideas were generated,
exchanged, reused and retooled by different artists, mapping networks of
creation and production well beyond those traceable through archival documents.