* 1320137
* AF: Small: Volumetric Alignment of Protein Cavities for the Analysis of Ligand Binding Specificity
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Katya Scheinberg, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2017
* USD 469,000.00

The alignment of protein structures is essential for the study of protein
function. Superposing the binding cavities of one protein onto another can
reveal shape similarities that explain why two proteins bind a similar molecular
partner. Superposition can also expose critical differences that explain why
proteins sometimes bind very different partners. These observations, made by
experts in structural biology with the computational aid of protein structure
alignments, help construct our atomic-level understanding of protein binding
preferences. Protein binding preferences lie at the crux of many pressing
challenges in protein engineering, systems biology, drug design, and other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers a new approach to protein
structure alignment that generates superposition by maximizing the overlapping
volume between binding cavities. Two core research directions will be
considered: (1) The development of specialized optimization techniques that
rapidly and reliably explore the continuous space of alignments and (2) the
usage of biological and biophysical data to enhance the alignment
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed work advances the
study of protein structure comparison with new representations of protein
structure and new geometric superposition techniques. A novel focus on closely
related proteins also diverges from existing methods, which generally target
proteins with distant evolutionary ties. The project advances techniques in
mathematical optimization for accommodating the noisy and expensive estimation
of overlapping cavity volume. Accommodations of this nature are an emerging
challenge in optimization, where the function being optimized is frequently the
result of imprecise and expensive computations, like simulations. The low
dimensionality of the cavity alignment problem, coupled with the opportunity to
optimize in the presence of noise and imprecision creates a unique opportunity
to advance techniques for this general challenge in optimization. In structural
biology, the proposed work will add automation and precision to existing
workflows, enabling the examination of more structures than humans can fully
consider and identifying molecular subtleties that might otherwise be
overlooked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project also focuses on
developing interactive software for protein structure comparison. This software
will provide a visual and intuitive interface, helping students and scientists
from non-computational background to better use and understand software in
structural bioinformatics. The research itself and the development of the
interface software will expose graduate and undergraduate students with mono-
disciplinary backgrounds to an interdisciplinary research program in
bioinformatics, and train them in cross-disciplinary communication.