* 1320188
* AF: Small: Computational Foundations of Lattices
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Oded Regev, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Lattices are mathematical objects defined as the set of all integer combinations
of some n linearly independent vectors in n-dimensional Euclidean space. For
instance, the set of all integer points in n-dimensional Euclidean space forms a
lattice. Lattices have attracted the attention of great mathematicians for over
two centuries, and have an impressive number of applications in mathematics and
computer science, from number theory and Diophantine approximation to complexity
theory and cryptography. The award focuses on lattice-based cryptography, an
area born in the late 90s, and that has since grown tremendously. Lattice-based
cryptography offers what is possibly the only alternative to traditional number-
theoretic cryptography such as RSA, and boasts strong provable security,
conjectured security against quantum computers, practical and highly optimized
implementations, amazing versatility leading to a remarkable number of
applications, and more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of the award is to
answer some of the main and most challenging open questions in the area of
lattice-based cryptography. These include: Is lattice-based cryptography
provably superior to traditional cryptography? Can we obtain better security
proofs for lattice-based cryptography, such as proving hardness statements for
ideal lattices? Progress on these questions should be possible using techniques
from number theory. The award also addresses related questions regarding the
computational complexity of lattice problems, such as the hardness of the so-
called shortest vector problem. Finally, the award addresses a fundamental
question in the geometry of lattices, progress on which should have applications
to the rest of the goals of the award, as well as to the mathematical and
computational study of lattices in general. Techniques used for closely related
questions in convex geometry seem particularly
promising.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, in the event of progress in
algorithmic number theory or advances in the implementation of quantum
computers, lattice-based cryptography is most likely the best (and possibly even
only) means for humanity to reclaim modern cryptography as used in nearly any
aspect of our lives, including credit cards, online financial transactions,
secure phone conversations, and lots more. The award will further our
understanding of lattice-based cryptography, and will aim to bring it to the
point at which it is ready to replace traditional cryptography.