* 1320175
* NeTS: Small: Inverse Problems from Cascades: Structure, Causation and Opinions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Sanjay Shakkottai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,687.00

Cascades, also known as epidemic processes, are network phenomena where the
activation of one node increases the likelihood of activation of its neighbors;
this results in an event starting at one node eventually affecting a much larger
part of the network via successive spread. Cascade processes serve as flexible
yet coherent models for several phenomena: spread of viruses and malware in
mobile phones, diseases in human society, opinions and actions in online social
networks. This project focuses on using cascades as an inference and learning
tool; the aim is to ascertain important network structure and properties, from
partial and very noisy observations of cascade progressions on it. This runs
counter to the vast majority of work on cascades, which is focused on the
"forward" problem (of predicting how a cascade will spread given network
properties). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop an analytical and
algorithmic framework that achieves the following three aims:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Inferring Graph Structure: What graph best explains
observed cascades? From noisy samples of multiple cascade progressions, the
project will formulate graph-learning as non-parametric statistical inference,
and propose an algorithmic approach that leverages recent break-throughs in
regularized convex optimization and iterative (forward-backward) methods.
Conversely, the project will develop lower-bounds on sample complexity using
statistical minimax theory. Applications abound - for instance, learning the
true Twitter interest graph from observation of cascades over the follower
network. &lt;br/&gt; 2. Detecting and Identifying the Causative Network: Is it
possible to detect if a cascade is progressing; if so which network is it
evolving on? Interactions occur over multiple possible networks in many
different domains (mobile forensics, epidemiology, online social networks),
pointing to the broad applicability of this thrust. &lt;br/&gt;3. Learning Node
Opinions: Users often need to be active participate for cascades to progress
(e.g., retweet on social media). By correlating user decisions with user
actions, is it possible to learn individual user opinions?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For validation the project will test the algorithms both
on both synthetic data and real data. Public data sets to be leveraged include
Texas hospital records along with online blog and search records (Spinn3r,
Twitter, Google Flu Trends, infochimps).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cascade processes
are widely prevalent in modern networks. The project's algorithms and
understanding of inverse problems will further the state of the art in diverse
fields including biological and human disease networks, societal networks of
self-interested agents, and mobile and malware networks. In addition, this
project will continue and broaden the PI's emphasis on recruiting and mentoring
students from under-represented communities. The industrial affiliates program
of the Wireless Networking and Communications Group at The University of Texas
at Austin will facilitate technology transfer to industry.