* 1321759
* ICOB: Molecular and morphological characterization of polar capsules in the parasitic Myxozoa
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Paulyn Cartwright, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2019
* USD 249,943.00

Myxozoans are a highly diverse yet understudied group of parasites. They are
microscopic animals that consist of just a few cells yet have a complex life
cycle that typically alternates between infecting an annelid and a fish.
Myxozoans are known to cause damage to fish aquaculture, which can have severe
economical consequences, yet little is known about the mechanisms underlying
their ability to infect their hosts. Recent studies using DNA sequence data have
provided evidence that myxozoans are related to cnidarians (jellyfish, corals
and sea anemones). Although superficially, these microscopic parasites do not
bear any resemblance to cnidarians, they have a similar complex intracellular
structure. In myxozoans this structure is called a polar capsule and is used to
attach to its host for infection. The polar capsule bears a striking resemblance
to the cnidarian stinging structure called a nematocyst. This project will
generate whole genome and transcriptome data from several myxozoan species using
next generation sequencing technologies. This data will be deposited into the
NCBI sequence read archive http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra. The research will
integrate newly generated genomic and ultrastructural data from myxozoan polar
capsules with existing data on cnidarian nematocysts, in order to shed light on
long standing questions regarding the origin and function of myxozoan polar
capsules. This will be accomplished by providing a comparative framework with
which to study polar capsules in the context of what is known of nematocyst
structure and function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's collaboration
combines expertise in myxozoan biology, cnidarian systematics, development, and
genomics. It marks the beginning of a productive and long-term international
collaboration in myxozoan research between the Israeli and US research teams.
This project will train two students and a postdoctoral researcher in myxozoan
biology. The US trainees will spend time with the Israeli lab and the Israeli
student will train in the US lab.