* 1321663
* CAP: Partnerships for Indigenous Knowledge and Digital Literacies
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Jon Reinhardt, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 06/30/2016
* USD 52,756.00

This project lays the academic foundations for collaborations between
researchers and indigenous American Indian community-based language
practitioners for the purpose of developing a socio-technical means of, in
parallel, preserving ancient indigenous languages and traditional ecological
knowledge (TEK), and helping indigenous youth learn traditional languages and
knowledge. The projected plan is to engage indigenous youth in the design of
augmented reality immersive experiences for others (ARGs) that incorporate
social media and immerse others in the culture and languages of the community as
a means towards addressing these goals. Such an approach places youth in the
position of being producers of immersive experiences for others and active
collaborators with elders who they can share with and learn from. During the
course of this Cyberlearning Capacity-Building Project (CAP), the PIs are
convening a set of workshops involving researchers, indigenous language
practitioners, and indigenous elders and youth to lay the foundations for later
collaborative research and planning. Indigenous participants are being
introduced to what is known about how people learn and about designing
experiences for promoting learning; researchers are being introduced to the
resources, needs, and knowledge of the indigenous people. American Indian
participants are from four separate but linguistically-related tribal
communities in the Midwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next generation of
indigenous peoples is faced with an awesome burden: how to sustain local
ecosystems, languages, and lands in the face of rampant language, culture, and
policy shifts. Existing theories of language and learning do not address these
issues, and project participants are laying the groundwork for both developing
theory around indigenous language and cultural learning and exploring the roles
technology might play in drawing youth into these activities and helping them
learn and preserve traditional languages and culture. Finding new channels for
the transmission of indigenous languages and traditional ecological knowledge is
both a practical and intellectual enterprise.