* 1321661
* EAGER: Mapping Fragmentation and Topology Optimization Concepts to GPUs
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Glaucio Paulino, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 05/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) is to
create an effective algorithmic mapping of extrinsic cohesive fragmentation and
topology optimization concepts to GPUs. The extrinsic cohesive fracture
framework will be used for detailed investigation of dynamic fracture
instability of brittle and quasi-brittle materials to properly explain the
limiting crack speed in these materials as well as increased fracture resistance
with crack speed. This framework will also allow multiscale investigations of
heterogeneous materials at the mesoscale, accounting for large deformation
behavior of a soft matrix with hard particles, including details of the graded
interphasial zones with interfacial cracking. The GPU framework for topology
optimization will consider realistic ground structures that can impact material
design, such as the design of extreme materials (e.g. auxetic), which are
globally homogenized but may locally (microstructurally) display a functionally
graded material architecture. The mapping and parallelization techniques will be
performed using NVIDIA's CUDA (Computer Unified Device Architecture) framework,
however, other emerging architectures such as the Intel's MIC (many-integrated-
core) can also be used and/or explored. To be able to fully utilize GPU hardware
is an art that relies on the effectiveness of the algorithmic mapping
associating software and hardware at various levels. To this effect, a tailored
topological data structure will be created to support mesh modification and
adjacency searches on the GPU. To circumvent race conditions, proper algorithms
(e.g. mesh coloring) will be investigated together their impact on
parallelization performance and concurrency issues. The research will make use
of the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) through
collaboration with Dr. Volodymyr Kindratenko (Research Scientist,
NCSA).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader outcomes of this interdisciplinary
research derive from the fact that GPUs have been a disruptive technology with
great potential for non-graphics applications, such as in computational
mechanics. This investigation will contribute to the understanding of both
explicit and implicit algorithms by adopting surrogate problems for each case,
namely, fragmentation and topology optimization, respectively. The scale of the
problems to be addressed has the potential to lead to computational discovery
through new physical understanding and insight. Concepts developed from this
research will be adapted into the curriculum at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). Educational and research findings will be disseminated
broadly through the internet. Moreover, outreach activities will be conducted to
motivate high-school students to pursue careers in engineering research and
education.