* 1321466
* STTR Phase I:  Polymer electrosonic actuation microarray: Low-cost tool for transfection of biological cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* John Meacham, OpenCell Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will prove the
technical and commercial feasibility of a single-use polymer microarray for
electromechanical transfection of biological cells. Alternative gene transfer
solutions are needed to access the potential held in biopharmaceuticals, gene
therapy, and stem cell research. Although physical methods for gene transfer
(e.g., electroporation) have demonstrated improved (over conventional chemical-
mediated techniques) treatment outcomes in difficult-to-transfect primary and
stem cells, control and uniformity of treatment remain inadequate. Further,
incremental improvements in performance of cuvette-based electroporation systems
have only been realized through corresponding increases in system complexity and
cost. One-by-one ejection of cells through cell-sized orifices has been found to
promote cell membrane poration and DNA delivery into cells by imposing an
identical and carefully controlled electromechanical environment on each
individual cell. Unfortunately, a relatively high material cost and limitations
on achievable treatment conditions (due to constraints on the geometry of
microarrays manufactured using standard silicon micromachining techniques),
inhibit practical implementation of existing silicon-based microarrays. The
innovative design and optimization of the polymer microarray under this STTR
Phase I project will yield a low-cost system capable of generating the
mechanical stress field needed to achieve improved treatment outcomes in
difficult-to-transfect cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project is to enable effective and economical transfection of
difficult-to-transfect primary and stem cells used for a variety of research and
therapeutic applications in the Life Sciences. Effective delivery of genes, drug
molecules, imaging agents, peptides, antibodies, and enzymes into living cells
is critical to applications ranging from the treatment of human disease through
introduction of DNA to the investigation of basic cellular function through
single molecule imaging; yet, intracellular delivery and transfection remain
difficult tasks. While efficiencies of greater than 90% are common in basic
research applications that use chemical or physical methods to transfect
laboratory established and maintained ("easy") cell lines, efficiency can drop
to 10% or lower for "difficult" cells. Refinements of physical methods (e.g.,
electroporation) have achieved incremental performance improvements; however, no
system currently on the market meets all end-user requirements for efficiency,
viability, functionality, and cost. The novel approach to transfection, which is
the subject of this STTR Phase I project, promises to improve treatment efficacy
through innovative use of multiple gene transfer techniques simultaneously,
while better addressing end user needs by providing a cost-effective
transfection solution for difficult cells.