* 1321520
* STTR Phase I:  An Advanced Biomanufacturing Platform Focused on Producing Sustainable Bio-based Commercial Chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Ludmila Rizhsky, OmegaChea Biorenewables LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop and commercialize a new scalable manufacturing capability that will
produce bio-based chemicals for surfactants, lubricants, and polymers. At the
core of this new manufacturing platform is a re-designed microorganism that
incorporates novel enzymes that determine the chemical nature of the omega-end
of fatty acids. Computational prospecting of genomes by NSF's Engineering
Research Center (ERC), CBiRC, has led to the discovery of these enzymes, and
CBiRC has developed systems to accurately identify their biocatalytic
capabilities in determining the omega-end of fatty acids. The CBiRC team will
implement these systems and identify new superior biocatalysts. The company will
utilize these discoveries by selecting optimized biocatalysts, and integrate
them into a microbial platform for the scalable bio-based manufacture of omega-
functionalized fatty acid chemicals. These functionalized fatty acids will
display improved performance characteristics in applications such as
surfactants, lubricants, and polymers, which are markets that are valued at more
than $40B per annum.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
a new manufacturing platform for producing bio-based chemicals that are
currently derived from petroleum-carbon. This proposed project has the potential
of impacting the carbon and environmental footprints of the surfactant,
lubricant, and polymer industries. The manufacturing platform will utilize
biological carbon sources (sugars derived from plants), and, via novel microbial
fermentation processes, will biologically transform the carbon to higher value
products. This transformation is of significance in the context of company's
geographic and intellectual inception. First, the company is based in a
Midwestern State (Iowa), which is at the epicenter of this country's bio-based
carbon-fixing industry (i.e., agriculture); the technology has the potential to
add value to primary agricultural outputs, and therefore support rural
development. Second, the company envisions forming industry partnerships in the
context of the ERC-Industry collaboration (i.e., CBiRC's Innovation Ecosystem)
that incorporates multiple companies along the value chain from agricultural
commodity producers to chemical companies that are seeking to change from using
non-renewable petroleum-derived carbon to renewable carbon-sources. Therefore,
the technology has the potential of being a transformative force in contributing
to a sustainable manufacturing base.