* 1321488
* 2013 Interior of the Earth GRC/GRS
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Barbara Romanowicz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/28/2014
* USD 41,950.00

This grant will partially support the 2013 Interior of the Earth Gordon Research
Conference (GRC, June 2-7, 2013) and the second Gordon Research Seminar (GRS,
June 1-2) which will be held at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley,
Massachusetts. The GRC is the 9th in a series of Gordon Research Conferences
that focus on the structure, dynamics and evolution of the Earth's interior. For
the second time, the Gordon Conference will be preceded by a Gordon Research
Seminar (http://www.grc.org/programs.aspx?year=2013&amp;program=grs_inter), a
unique forum for graduate students, post-docs, and other scientists with
comparable levels of experience and education to present and exchange new data
and cutting edge ideas. NSF funds will be used to attract young scientists to
the&lt;br/&gt;GRC and GRS, from a diverse range of institutions, backgrounds and
scientific disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The forthcoming conference will
focus on the deep Earth and will cover, among others, the structure, composition
and dynamics of the core-mantle boundary region and the core, magnetic field,
planets, as well as structure and geochemical evolution of the whole Earth, from
a multidisciplinary perspective. Invited speakers from the fields of
geochemistry, geodynamics, mineral physics, geomagnetism and seismology will
define the forefront of knowledge and set the stage for a freewheeling
discussion and debate of the most pressing scientific questions. Specific
session topics include inner core structure and dynamics, the structure and
nature of LLSVP's (large low shear velocity provinces), the mantle transition
zone and interactions between the upper and the lower mantle, early earth and
geochemical reservoirs, rheology and mineralogy of the deep mantle, the core-
mantle boundary and core/mantle interactions, planetary interiors. The
conference will also provide the opportunity for junior scientists and graduate
students to present their work in poster format and exchange ideas with leading
researchers. The latter will be greatly facilitated by the preceding GRS, which
will focus on 'Structure of the Earth's Deep Interior and its Role in Mantle
Convection", providing particular synergy with the GRC to follow. The collegial
atmosphere of both GRC and GRS, with programmed discussion sessions and
opportunities for informal gatherings, is intended to generate lively exchange
and promote cross-disciplinary collaborations.