* 1321637
* CNIC:   Planning visits to develop U.S. - Costa Rica - Asia collaborative research and education initiatives in biodiversity and sustainability in the tropics
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Elizabeth Losos, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2016
* USD 77,805.00

Sustainability research examines the complex interactions between humans and the
rest of nature, which have resulted in climate, land-use, and other
environmental changes. Although sustainability studies are increasingly included
within temperate regions, they are rarely included within studies of tropical
ecosystems. This award will support workshops in Costa Rica and China to foster
the inclusion of sustainability within biodiversity research in the tropics. The
project will bring together existing teams of researchers from the Organization
for Tropical Studies (OTS), Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences (XTBG-CAS) and the Center for Tropical Forest
Science (CTFS) plus social scientists and policy developers to develop
recommendations on how best to incorporate sustainability questions within
tropical systems research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainability research
recognizes the importance of simultaneously considering social, economic and
natural aspects to the long-term viability of tropical systems. Forming an
alliance among US, Costa Rican and Asian scientists will create research,
education and training opportunities for students, post-docs, junior and
established researchers in each of the three regions that will have long term
and far reaching impacts on research in tropical systems. The expectation is
that these workshops will catalyze research leading to the long-term goal of
sustainable social, economic and ecological systems in the tropics.