* 1321751
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Technological Innovation in the Upper Great Lakes
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Heather Walder, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 25,200.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Sissel Schroeder, Heather Walder will conduct new
analyses of existing artifact collections from approximately thirty-five Native
American village sites in Wisconsin, Michigan, and Illinois that were occupied
between roughly AD 1630 and 1730. This time of early interactions among the
Upper Great Lakes region's original inhabitants, displaced Native newcomers, and
European explorers resulted in hybridized, multiethnic communities that
persisted into the French Colonial period. Ms. Walder is investigating several
important aspects of this socially, economically, and politically dynamic
period: 1) changes through time in the material practices and performance of
social identity as expressed in personal ornaments; 2) regional variation in the
technologies used to transform European materials, such as copper-based kettles,
into adornments; and 3) spatial and temporal patterns in the chemical
composition of glass beads, which reflect the extent and timing of glass bead
trade in the region. Studying the production and exchange of socially-meaningful
adornments will help to clarify the beginnings of global-scale interaction and
trade from the standpoint of technology and material culture. This project
contributes to recent theoretical discussions of identity in cultural contact
and early colonial situations. In contrast with the Northeast or island settings
like colonial Hawaii, where early contact was more sustained, the Upper Great
Lakes region experienced infrequent and intermittent early European contacts,
allowing it to be examined as a locale of historically documented hybridity and
multi-ethnicity.

The primary methods that Ms. Walder will apply are physical attribute analysis
of copper-based metal ornaments and chemical compositional analysis of glass
beads. By comparing the find-spots of chemically similar glass beads to the
distribution of contemporaneous archaeological sites and discrete Native
occupation areas as labeled on historic maps, it may be possible to determine if
socially distinct groups had access to different European materials or if access
patterns changed through time. Attribute analysis of metal ornaments and waste
fragments that result from their manufacture will allow the comparison of metal-
working practices of different contemporary social groups, in order to
understand if or how social identity influences the ornament production process.
Ms. Walder's research demonstrates the potential value of investigating
unpublished or under-published collections using relatively new analysis methods
that were not used or were unavailable for earlier studies.

This research will produce an on-line data set useful for anthropologists
worldwide who are engaged in the study of cultures in contact and the beginnings
of the colonial world. Results will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
publications and through public presentations in various venues throughout the
Midwest. Broader impacts of this research include updating of museum curation
strategies and interpretive displays and involving descendant communities in the
research process. While working with the museum collections, Ms. Walder will
organize and digitize original field notes, locate missing artifact information,
repackage artifacts in dire need of conservation, assist curators in the
identification of historic artifacts, and collaborate with curators to ensure
continued research accessibility to the collections. Updated interpretive
displays that present the results of Ms. Walder's study are planned at several
curating institutions, including the Madeline Island Museum and Rock Island
State Park. Finally, this research project will foster relationships and
collaborations with descendant Meskwaki, Menominee, and Ho-Chunk community
members in the Midwest.