* 1321550
* Collaborative Research: Near-Field Observations of Preseismic, Coseismic, and Postseismic Slip on the Northern Costa Rica Megathrust
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Susan Schwartz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2017
* USD 135,012.00

The plate boundary at convergent margins produces most of the world?s largest
earthquakes, threatening local inhabitants and global populations through
destructive shaking and tsunami generation. An Mw 7.6 earthquake occurred on 5
September 2012 in Nicoya Peninsula, northern Costa Rica directly beneath a
network of seismic and continuous GPS stations. It provides a unique opportunity
to study the cycle of a megathrust earthquake in unprecedented detail. This
project seeks to better understand the preparation process of megathrust
earthquakes by identifying slow preslip and/or patterns in foreshock activity,
and evolutions of aftershocks and afterslip induced by the mainshock. Our
project has important implications for predictability of large earthquakes, the
potential size of the megathrust earthquake, the strong ground motions and
associated damage, and tectonic strain accumulation and release during an
earthquake cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major research questions to be addressed
include whether there is discernible preparation activity before the mainshock,
if distinct regions of the plate boundary host coseismic versus slow and after
slip, if slip in the mainshock occurs in regions accumulating strain during the
interseismic period, whether aftershocks are driven by afterslip or other
processes, and what effect mainshock rupture has on seismic velocities and
properties of the plate interface. Because we have been measuring surface
deformation and seismicity directly above the megathrust for over a decade
preceding the 2012 Nicoya earthquake, we can compare the distribution of
coseismic slip with the interseismic strain accumulation pattern, slow slip
behavior, and precursory seismicity and address all of these questions in a
single location. To ascertain whether any accelerating foreshock activity and
aftershock expansion/migration occurs, a complete catalog of seismic activity
before and after the mainshock is required. We will use all earthquakes in our
existing catalog as templates and scan through continuous records to identify
additional events easily missed by automated detection algorithms and visual
inspection. Event pairs with the highest correlation coefficients will be
grouped into repeating earthquake clusters and used to infer slow-slip and
afterslip, and track temporal changes of subduction zone interface properties.
We will also detect tectonic tremor long before and after the mainshock and use
it as a proxy for slow slip and investigate whether tremor/slow slip events
occur before major earthquakes. Finally, we will compare high-resolution co-
seismic slip with aseismic slip during postseismic and interseismic period as
well as microseismicity to understand different frictional properties of the
plate interface. Because of the high-quality data collected over the past
decade, and the close proximity to the megathrust, our project could lead to
significant advances on how subduction zone properties evolve immediate before
and after a major megathrust event.