* 1321408
* Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Philippos Mordohai, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 04/30/2014
* USD 15,050.00

This project supports the Doctoral Consortium held with the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) in Portland, Oregon, in June
2013. CVPR is the premier annual conference with about 2000 senior and student
participants in computer vision, held in North America and attended by members
of the international research community. The goal of the Doctoral Consortium is
to highlight the work of senior Ph.D. students, who are close to finishing their
degrees, or recent graduates, and to give these students the opportunity to
discuss their research with senior researchers matched with their expertise. NSF
support covers some of the costs for the selected US graduate students to attend
the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
rests in the selection of top-quality Ph.D. students whose research is showcased
and to whom feedback is provided by senior researchers. The opportunity to
receive advice on their research and career plans from experts from different
institutions, and with potentially different perspectives, in many cases is not
available internally within one's own institution. The broader impacts of this
project include supporting the career development of some of the brightest
junior researchers in computer vision, contributing to the research community in
general by drawing attention to an important aspect of graduate student
development, and potentially increasing the number of active researchers and
teachers in STEM. The doctoral consortium event aims to have representation from
a diverse group of participants in terms of gender, ethnic background, academic
institution and geographic location.