* 1321412
* Did Hunting or Climate Change Cause a Late Holocene Bottleneck in California Tule Elk? An Integrated Test using Ancient DNA and Stable Isotopes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Dennis O'Rourke, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 203,716.00

Recent research has suggested that prehistoric hunters may have caused declines
in the populations of prey species such antelope, deer, and elk over the last
3000 in many areas of western North America. This work has shown that the
implications of these declines are far-reaching and range from changes in human
behavior and biology involving increasing violence and declining human health,
to modern wildlife management. Standard archaeological indicators of prey
population declines - such as declining abundances of the bones of large game -
are, however, imperfect and cannot distinguish between broad-scale prey
population declines versus local movements of prey away from human settlements.
In addition, it is hard to evaluate the effect of climate change on prey
declines, because of the difficulty in aligning time series of archaeological
bone abundance data with those from various records of climate change. One needs
a more robust methodology - one that informs more directly about specific causes
including climate change. This research develop and test such a methodology
using both ancient DNA (aDNA) and stable isotopes derived from the bones of elk
(Cervus elaphus), the largest and most economically attractive terrestrial
animal on the California landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a
previous pilot study with tule elk and uses patterns of genetic variation
derived from ancient mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), and stable isotopes, to test the
hypothesis that prehistoric hunters caused a population decline in this animal.
Trends in genetic variation are used to reconstruct the tule elk population
history since population declines leave a signature in genetic variation. The
stable isotopes of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen recovered from faunal bone
register aspects of an animal's forage and can be used to reconstruct
terrestrial climate change. The work will analyze ancient mtDNA and stable
isotopes from the bones of 113 tule elk individuals from two archaeological
sites in central California where elk remains are abundant. All specimens that
produce aDNA sequences and stable isotope values will be radiocarbon dated to
provide chronological control. The analysis not only represents a novel
integration of aDNA and stable isotope methodologies to reconstruct and evaluate
the prehistoric population trends of a key subsistence resource to the
aboriginal people of the region, but can be a model for exploring the role of
human and climatic influences on animals in other archaeological
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has implications for the methodology
of reconstructing trends in the populations sizes of ancient animals, key issues
in the human prehistory and historical ecology of California, as well as current
issues in tule elk conservation and management. The project will also continue
the career development of a post-doctoral student who has conducted the aDNA
work in the pilot study and support and train a graduate student research
assistant in stable isotope analysis. Finally, the project will provide a key
stimulus to a new Molecular Zooarchaeology research program devoted to
understanding the population histories of other animal species in North America.
The proposed project and developing research program integrates the research
expertise of four faculty members of the Department of Anthropology, University
of Utah, and will enhance both undergraduate teaching and graduate level
training and research opportunities.