* 1321171
* NeTS: Small: Co-Optimization of Sensing, Communications and Navigation of a Robotic Network under Resource Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Yasamin Mostofi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Robotic networks can have a tremendous impact in many different areas such as
disaster relief, emergency response, and national security. The recent disasters
such as Hurricane Sandy of 2012 or Japan's earthquake of 2011 remind us of the
crucial role that unmanned autonomous networks can play as part of our society.
The goal of this project is to introduce a new multi-disciplinary design
paradigm for the successful operation of mobile robotic networks through the co-
optimization of sensing, communications and navigation. In the robotics/control
community, most existing work does not deal with realistic communication issues
(such as shadowing and multipath fading) and ideal links/disk models are assumed
for predicting connectivity. On the other hand, the communication and networking
communities are not typically concerned with path planning and navigation. In a
robotic network, path planning not only affects sensing quality but also impacts
connectivity maintenance. This multi-disciplinary nature makes designing robust
decision-making strategies for a successful task accomplishment in robotic
networks considerably challenging and an open problem. Furthermore, a separate
optimization of the given sensing, communications and navigation resources may
not suffice for a successful operation under resource constraints.

In this research effort, the focus is on the impact of limited energy (both
motion and communications), time, and bandwidth resources and on laying the
foundation of the corresponding optimum sensing, communication and navigation
co-design policies, which includes trajectory, sensing, connectivity, motion
speed/power, and communication transmission rate/power optimization. In this
approach, realistic probabilistic connectivity metrics are properly co-optimized
with sensing and navigation goals such that each robot chooses a trajectory that
allows it to maximize its information gathering while maintaining the needed
connectivity. This framework answers fundamental questions such as when to
invest in motion and when to invest in communications. The project also
addresses task feasibility and the fundamental limits of information generation,
gathering and exchange, which can provide key insights for resource planning
before deployment.

Overall, this new co-optimization foundation enables the successful operation of
robotic networks under limited resources and can thus have a tremendous impact
on our society. This project also has a significant educational impact on
minority and under-represented students.