* 1321998
* Collaborative Research:  Early Earth Evolution: Hf and Nd Isotopic Constraints from the ca 3.4-&amp;gt;4.0 Ga Acasta Gneisses
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Jeffrey Vervoort, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2017
* USD 187,564.00

Scientists and the general public alike are fascinated by the antiquity of the
continents on which we live. When did the first large continental masses appear?
How did the continents grow through time? What were conditions like on the early
Earth? These are all questions that many ponder. In detail, these questions do
not have simple answers and stimulate much heated debate. The oldest crystalline
basement rocks preserved in small regions on many of the continents are an
important source of information in Earth?s earliest history. This project is
designed to understand how continental crust grew during the first billion years
of Earth history and is focused on a study of some of the oldest rocks in the
planet, which is the Acasta Gneiss Complex (AGC) of the Slave Province in
northern Canada. This terrane hosts what are thought by many to be the oldest
known granites on Earth and therefore is critically important source of
information on the earliest Earth history. The AGC is not a simple package of
rocks, however, and extracting reliable isotopic information from these rocks
requires a detailed-oriented approach. What is remarkable about these rocks is
that they do not appear unusual in any way and lend some support to the idea
that the processes that produced these rocks are similar to those operating
today. However many of them are older than 3.9 billion years and some as old as
4.0 billion years. Considering that the age of the Earth is thought to be a
little more than 4.5 billion years old, these rocks get us very far back in the
history of the planet. The team of investigators are hopeful that even older
rocks will be identified during this study. This proposal brings together two
investigators with fundamentally different views on the early history of crust
formation, but who are intensely curious about the early Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first billion years of Earth history is crucial not
only for understanding the growth, maturation, and preservation of continental
lithosphere, but also for evaluating the nature and age of geochemical
reservoirs preserved in the modern earth. Earth?s earliest history is a subject
of much controversy, which centers on whether or not there were large volumes of
continental crust by ca. 4.0 Ga and a corresponding large global depleted mantle
reservoir. Both Hf and Nd isotope systematics on a compositionally diverse suite
of rocks are essential for understanding the first billion years of Earth?s
evolution. This proposal seeks to determine U-Pb dates and Hf isotopic
compositions of zircon as well as Hf and Nd whole rock isotopic compositions
from a suite of rocks ranging in age from ca. 3.4 to &gt; 4.0 Ga from the AGC.
Our multi-pronged approach will be to determine: the U-Pb dates of zircons and
host rocks by ID-TIMS; the Hf isotopic composition of the zircons on the
solutions remaining from the ID-TIMS U-Pb work; Hf isotopic composition of the
zircons by LA-MC-ICPMS obtained coincidently with the U-Pb data using the split
stream approach; and the Hf and Nd isotopic compositions of whole rocks starting
with those with least complex zircon U-Pb and Hf isotopic compositions. These
methods, in concert, will be able to help identify samples where complexities in
the age and isotopic compositions could compromise interpretations. Conversely,
by determining well-constrained U-Pb zircon crystallization ages and
corresponding isotopic compositions, they will be able to provide an unambiguous
isotopic record for these rocks. The goal is to extract robust constraints on
the nature of the crustal and mantle reservoirs from which these rocks were
derived.