* 1321265
* EAGER:   Climate change and phenological mismatch - an experimental test with cavity nesting bees, cleptoparasites, and floral resources
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Daniel Bunker, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2018
* USD 156,500.00

Species that rely closely upon one another, such as bees and the plants they
pollinate, may respond differently to global climate change, with potentially
dire consequences such as poor crop pollination and low yields. For instance,
pollinators may respond strongly to climate warming and emerge earlier in the
growing season, while their preferred flowers respond less strongly and emerge
later. This mismatch in timing could severely impact either organism if one
relies strongly on the other. The work proposed here would test the importance
of such mismatches for cavity-nesting bees and the trees they pollinate, by
experimentally manipulating bee springtime emergence. In addition, the proposed
work will develop two novel technologies that are critical for this and similar
experiments. The first technology will enable bee nests to be warmed in the
field and cause the resident bees to emerge earlier in the spring. The second
technology will employ tiny labels, similar to bar-codes, that can be placed on
the backs of bees. The bees and tags can then be monitored using computer
assisted image recognition. By placing a video camera at each nest, this
technology will allow researchers to study in detail how bees respond to a
warming climate and shifting schedules of flowering.

Understanding and predicting how species and ecological communities respond to
global climate change is critical because the pace of climate change over the
next few decades may greatly exceed what species have previously experienced
over the previous millennium. Since many wild plants and animals provide
important services that are critical for human well-being, an understanding of
how they may be impacted by climate change is essential for any effort to
predict and mitigate these effects. Indeed, bees are the most important
pollinators globally, providing pollination services to both agricultural and
natural ecosystems. Additionally, the proposed micro-tagging and tracking
technologies may redefine how scientists study small mobile organisms, which
often have outsized impacts on ecosystems but are difficult to study due to
their small size. Finally, one Ph.D. student will be trained, and at least two
undergraduate students will gain valuable field and laboratory research
experience.