* 1321828
* Cross-National Comparison of School and District Supports for High-Quality Mathematics Instruction in the US and China
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Paul Cobb, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

Since the publication of the result that students from Shanghai, China,
outperformed students from all other participating countries on the 2009
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) in mathematics,
researchers have sought to understand why Chinese mathematics education appears
to be both more successful at boosting student learning and more equitably
distributed. This RAPID project is a cross-national comparative study of U.S.
and Chinese instructional support systems, building from earlier data about
mathematics teaching and learning in large urban school districts of both the
United States and the People's Republic of China. The work is being conducted by
researchers from Vanderbilt University, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University and Beijing Normal University. The study uses quantitative methods to
compare and contrast the effectiveness of supports (e.g., professional
development, teacher networks, school leadership) in improving teachers'
instructional practices and student achievement using comparable
instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study contributes to research and
policy in several ways. First, it is helping to identify supports that have been
particularly effective in improving mathematics teaching and learning in China.
This should inform current theories about how to best support mathematics
education in the United States. Second, the cross-nationally validated
instruments used to collect the data can be used by other researchers
investigating curricular reform implementation cross-nationally. The findings of
this study are especially relevant to district leaders as they develop support
and accountability systems to effectively implement the content and practice
standards of the Common Core State Standards for
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF's International
Science and Engineering Section, Office of International and Integrative
Activities.