* 1321760
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant:  Religion at the Edges:   Social Boundaries and Religious Architecture in the Prehispanic Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2015
* Katherine Dungan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2015
* USD 10,880.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Barbara Mills, Katherine Dungan will analyze
prehispanic religious architecture dating to the 13th and 14th centuries C.E. in
east-central Arizona and west-central New Mexico. This large region contains
multiple spatial and social boundary zones, areas where groups practicing
distinct cultural traditions lived in close proximity to one another. The study
will examine the relationship of religious architecture to these boundary zones,
asking whether religion played a role in the creation and reinforcement of
social boundaries, or, alternatively, whether religion was more flexible at
social boundaries. The study will approach these questions through the
examination of spatial variability in great kiva (religious structure)
characteristics. If great kivas in social boundary zones adhere to an ideal form
or size this would suggest that they facilitated boundary maintenance.
Conversely, greater variability among boundary zone structures would suggest
that a boundary position contributed to religious experimentation or
flexibility. Research on religion in the context of boundaries over time
challenges the long-standing view of religion in premodern or small-scale
societies as primarily integrative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
include revisiting collections and records from previously excavated great
kivas, along with the creation of a large-scale database from published and
unpublished records of approximately 100 sites. Most of the collections to be
reexamined were excavated in the mid-20th century, with only the most unusual or
spectacular finds interpreted as evidence of religious activity. Reevaluation of
these collections, housed primarily at the Field Museum, Harvard Peabody Museum,
and Museum of New Mexico Laboratory of Anthropology, should contribute
substantially to the broader study of Southwestern religion. The use of existing
collections adheres to a preservation-focused approach to archaeology, which
emphasizes research with a minimal impact on the archaeological record. The
Upper Gila area of New Mexico will serve as an intensive local study area, with
data from recently completed excavations and intensive collections analysis
complementing the regional database. Limited excavation at a 13th-century site
in Mule Creek, NM has demonstrated that this area served as a social boundary
zone through time and that the site's religious architecture is unusual compared
to that of the larger region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond these specific
questions, the research aims to make broader contributions. The database, with
spatial data removed, will be made available online, substantially increasing
the accessibility of data from understudied collections. Public lands make up a
large portion of the study area; the study will increase the information
available to managing agencies and for public interpretation. The analysis of
material from the completed excavations will continue to provide training
opportunities for undergraduates at multiple institutions, including the
University of Arizona and Pima Community College. The research continues the
collaboration between the University of Arizona and Archaeology Southwest, a
non-profit organization focused on archaeological preservation and research. The
results of the work will be presented to the public through Archaeology
Southwest's website, magazine, and public presentations in Tucson and the Upper
Gila, and to an academic audience through peer-reviewed publications. Finally,
the results will be used in Archaeology Southwest's landowner outreach in the
Upper Gila, ultimately contributing to the preservation of the archaeological
record.