* 1321336
* Experiments in Student Mentoring, Tutoring, and Guided Peer Interaction in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs)
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2016
* Elaine Collins, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 12/31/2016
* USD 59,999.00

Project Description: This project is producing a Massive Open Online Course
(MOOC) delivered workshop that addresses the poor completion rate for MOOCs that
currently exists. The project team is studying what factors impact the
completion rates and gathering data that indicates how the addition of human
mentoring and guided peer learning can impact student completion. The
exploration is based on two observations: (1) MOOCs are presently more
successful for highly self-motivated individuals, and (2) currently there is an
absence of interactive human mentoring in MOOCs. Six different modes of
instructor-student and instructor directed-student peer interactions are being
investigated to determine efficacy of multiple methods of instructor
intervention and human guidance in the success rates of online MOOC students.
Ultimately, the project is offering guidance as to how MOOCs can more
successfully impact a broader segment of students.

Broader Significance: MOOCs are presently being offered on a large scale;
however, there has been little discussion of how effective these courses are
with respect to student learning. This timely workshop offers a groundbreaking
effort to study and report on the addition of interactive student mentoring to
MOOCs. The effort is also examining the potential to provide students in high
schools and community colleges with increased access to low-cost remedial
mathematics courses. Students who complete such mathematics remediation before
they arrive at a community college or university campus may be more successful
in college, thereby increasing the likelihood of obtaining a bachelor's degree.
The workshop is helping faculty to design and offer MOOC-style courses that have
built-in mentoring components that are needed to help students complete these
courses.