* 1321388
* U.S. Young Observer Program for the 2013 and 2015 Congress and General Assembly of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Kathryn Hughes, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 47,148.00

Katherine W Bowman, Katherine Bailey Mathae and Kathryn Hughes of the National
Academy of Sciences are supported in an award from the Division of Chemistry to
support the Young Observer Program for the 2013 Congress and General Assembly of
the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). Approximately 12
early-to-mid career scientists (under the age of 45) will attend the 45th IUPAC
Congress and 47th IUPAC General Assembly (Turkey, 2013). The Young Observers
will obtaine travel grants as well as associated mentoring, networking and
career development opportunities. The IUPAC Young Observer program has been in
operation since 1977 and has introduced approximately 200 scientists to the
international issues and progress in the field of
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the IUPAC Young Observer
Program include provide networking and mentoring opportunities that foster
interactions of the participants with leading scientists in their field, helping
to nurture a future generation of chemistry leaders, providing opportunities for
sharing research in a global forum from across the chemical sciences, and
fostering international collaborations between U.S. chemists and their
international peers. The Young Observer program will enable those who might not
otherwise be able to attend the Congress and General Assembly to do so,
encouraging the participation of a strong pool of U.S. chemistry talent at these
meetings and in IUPAC activities.