* 1321002
* Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Woody Sutherland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2015
* USD 57,081.00

A request is made to fund additional and back-up instrumentation on the R/V
Roger Revelle, a 273? general purpose Global vessel; the R/V Melville, a
279?general purpose Global vessel; the R/V New Horizon, a 170?, general purpose,
Ocean/Intermediate vessel and the R/V Sproul, a 125? general purpose
Coastal/Local vessel. All four vessels are operated by Scripps Institution of
Oceanography as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
research fleet.

Both R/V Roger Revelle and R/V Melville are Global vessels and support
multidisciplinary oceanographic research in all of the world?s ocean basins. R/V
New Horizon focuses primarily on offshore California but has been used for work
throughout the Pacific. The primary working area for R/V Sproul has been the
continental shelf and coastal environments off Southern California. In 2013, R/V
Roger Revelle is scheduled for 247 days with NSF days accounting for 31% of the
total sailing schedule; R/V Melville is scheduled for 316 days with NSF days
accounting for 44% of the total sailing schedule; and R/V New Horizon is
scheduled for 157 days with NSF days accounting for 50% of the total sailing
schedule. R/V Sproul, a vessel owned by the State of California, has no NSF days
in 2013 and only one day currently funded on the vessel.

Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in this proposal includes

RDI 150 KHz OS ADCP $66,110 H2000 ROV Spares $21,567 H2000 ROV Cable and
Modifications $57,081 10m2 MOCNESS Components $46,279 TOTAL $191,037

Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is under criterion
two of the Proposal Guidelines. They provide infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.