* 1321731
* Improving access to the Elemental Analysis Facility and Inter-laboratory comparison
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Patrick Williams, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 157,853.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Laure Dussubieux and
Ryan Williams from the Field Museum will 1) continue offering access to the
Elemental Analysis Facility (EAF) to a wide range of archaeological scholars and
2) organize inter-laboratory comparison tests for LA-ICP-MS users studying
ancient glass and ancient ceramic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EAF includes a
scanning electron microscope with an energy dispersive spectrometer (SEM-EDS),
and inductively coupled plasma - mass spectrometer (ICP-MS). The ICP-MS can be
fitted with two lasers. One of the lasers is dedicated to the sampling of small
objects with a high throughput, whereas the second laser, a totally unique,
custom-transformed apparatus, accommodates large objects. This equipment is
complemented by two portable XRF instruments for totally non-invasive
investigations of artifacts on the premises of the Museum or in the field. The
facility is used to determine the composition, including major, minor, and trace
elements, of a large range of materials in a non-destructive manner to address
questions related to the archaeology of cultural production, interaction and
exchange in the Americas, Africa, Oceania, Europe, and Asia and advancing the
cause of material conservation of The Field Museum's reknowned anthropology
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The elemental analysis facility serves the
Field Museum community as well as scholars and students from the Chicago area,
the Midwest and throughout the world. This project will reinforce our
interaction with outside scientists to attract high profile collaborative
projects by offering financial support to offset travel and accommodation
expenses as well as part of analytical costs. The presence of an on-site
laboratory at the Field Museum creates the opportunity to study artifacts from
the unique collections of the museum that could not be moved easily to outside
analytical facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large quantity of data
generated by the EAF in eight years of activity and the multiplication of LA-
ICP-MS laboratories around the country pose the questions of data set
comparability. Data obtained by participating laboratories on two widely
analyzed materials (glass and ceramic) will be compared in the framework of an
inter-laboratory comparison test. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits
of the project include the establishment of extensive new datasets of
archaeological and ethnological material from around the world that directly
informs hypotheses about ancient trade and exchange, technology, and their
relationship to the development of social complexity around the world. By
sharing our expertise for the investigation of ancient material and linking
leading scholars and graduate students to the museum's extensive collections and
giving them the tools to analyze these one of a kind assemblages, the project
will significantly enhance understanding of the role of cultural production in
the development of complex societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the research include student training and public education. This project
integrates research and training of undergraduate and graduate students. They
are initiated into the analytical process by undertaking the analysis itself and
are trained in method development, the statistical processing of the data, and
interpretation. Results of this research will inform future exhibits and
education activities of the institution, which educate hundreds of thousands of
school children and millions of visitors annually. The inter-laboratory
comparison test will constitute a first step toward the elaboration of a large
data base of LA-ICP-MS data for the use of archaeologists.