* 1321247
* Collaborative Research: Urbanism, Neighborhood Organization, and Domestic Economy  at the Tlajinga District, Teotihuacan, Mexico.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* David Carballo, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 188,238.00

The archaeology of early urbanism provides deep historical context for an
increasingly urbanized world. Dr. David M. Carballo and Dr. Kenneth G. Hirth
will direct a collaborative three-year project involving an international team
of interdisciplinary researchers at the ancient city of Teotihuacan, Mexico.
During its height in the early first millennium AD Teotihuacan was the largest
city in the Americas and one of the largest in the world. Today, being a UNESCO
World Heritage Site and the most visited ruins in the Americas, Teotihuacan is
of great interest to a broad audience.

Though Teotihuacan is famed for its high-level of civic planning, cosmopolitan
populace, and broad economic reach, such issues require more intensive
investigations within understudied portions of the city. Investigations of this
project focus on the Tlajinga district, a cluster of neighborhoods to the south
of Teotihuacan that was inhabited by a lower socioeconomic stratum of the city's
populace, was the locus of intensive utilitarian craft production, and is
bisected by the terminus of the city's central artery named the Street of the
Dead by the later Aztecs. The Tlajinga district provides an opportune setting
for examining issues of broad interest to social and behavioral sciences and
represents a minimally explored portion of the city whose archaeological record
is threatened by contemporary urbanization surrounding greater Mexico City. To
date, only one of approximately 90 apartment compounds - the multi-family
residential complexes of Teotihuacan - has been excavated.

Research goals of the project scale from the level of the household to the level
of the urbanization of the city as a whole. One household activity of particular
interest is the production of obsidian blades - the utilitarian cutting
implement of the period - in one compound, and its implications for the
organization of markets and interregional exchange. This compound will be
excavated and the obsidian acquisition, production, and distribution system will
be analyzed technologically and geochemically. At the district level, a complex
consisting of likely temples around a plaza will be studied for a better
understanding of administrative and religious activities that connected
neighborhoods and articulated them with the urban fabric of the multi-ethnic
city. And at the level of the entire city, excavations at the unexplored
southern Street of the Dead will address when it was established and the degree
of centralization involved in this major act of urban planning.

Research methods of the project include two seasons of horizontal excavations at
three compounds and along the southern Street of the Dead; analysis of activity
areas coupling floor-chemistry analyses and micromorphological studies; detailed
materials analyses, including the technological sequence of obsidian-blade
production; isotopic analysis of bones and geochemical analyses of artifacts;
and extensive surface mapping and remote-sensing programs for neighborhood-scale
spatial analyses. The project involves close collaboration between researchers
from the US and Mexico as well as the training of undergraduate and graduate
students from these two countries.