* 1321649
* Properties and Phase Equilibria for Product and Process Design (PPEPPD) International Conference, May 26-30 2013, Iguazu Falls, Argentina
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Joan Brennecke, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 03/31/2014
* USD 21,384.00

ABSTRACT

This proposal requests travel funding for the 13th Properties and Phase
Equilibria for Product and Process Design (PPEPPD) international conference to
be held in May 26-30 2013, in Iguazu Falls, Argentina. The topics of the
Conference include Fundamentals of Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibria,
Transport Properties, Surfaces and Interfaces, Quantum Calculations and
Molecular Simulations. Processing and Applications will focus on agrochemicals
and biomass, new oil and gas processing challenges, renewable energy, product
and process engineering, novel reaction and separation technology,
pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, biological systems, food processing, materials,
nanoscience and nanotechnology, and environment, sustainability and risk
management.

The funds will support young research workers (approximately 12) who would
otherwise not be able to attend, as well as presenters of invited lectures and
members of the international organizing committee (5 individuals). No request is
made for local expenses, meeting organization costs, or for non-US participants.
These conferences have provided excellent forums for fruitful discussions on
curriculum issues among faculty of the participating countries. In addition to
the personal contacts that the U.S. participants will make with people from the
other countries, it will be beneficial to U.S. interests to foster exchanges of
research and teaching ideas and of personnel, and establish research
collaborations between chemical engineers from the U.S. and those from the
emerging centers of expertise around the world. American participation is
essential for making contributions to the general knowledge base, for becoming
aware of the progress made by other parts of the globe, and for fostering
international collaborations. Significant efforts will be made to include both
young and underrepresented faculty in the group of U.S. participants. The
conferences especially encourage senior members of the profession to interact
with younger scientists and graduate students.