* 1321999
* University of Illinois I-Corps Sites Program: Enhancing technology commercialization at a world-class research institution
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Jed Taylor, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2017
* USD 299,982.00

This proposal addresses NSF?s call for universities to nurture students and/or
faculty who are engaged in projects having the potential to be transitioned into
the marketplace. I-Corps Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources,
networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to
transition their ideas, devices, processes or other intellectual activities into
the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is creating
a new I-Corps Site that will build upon their existing expertise, while filling
a gap that is critical in the commercialization and translation of university-
based research. This I-Corps Site will enable Illinois to broaden its innovation
services, update current entrepreneurial programming and reach additional
prospective and under-represented participants to create a robust and
diversified pipeline of entrepreneurial teams to enroll in the NSF I-Corps
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of these activities include a
wider network of students and faculty involved with technology development and
commercialization efforts. Students will be exposed to technology
entrepreneurship efforts as Entrepreneurial Leads, contributors, and by
attending targeted entrepreneurship curriculum. Faculty entrepreneurship will be
enhanced through team formation, business guidance, and financial support.
Under-represented groups will be especially encouraged to participate in I-Corps
Site and technology commercialization activities.