* 1321752
* Support of student travel to the EIPBN conference. To be held at the Gaylord Opryland Resort, Nashville, Tennessee, May 28-31, 2013.
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Henry Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

ECCS-1321752 Hank Smith, MIT Support of student travel to the EIPBN conference

This award will provide travel support to enable students to attend The 57th
International Conference on Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology and
Nanofabrication, 2013, to be held at the Gaylord Opryland Resort, Nashville,
Tennessee, May 28 to May 31, 2013.

Intellectual Merit: This is a major conference in the fields of nanofabrication,
electron and ion-beam lithographies, photon and imprint lithographies, particle-
beam optics, and forefront applications of nanofabrication. This travel aid will
enable students to present their research to a high-level international
scientific community. They will observe how scientists and engineers exchange
innovative ideas and other information, and they will hear first-hand
presentations of up-to-date research results in nanoscale science and
technology.

Broader Impacts: Learning how a technical conference serves as a venue for
conveying information to others is an important element of a graduate student?s
education. Also important is leaning how to present, in a cogent and
understandable way, the results of one?s research. The requested support will
help to accomplish these ends. At the conference, students will make important
personal contacts and learn of employment opportunities. At a special student
breakfast, the conference organizers will describe to the students optimal
techniques for presenting scientific information and how the conference program
is put together. The provision of support will greatly ease the burden on
students in finding funds needed to attend a conference, especially early in
their academic careers, when this lesson can be most formative.