* 1321102
* HCC: Small: Designing and Understanding Technology Mediated Reflection to Improve Well-Being
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Steve Whittaker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2018
* USD 519,548.00

This is a multidisciplinary research program combining medical informatics,
human-computer interaction and behavioral science exploring effective user-
centric technology mediated reflection (TMR) to promote psychological well-
being. It will design, develop and evaluate a radically new class of user-
centric TMR system, thereby creating methods that will have much wider
applications as well. People currently experience problems of memory and
compliance in carrying out TMR. However these problems are addressable by
computational intervention using mobile tools for user-centric TMR to capture
data about personal events and support reflection about emotional reactions to
those events. These mobile augmentation tools will overcome critical limitations
of unaided reflection, by being lightweight, user tailored and context-aware,
and they will support adaptive reminding about positive and negative events.
Novel visualizations should also improve people?s ability to infer general
patterns in emotional behavior in order to promote long-term behavior change.
Using predictions derived from prior social science, this research will test the
efficacy of TMR for improved well-being when users remind themselves about
positive events, adaptively deal with negative past experiences, and modify
long-term behavioral patterns in response to events. The research will then
contribute fundamental new scientific knowledge to the social and psychological
sciences, in part because collection of data about memory states during real
life experiences goes beyond what it is possible to measure within the confines
of academic laboratories. In addition, the project will develop techniques to
analyze how reminiscences about the same event change over time. This will allow
the development of new psychological and clinical models concerning the
relations between memory, emotions and well-being. A significant fraction of the
population experiences a major depressive episode at least once in their life,
and other problems such as anxiety are also common, yet many people respond
poorly to conventional forms of treatment, and the exact boundaries of these
problems are poorly defined. Effective TMR can address these pressing problems,
by providing new tools and an experimental platform that will enable the
rigorous testing of TMR interventions, addressing calls for disruptive
interventions in mental healthcare. It may be that one limitation of some
current forms of treatment is that the benefits do not transfer well from the
help-giver's office to the client's daily life, and mobile TMR may bridge that
gap. Diaries composed with mobile devices can also contribute to more formal
accounts of historical events, thereby facilitating the emergence of citizen
science in which ordinary users collaborate with each other scholars and social
scientists, to complete valuable projects and experience the enrichment of life-
long learning. This project will also train undergraduates and graduate students
in an interdisciplinary area of human computer interaction, medical informatics,
and psychology.