* 1321745
* Ecoclimate Teleconnections: Effects of a Shifting Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Abigail Swann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 06/30/2017
* USD 380,046.00

The goals of this project are to quantify the impact of ecosystem-climate, or
ecoclimate, teleconnections on regions remote to the original forcing and to
identify feedbacks associated with the change in ecosystem structure, function,
and productivity in those locations. Prior work has shown that an increase in
mid latitude forest cover can raise northern hemisphere temperature and has the
ability to shift the general circulation of the tropics and the location of
precipitation associated with the intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ). This
ecosystem-driven teleconnection links productivity in land regions remote to one
another through the circulation of the atmosphere.

Through an offline-coupling approach with both a global-scale circulation model
and a model of ecosystem dynamics, the first order impact of feedbacks
associated with changes in vegetation cover will be quantified. In particular
the impact of mid latitude tree cover on the location of the ITCZ will be
quantified and the resulting change in tropical forest productivity and
structure will be assessed. The impact of any changes in tropical forest
structure back onto the global climate system will also be examined.

The scientific questions that will be addressed in this project are the
following: Can large-scale changes in mid latitude tree cover destabilize
ecosystems in other parts of the world through atmospheric teleconnections? How
are these ecoclimate teleconnections communicated through the atmosphere? How
much change in mid latitude tree cover is needed to impact forests in the
tropics? Improved understanding of ecosystem-climate interactions has
substantial broader impacts.