* 1321432
* STTR Phase I:  Novel bioreactors for production of metabolically engineered heparin in Chinese hamster ovary cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Susan Sharfstein, Sepragen Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
combine a novel metabolically engineered Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell line
with a unique, high performance, continuous cell-culture bioreactor to
demonstrate the commercial viability of producing a bioengineered heparin from
CHO cells. This CHO cell line overexpresses critical enzymes in the heparin
biosynthesis pathway, resulting in increased levels of a product that is the
pharmacological equivalent to heparin. These cells will be grown in the
company's proprietary wicking matrix bioreactor that can potentially enable high
density, continuously producing cultures in a small footprint, and thus have a
multifold reduction in manufacturing cost of goods. The goal is to demonstrate
that this engineered CHO cell line can be grown for an extended duration in this
bioreactor while maintaining high productivity and product quality. This is
expected to be accomplished by optimizing various physical and chemical
parameters, developing a unique monitoring system, and continuously assessing
metabolic, productivity, and quality attributes associated with heparin
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of the proposed
research, if successful, will be to advance the development of a novel
bioreactor system, potentially with a multifold reduction in manufacturing cost
of making therapeutics, and the development of a bioengineered heparin, a
substantially safer version of a widely used therapeutic. Heparin is the most
widely used anticoagulant drug in modern medicine (~$7B) with &gt;100 tons of
heparin being produced annually. However, current production methods rely on
purification from animal tissues with known and documented deadly incidences of
contamination and disease. Achievement of these objectives will have a
substantial impact on human health by facilitating the introduction of novel
pharmaceuticals in a more cost-effective manner.