* 1321271
* CAREER:  Understanding Process-Induced Damage in Laser-Assisted Cell Direct Writing - Bridging Manufacturing Science and Biomedical Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Yong Huang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 09/30/2014
* USD 151,824.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
project is to elucidate the effects of process-induced thermomechanical loading
magnitude and duration on cell damage in laser-assisted living cell direct
writing. Using a laser-assisted living cell direct-write technology, this
research will 1) model the process-induced thermomechanical loading magnitude
and duration during cell droplet formation and landing processes; 2) model the
cell post-transfer viability by understanding the mechanistic correlation
between cell damage/viability and process-induced thermomechanical loading
magnitude and duration; and 3) calibrate and validate the mechanistic cell
viability model based on cell death measurements. The educational objective is
to promote engineering through biomedical manufacturing innovations. Key
education activities include providing outreach to high school students through
an e-museum, Machining the Body: Young Machinist, including a Young Investigator
Video series and developing and disseminating educational materials for high
education in biomedical manufacturing.

If successful, this study will contribute towards an understanding of the
dynamics of laser-assisted cell droplet formation and landing processes and the
effects of process-induced thermomechanical loading on cell damage/viability.
The resulting mechanistic cell viability model will elucidate an understanding
of process-induced cell damage caused by jet-based direct writing. Broader
impacts of this study are multifaceted. The safe and efficient implementation of
cell direct writing enables its wide application in both organ printing and
rapid prototyping of cell-based products. Society will benefit from these new
on-demand organ manufacturing and cell seeding-related health technologies, and
this study will foster research collaboration between manufacturing science and
biomedical research. The integration of education with biomedical manufacturing
research will attract underrepresented and minority students and promote
engineering to a broader population.