* 1321771
* SB6.0:   The 6th International Meeting on Synthetic Biology (July 9-11, 2013, Imperial College, London, UK)
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Holly Million, The BioBricks Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2014
* USD 19,900.00

The field of synthetic biology aims to utilize rapid developments in
biotechnology to engineer synthetic biological systems for useful purposes, and
in doing so, increases our understanding of the natural world. Researchers in
the field are working to produce living technologies that manipulate
information, fabricate materials, process chemicals, provide food, maintain
health, and produce energy. The Synthetic Biology conference series (SB6.0) is
the preeminent academic meeting in the field of Synthetic Biology and has hosted
over 2,200 attendees from 31 countries since its inception as SB1.0 in 2004. The
6th installment of the conference series (SB6.0) will be held July 9-11, 2013 on
the campus of Imperial College London, U.K. and will build on the successes of
previous meetings hosted at MIT (SB1.0), University of California, Berkeley
(SB2.0), Eidegenoesische Technische Hochschule (ETH), Zuerich (SB3.0), Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology (SB4.0), and Stanford University (SB5.0).
INTELLECTUAL MERIT Held over a three-day period in locations around the globe,
the SB6.0 Conferences brings together the world's leading researchers, students,
industry executives, and policy makers working to: (1) Design and build
biological parts, devices, and integrated systems; (2)Develop biotechnologies
and technical standards that enable such work; (3)Place this scientific and
engineering research within its current and future social context,including
biosafety/security, bioethics, education, and intellectual property. BROADER
IMPACT Held every 2 years, the SB6.0 Conferences are unprecedented opportunities
for the field's practitioners and supporters worldwide to: (1) share research
results; (2) make academic and industrial connections; (3) gain exposure and
feedback from the scientific and industrial community; and (4) openly discuss
the critical societal impacts of their work, as well as the policy and
governance issues that impact genomic research and development more broadly. The
conference organizers pay particular attention to balance in the choice of
organizers, speakers and participants. Early career scientists are particularly
encouraged to attend.