* 1321006
* CSR: Small: Proactive Methods in Handling Configuration Errors in Data Centers and Cloud Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Yuanyuan Zhou, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2017
* USD 329,320.00

Configuration errors (i.e., misconfiguration) are a major cause of system
failures according to several studies. For example, misconfiguration has caused
serious crashes and center-wide outages in a number of data centers and
commercial cloud infrastructures affecting millions of customers. In addition to
system down time, misconfiguration also wastes engineers' or administrators'
time in troubleshooting and corrections, leading to significant maintenance and
support costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although recent work on detecting
misconfiguration has improved the situation to some degree, the fundamental root
cause needs to be better addressed. Based on the insights gained from the PIs'
recent empirical study on 546 real world configuration errors in commercial and
open source systems, the intellectual merit of this project is to take a more
fundamental approach to addressing misconfiguration problems from the root cause
in a proactive, anticipatory way. This work has three objectives: (1) to improve
configuration design to make them less error-prone; (2) to harden software
systems to better tolerate and gracefully react to users' configuration errors;
and (3) to detect hard-to-check configuration issues such as compatibility and
cross-component parameter inconsistency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts include significantly reducing the amount of system downtime in data
centers, decreasing vendors' customer support cost for troubleshooting
configuration issues, and planned educational, outreach, and broadening
participation activities.