* 1321941
* Toward Building a Crystal Structure Prediction Framework
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Tonglei Li, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2014
* USD 126,078.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Crystal packing of organic molecules is poorly understood;
predicting likely crystal structures of a given compound is even more
challenging. This research project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry (SSMC) program of the Division of Materials Research (DMR), is to
study how organic molecules interact in the solid state so as to learn and build
up the fundamental understanding that will lead to viable solutions for crystal
structure prediction. In particular, the locality of intermolecular
interactions, both strength and directionality, in organic crystals will be
investigated within the framework of conceptual density functional theory by
utilizing such concepts as softness, Fukui function, and crystallization force.
Through calculation and analysis of electronic structures of molecules and their
respective crystal structures, the project will seek and establish the
underlying, inherent linkage between a molecule's structure and its interacting
characteristics with other molecules in crystals. The influence of a molecule's
conformation on its intermolecular spatial arrangement is further studied by
electronic calculations and crystallization experiments. Upon successful
completion of this research project, a methodological framework will be built
for advancing into practical tools to understand crystallization and to predict
crystal structures of organic compounds.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Fascination of organic crystals lies in the infinite
periodicity and intriguing complexity in the three-dimensional structure that is
interweaved by weak forces. Despite years of vigorous studies, the scientific
efforts to predict crystal structures have proved to be primitive, powerless in
most cases, and in the end, futile. This research project aims at bringing
advanced computational methods into the field and developing novel approaches
for predicting crystal structures that are built upon ingenious ways of
analyzing electronic structures of molecules and crystals. Moreover, the
research will shed light on fundamental mechanisms of crystal growth and offer
insights for designing new materials including pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals,
and nonlinear optical materials. The project will serve as an excellent
educational platform for undergraduate and graduate students to master their
problem-solving skills and become future leaders in the area of organic
materials.