* 1321636
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Rapid Response to Ongoing Tolbachik Eruption
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Pavel Izbekov, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2014
* USD 24,967.00

This RAPID award funds a prompt response to the ongoing, massive eruption of
Tolbachik volcano, central Kamchatka, Russia, which started with little warning
on November 27, 2012, after 36 years of quiescence. Within two days of the
eruption onset the lava flows had already traveled nearly 10 km, covering an
area of ~14 km2. The eruption has formed a series of cinder cones that feed lava
flows, which at the time of this writing extend for nearly 20 km over the barren
slopes of the volcano down into snow-covered forests. The investigators will
join an international team of volcanologists who are monitoring the ongoing
activity, and will focus on two important aspects of the eruption: (1)
interaction of lava with snow and ice, and (2) temporal variations of the
composition of erupted lavas and their crystal cargo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
of these topics are timely for improving our understanding of volcanic
eruptions. Gaining a more quantitative understanding of how lava flows interact
with snow and ice is critical for assessing hazards at snow and ice covered
volcanoes and for improving our ability to recognize ancient deposits formed by
lava-snow interactions. Few if any quantitative studies have been attempted in
the field to quantify heat transfer from lava to snow or ice; this requires
direct field measurements at the front of an active lava flow propagating
through the snow/ice-dominating environment. While these conditions are highly
ephemeral, they are now present at Tolbachik as the eruption began after much of
the surrounding landscape had been covered by seasonal snow, which has created a
unique opportunity to measure heat transfer between lava and snow/ice and
provide more accurate constraints for experimental and theoretical modeling of
their interaction. Having a better understanding of how lava flows rapidly melt
snow and ice is important for identifying hazardous areas around snow and ice-
covered volcanoes such as Mt. Rainier in the Cascades. Similarly, collection of
lava and ash samples during and immediately after their eruption is important
because: (i) their juvenile origin can be established unequivocally and (ii)
their time of eruption is known precisely. These characteristics are critical
for using a series of erupted products to observe compositional trends in the
eruptive sequence and to identify magma processes that triggered and currently
drive the eruption at Tolbachik. This RAPID award will allow sampling of the
eruptive products before they are buried by ash or later lava flows.