* 1321056
* EXP: Transforming World Language Education using Social Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* William Johnson, Alelo TLT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 549,957.00

This Cyberlearning Exploration Project explores the potential for social
robotics to transform foreign-language learning. The social robot being
developed in this project is designed to act as a language partner for students
learning a foreign language, in this case those learning Chinese. It augments
classroom instruction, providing for the learner a robot companion to converse
with. The hypothesis is that social robots can make interactions with language
speakers more exciting and more accessible, especially for less commonly taught
languages. The embodied robot is designed not only to converse with learners but
also to point and nod and gesture at particular people and objects, helping to
direct the attention of learners and interact socially with learners in ways
that a non-embodied simulation cannot. The PIs take a task-based approach to
language learning, helping students learn the language that goes with a variety
of real-world situations. The technological innovation is a synthesis of social
robots and social simulation; classroom language instruction is augmented by
robot interaction. In this Exploration project, robots are being used in
classrooms; as the price of such robots decrease, such robots could become
available for after-school, library, cafeteria, or even home or public
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together a leading developer of
simulation-based learning solutions for intercultural communication (Alelo,
Inc.) with a leading developer of lifelike intelligent robots (Hanson Robokind)
to create a prototype social robot for language learners (in this case those
learning Chinese) and to investigate the roles such robots might play in
language learning and the most effective ways of interacting with learners so as
to sustain their engagement in foreign-language conversation. The project meets
a critical need in this country for a workforce that can engage well in the
international marketplace. The particular focus in this project is on Mandarin
Chinese language and culture, but what is learned will be applicable to other
foreign languages as well.