* 1321479
* Engaging the Sedimentary Geology Community in EarthCube (Workshop)
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Marjorie Chan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 01/31/2016
* USD 99,947.00

A workshop is proposed to identify and articulate the cyberinfrastructure (CI)
needs and&lt;br/&gt;potential applications in the broad scientific domain
encompassing sedimentary geology. The&lt;br/&gt;effort is intended to build
consensus within the diverse sedimentary geology community (SGC)&lt;br/&gt;with
respect to the EarthCube effort. The SGC focuses on the processes that form,
shape, and&lt;br/&gt;affect Earth's sedimentary crust, and distribute key
resources such as hydrocarbons, coal, and&lt;br/&gt;water. The sedimentary
records studied by this community are the archives of Earth's
past&lt;br/&gt;surface processes, climates, oceans, and biosphere. The SGC
collects a great diversity of&lt;br/&gt;qualitative and quantitative data that
characterizes diverse attributes of sedimentary rocks at&lt;br/&gt;spatial
scales that span 13-orders of magnitude. Most data is based on physical samples;
some is&lt;br/&gt;continuous. Derivative products based on the data are
published, but the data itself are typically&lt;br/&gt;not archived or readily
available to other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The domain workshop will
focus on: 1) defining the current nature of SGC data and
workflows,&lt;br/&gt;including the challenges and impediments to sharing and
using that data; 2) establish what types&lt;br/&gt;of data, repositories,
software, and tools (analytical, modeling, and visualization) would
enable&lt;br/&gt;community-based, 'big science' collaborations within the SGC;
3) evaluate the potential&lt;br/&gt;importance of mining legacy data; 4)
identify examples of the kind of scientific challenges the&lt;br/&gt;SGC would
attack given an ideal CI; and 5) evaluate how EarthCube, if populated with the
type&lt;br/&gt;of data and tools articulated in the above bullets, would impact
the SGC's teaching. The overall&lt;br/&gt;product of the workshop will be a
report to NSF that defines the issues and challenges that must&lt;br/&gt;be met
for the integration of the SGC with EarthCube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sedimentary
rocks are the most abundant rock type on the surface of the Earth and are rich
in&lt;br/&gt;geologic data and history. The intellectual merit of the proposal
is that the summary outcomes&lt;br/&gt;will provide SGC guidance on the
priorities and use of sedimentary data to the EarthCube&lt;br/&gt;framework of
Earth systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader of impacts of the proposed
workshop are to integrate SGC with one of the most&lt;br/&gt;important
cyberinfrastructure initiatives to NSF integrating information and data across
the&lt;br/&gt;geosciences.