* 1321782
* Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic Tracking data (RAATD): International Crabeater and Weddell Seal Tracking Data Sets
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Daniel Costa, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Charles Amsler
* 02/28/2015
* USD 87,782.00

Identifying the basic habitat requirements of Antarctic predators is fundamental
to understanding how they will respond to the human-induced challenges of
commercial fisheries and climate change. This understanding can only be achieved
if the underlying linkages to physical processes are related to animal
movements. As part of the international Retrospective Analysis of Antarctic
Tracking Data (RAATD) organized by the SCAR Expert Group of Birds and Marine
Mammals, this research will collate and synthesize tracking data from crabeater
seals, Lobodon carcinophagus, and Weddell seals, Leptonychotes weddelli. These
data will be combined with all available data from the Southern Ocean that has
been collected by researchers from Norway, United Kingdom, Germany, Australia
and the USA. These data will be analyzed using a common analytical approach and
synthesized into a synoptic view of these two species across the Southern Ocean.
The diving and movement patterns will be examined for each species. As well, the
total home range and core habitat utilization patterns for each species and
region will be determined. This study will develop global habitat maps for each
species based on physical and biological attributes of their "hot-spots" and
then overlay all the species specific maps to identify multi-species areas of
ecological significance. Broader impacts include support and training for a
postdoctoral scholar, the production of a publicly available database and the
participation in an international data synthesis effort.