* 1321536
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Microfluidic Technology for Discovery of Affinity Binders
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Balaji Rao, Isthmus Biosciences
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technical Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the potential for developing a novel affinity binding reagent screening
technology. Synthetic affinity binding reagents can improve on immunoglobulin-
based antibodies. For example, synthetic affinity binding reagents are much
smaller, far more stable, less costly to develop, and more soluble than
immunoglobulin-based antibodies. Moreover, synthetic affinity binding reagents
can be created in vitro (no vertebrate animal research is required). Typical
screening technologies require immobilizing a purified antigen target (the
display component), and physically connecting the affinity binder genotype and
phenotype. These requirements can limit the effectiveness of the screen. In
contrast, this project will develop a novel proprietary technology that screens
for affinity binders in solution using microfluidic in vitro
compartmentalization and a homogeneous assay. The research will result a system
that can discover, within a relatively short time, tens to hundreds of affinity
binders that have genuine utility to label, identify, capture, stabilize,
crystallize, and quantify specific biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be new
affinity binding reagents for life science research, diagnostics, and
biopharmaceutical applications. Research antibodies have dominated the Life
Sciences Research market for many years (approximately $1.6 billion in sales
worldwide) and include applications such as immunoassays (e.g., ELISA),
immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis, and lateral flow assays. However,
immunoglobulins are challenging and time-consuming to create and purify, because
they require animal hosts. Most affinity binding reagents are highly stable
(possibly room temperature storage), uniform, specific, and reproducible. In
addition, these affinity reagents will be useful for reversibly capturing native
biomolecules or biomolecular complexes, capturing native proteins for mass
spectrometric immunoassays, and as chaperones for determining protein crystal
structures. These affinity binders will become a very important component of In
Vitro Diagnostic (IVD) immunoassays ($10 billion worldwide market), therapeutic
drug monitoring, and multiplexed immunoassays in point-of-care devices. The most
prominent and profitable market for the affinity binders will be
biopharmaceuticals ($50 billion antibody worldwide market). Investment in
monoclonal antibodies has resulted in 5 blockbuster and dozens of other valuable
therapeutics. Investment in synthetic affinity binders will expand this
potential.