* 1321115
* NeTS: Small: Beating the Odds in Traffic Measurements/Detection with Optimal Online Learning and Adaptive Policies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Chen-Nee Chuah, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

A key tool for understanding and engineering Internet backbone is the analysis
of packet traces. However, given the increasing backbone speed towards 100Gbps,
it is prohibitive to monitor individual flows at all times. This project
develops optimal online learning and adaptation strategies for accurate traffic
sampling, inference, and detection under hard resource constraints (e.g.,
limited CPU or memory at routers) and dynamic network/traffic conditions. Based
on theories and techniques in multi-arm bandits, group testing, and compressed
sensing, optimal or near-optimal solutions will be developed by exploiting the
unique structures of the specific measurement application under study.
Challenges addressed include learning from observations with heavy-tailed
distributions and long-range dependencies, coping with sparse and/or imperfect
observations, and distributed learning strategies that involve multiple monitors
and decision points.

If successful, this research will provide fundamental design principles for a
flexible traffic measurement infrastructure under the software-defined
networking (SDN) paradigm. Reconfigurable measurements based on a learning
process can be realized in commodity router/switches using SDN APIs such as
OpenFlow, leading to potential development of new services. As this project
examines problems at the intersection of networking and stochastic
learning/optimization, it provides interdisciplinary training to graduate and
undergraduate students in a team environment.