* 1321480
* STTR Phase I:  A novel combinatorial technology for engineering product tolerance traits in yeast
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Helge Zieler, Primordial Genetics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 269,906.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
engineer butanol tolerance in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae using a novel
combinatorial genetic technology designed to enable yield enhancements in
microbial production organisms. Microbial production of renewable fuels and
chemicals is rapidly expanding. However, toxic products or by-products and
engrained metabolic fluxes often limit yields. Companies engaged in this space
are actively searching for solutions. Novel genetic technologies are required
that can help overcome these limitations. The proposed technology is designed as
a new way to reprogram a cell and confer useful phenotypes. Synthetic genes are
constructed using proprietary combinatorial strategies, limiting the ability of
organisms to generate compensatory genetic or epigenetic changes. High-
complexity expression libraries of these genes are transferred into the organism
followed by selection or screening for desirable characteristics. The proposed
experiments will demonstrate the feasibility of the technology in a screen for
tolerance of butanol - a second-generation biofuel and important chemical
precursor - using Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a yeast commonly used for alcohol
production. The genes discovered during this work will be of direct interest to
companies employing yeast for fuel and chemical production.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
the enablement of improvements in microbes used for production of chemicals,
fuels, pharmaceuticals, foods, and food ingredients. There is increasingly
widespread use of microbial organisms (bacteria, fungi, yeasts, cyanobacteria,
and algae) to produce these materials. Fuels and chemicals produced from such
renewable sources generate roughly $75B in annual product sales, and this
industry is experiencing rapid expansion. However, improving the yield and
efficiency of production organisms is limited by the highly complex regulatory
systems that govern yield, resistance, metabolism and growth. Current genetic
methods are capable only of incremental improvements. Dramatic increases in
yield and efficiency will require harnessing the massive combinatorial potential
of genomes - the material on which natural evolution works. The proposed
technology has multiple advantages over current approaches, especially regarding
the probability of achieving a phenotype of interest, novelty of the active
genes, transferability of the phenotype, speed and cost. This technology
promises dramatically more effective creation of microbes with improved
characteristics in multiple industries. It also will enable breakthroughs in our
understanding of how important traits relating to growth, yield and productivity
are encoded in biological systems.