* 1321442
* STTR Phase I:  Overcoming Metabolic Pathway Limitations through De Novo Pathway Design for Terpenoid Biosynthesis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Ajikumar Parayil Kumaran, Manus Biosynthesis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (STTR) Phase I project aims to develop a
novel, high flux terpenoid precursor pathway by circumventing limitations of the
bacterial methyl erythritol-phosphate (MEP) pathway for the renewable production
of monoterpenoids. Monoterpenoids are natural chemical precursors for several
consumer products, and many are produced via highly polluting chemical
processes. In the proposed project the plan is to sidestep some of the MEP
pathway limitations by designing de novo metabolic pathways. The
designed/predicted enzymes will be characterized individually and assembled into
a pathway. Further, multivariate-modular metabolic engineering (MMME) approaches
will be used to assemble the upstream and downstream pathways to optimize the
metabolic flux for the overproduction at commercially viable levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project,
if successful, will be to develop a microbial monoterpenoid production platform
from renewable sugars that will retain and develop sustainable manufacturing of
monoterpenoid-derived products in the US. By this strategy, terpenoids can be
made at much higher productivities than the native bacterial MEP pathway. While
the immediate focus is on the $1B+ monoterpene/derivative market, this approach
will benefit US manufacturing of all terpenoids, in total a $5B+ market.
Overall, this project will provide a new sustainable production route for these
natural chemicals.