* 1321931
* Reaction Dynamics of Vibrationally Excited Molecules in Gases and Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Martin Zanni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 02/28/2017
* USD 509,601.00

This project is a unified study of reactions in liquids and gases with the goal
of comparing the influence of vibrational excitation on bimolecular reactions in
the two settings and of understanding the role played by the surroundings. In
gases, bimolecular reactions can be promoted and controlled using laser pulses
to generate a reactive radical, to excite a reactant vibrationally, and to
detect the reaction products. The same conceptual approach, using different
technology, will be applied in liquids. Gas-phase studies rely on relatively
high spectral resolution lasers to prepare and probe individual quantum states
of the reactants and products. Because of the frequent encounters in liquids,
studies in solution need short time resolution, with the consequence that the
spectral resolution of the laser pulses is poorer. Nonetheless, it is possible
to excite and probe individual vibrations in liquids by a judicious choice of
time and spectral resolution in the excitation and interrogation steps. This
project will use bromine in vibrational-mode selective single collision
reactions and compare gas-phase reactions with those in solution. The high time
resolution in the solution-phase experiments will allow the direct observation
of the evolution of a photolytically generated bromine atom as it forms
complexes and reacts with vibrationally excited solvent molecules. Single
collision studies of the same reactions in a molecular beam will provide a point
of comparison by observing the influence of vibrational excitation without the
complication of the surrounding solvent. The fundamental science in this project
will provide valuable experience and skills to graduate students, as well as
opportunities designed to integrate research, teaching, and learning at the
University of Wisconsin/Madison. The principal investigator will participate in
education and policy related activities, and reach out to beginning scientists
about the research enterprise.