* 1321493
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Real-Time Modeling System for Heliospheric Space Weather Forecasting
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2019
* Lan Jian, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 03/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

This grant is for partial support of a project selected and funded under the
2012 NASA-NSF partnership for Space Weather Modeling Collaborations. It is a
collaborative effort, led by George Mason University and with participation also
from University of Maryland and University of California-Berkeley and with
further collaboration also with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The objective
is to bring together multiple mature physics-based modules to develop an
improved integrated real-time modeling system for heliospheric space weather
research and forecasting. It builds on an existing capability that combines a
numerical MHD model for the heliosphere, an empirical model for the background
solar wind, and a semi-analytic model for the near-Sun disturbances. Ignoring
the specifics of a magnetic eruption process at the Sun, this practical approach
uses observations of the resulting coronal mass ejection (CME) to determine its
geometric and kinematic representation and launches a corresponding hydrodynamic
cloud into the heliospheric computational domain, where it evolves as it
interacts with the background solar wind. Improvements to the existing model
suite include simulation of the evolving background solar wind, launching more
realistic geometric shapes of CMEs into the model, enabling ensemble
forecasting, and performing on-the-fly evaluation of the simulated scenarios. In
addition, new modules will be included to model outstanding phenomena and
effects. The most critical of these are: the prediction of solar energetic
particles (SEPs) events caused by solar flares (impulsive events) and
interplanetary shocks (gradual events) at planets and spacecraft, and the
prediction of southward interplanetary magnetic field events at Earth. Finally,
the project will develop additional model outputs, such as synthetic imaging for
direct comparison with remote observations, and will enhance the flexibility of
the system to allow for the inclusion of model components and initializations
developed by others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When completed, the enhanced and
improved heliospheric model suite will be delivered to the Community Coordinated
Modeling Center (CCMC) for access by the scientific community and eventual
transition to use for operational space weather forecasting. The results of this
effort will help provide accurate predictions for the arrival of CME and SEP
events at Earth and other locations in the solar system, which is a high
priority national space weather need. Educational components of the project
include the participation of postdocs and graduate students.