* 1321053
* RI: Small: Deep Learning: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Pierre Baldi, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 457,999.00

The ability to learn is essential to the survival and robustness of biological
systems. There is also growing evidence that learning is essential to build
robust artificial intelligent systems and solve complex problems in many
application domains. However, solutions to complex problems ranging from
recognizing faces to understanding speech, cannot be implemented in a single
step. Instead they require multiple processing stages, for instance to extract
increasingly more abstract and refined features from an input image.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus computers and brains are both faced with the problem
of deep learning --- how to simultaneously optimize the parameters of a
hierarchy of processing stages in order to solve complex tasks and display
intelligent behavior. In the past few years there has been remarkable progress
in computer science to address the deep learning problem, and deep learning
methods now claim state-of-the-art performance in several application areas. The
next generation of machine learning methods holds the promise to not only
approach human performance in tasks previously impossible for computers, but
also to exceed it. However, our theoretical understanding of deep learning
remains limited and there are several important areas where deep learning has
not yet been applied systematically. This project addresses these challenges and
opportunities by furthering formal understanding of the theory and algorithms
behind deep learning, and by applying deep learning methods to new problems in
the life sciences. Because deep learning can be used in almost any domain, the
results have the potential for broadly impacting science, engineering, and
technology across multiple areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
educational and outreach components, ranging from courses to virtual 3D world
interactions, for undergraduate and graduate students at UCI, as well as
talented students from local high schools, and underrepresented minority
students from local colleges. Scientific results, data, and software resulting
from the project will be disseminated in scientific journals and over the
web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three main thrusts: theory,
algorithms, and applications. From a theoretical standpoint, the project
develops better mathematical understanding of deep architectures, including
stacks of autoencoder networks, and their properties. These theoretical results
will inform the design of deep-learning architectures. From an algorithmic
standpoint, the project investigates, formally and through simulations, several
deep learning algorithms, including the dropout algorithm and the PI's deep
targets algorithm. From an application standpoint, the project uses the new
theoretical and algorithmic knowledge in application to the life sciences, for
instance for protein structure prediction, and in predicting chemical reactions.
Advancing the state-of-the-art for any one of these thrusts will have a
significant impact in computer science, artificial intelligence, statistical
machine learning, and the corresponding application field.