* 1321469
* Completing the Mesoamerican Online Ethnobotanical Database (MOED)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Jon Hageman de la Plaza, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 50,638.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among indigenous populations of Central America, over 70%
of the human diet consists of plants. Plants are also preferred sources of fuel,
medicine, and construction material. Existing evidence suggests this pattern has
been consistent for at least 1600 years. One might think that the archaeological
identification of ancient seeds, fruits, flowers, and wood (macroremains) is
robustly developed and has revealed a much about ancient daily life. The current
reality, however, is that with the exception of a handful of species, a great
deal more is known about the variety of animals in the ancient Maya diet than
about plants. The list of plant species and genera represented by the
archaeological recovery of seeds, fruits, flowers, and wood numbers between 150
and 200 - this is in contrast to over 1500 species used and recognized by Maya
populations studied by cultural anthropologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
largest obstacle to understanding ancient plant use in Latin America is a lack
of comprehensive reference and plant identification resources, particularly
online databases. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Jon Hageman
will, with his colleagues, complete a Mesoamerican Online Ethnobotanical
Database (MOED), an online ethnobotanical reference for over 1400 plant species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed project lies
primarily in compiling data currently published in a variety of venues, many of
which are out of print or prohibitively expensive to obtain, and making these
data available to a broad audience of researchers. Ethnobotanical information
and scaled color images of plants, wood, seeds, fruits, flowers for over 1400
plant species currently do not exist in one published source. The MOED database
will remove the largest barrier to the study of ancient plant use by others in
Central America and adjacent areas where the habitats of various plant species
extend. This may also assist in facilitating more comprehensive studies of diet
as well as help enable an understanding of ancient plant use in relatively
unexplored topics such as ancient medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of this project include making available resources of the Field Museum of
Natural History's Searle Herbarium (known for its New World tropical plant
collections) to traditionally underserved scholars, particularly those in
smaller US institutions located far from large herbaria and in Latin America.
This easily-accessed resource goes beyond the publication of an expensive book -
such volumes with color photos and lengthy printed descriptions are out of reach
for many individuals and institutions. Instead, this resource will be available
to anyone with internet access, anywhere in the world. Plant identification can
be taught to undergraduate and graduate students in classrooms using this
resource. Archaeobotanists can compare images from MOED to their recovered
macroremains in the field lab. Underserved scholars will have a bounty of
information to help train new generations of students and foster novel research
in the area. This database will serve scholars and train students in
archaeology, cultural anthropology, and botany.