* 1321361
* Acquisition of a Laser Ablation System in Support of (U-Th)/He and U/Pb Multidating of Accessory Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kip Hodges, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 216,000.00

In recent years, geoscientists have increasingly applied the methods of
geochronology - the determination of mineral crystallization ages - and
thermochronology - the determination of cooling ages - to minerals in
sedimentary rocks with the aim of fingerprinting the bedrock sources of these
minerals and the cooling histories of those sources. There is great scientific
advantage in performing both geochronologic and thermochronologic studies on the
same mineral grains, but conventional analytical techniques seldom enable such
'multidating' studies. This grant permits the acquisition of a new ultraviolet
laser ablation instrument that, when integrated with existing instruments in the
Noble Gas Geochronology and Geochemistry Laboratories at Arizona State
University, will establish the first fully automated analytical system for
zircon (U-Th)/He thermochronology and U/Pb
geochronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts from this project include
opportunities for geology graduate and undergraduate students from outside the
ASU community to perform analyses on the system as guest researchers. In
addition, the integration of components to build the system will serve as a case
study for an on-line 'analytical systems engineering' subject in ASU's B.S.
degree program in Exploration Systems Design.