* 1321443
* Expanding Collaborative Opportunities for Research in Archaeo-Geomatics and Archaeo-Geophysics at CAST/AIL
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kenneth Kvamme, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 249,986.00

With National Science Foundation support the University of Arkansas' Center for
Advanced Spatial Technologies (CAST) and the Archaeo-Imaging Laboratory (AIL)
will provide next-generation 3D measurement, analysis and remote sensing
technologies to archaeological research projects around the world. The project
will focus on three primary areas of CAST and AIL's established expertise: 1)
site-based archaeo-geophysics and mapping, 2) three-dimensional scanning,
photogrammetry, visualization, and morphometrics; and 3) aerial and satellite
remote sensing, regional survey, and mapping. The growing availability and
sophistication of digital technologies, particularly in the geospatial domain,
has begun to profoundly affect how archaeologists and other scholars work. The
things archaeologists study - from artifacts to sites to landscapes - almost
always have a spatial component, and space is viewed as one of the central
dimensions of archeological study. The capabilities of geospatial technologies
to enhance discovery and interpretation of these features not only offers new
data, but creates entirely novel means of engaging with the archaeological
record. For example, high-resolution satellite imagery makes it possible to
locate and map archaeological features across vast expanses of terrain, enabling
investigations to cross modern cultural and political boundaries and explore
ancient polities at scales never before possible. Subsurface geophysical
investigations allow buried archaeological remains to be documented revealing
complete, detailed plans of entire communities offering new insights into
community organization and past built environments. Laser scanning and
photogrammetric modeling techniques present new ways of recording artifacts and
architecture in three dimensions and enable morphometric analysis at multiple
scales - from small objects to large sites.

Currently, relatively few individuals or even institutions have the combination
of equipment, technical skills, and archaeological acumen needed to integrate
geomatics effectively into archeological research. While an obvious approach to
overcoming this limitation is to partner multiple individuals with complementary
knowledge, it does not guarantee success. There is an extensive record of missed
opportunities where a technical specialist partnered with an archeological
research project but there was a lack of understanding of the archaeological
requirements by the technical specialist and/or a lack of experience with the
technology by the archaeologist. Over the past two decades, CAST) and AIL, with
earlier support from NSF and others, have steadily invested in the development
of capacities (equipment and software, analytical practices, staff, and
expertise) in geospatial technologies and their deployment in archaeological
research through collaborations between geomatics specialists and
archaeologists. Today, CAST and AIL are global leaders in geospatial research
across a variety of disciplines and applications, and are widely regarded as
among the best places for the application of these technologies in archaeology.
The expansion of the application of these methods to the study of the past that
will be made possible by this project will have a significant effect on the
field. The project will be lead by CAST Director Dr. Jackson Cothren and Co-PIs
- Drs. Jesse Casana, Dave Fredrick, Ken Kvamme and Fred Limp.