* 1321120
* CIF: Small: Wireless Network Security: Building on Erasures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Suhas Diggavi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2017
* USD 497,415.00

This project aims to advance our fundamental understanding of secrecy over
arbitrary wireless networks. Over the last decade we have significantly deepened
our fundamental understanding on how to send information over wireless networks,
while our understanding on how to securely send this information has not reached
the same depth as yet. This project aims to develop a unifying theory that
enhances wireless secrecy by exploiting wireless properties such as: the
existence of feedback (today part of all wireless standards); the possibility of
selecting and using multiple network communication paths; the smart use of
wireless jamming and the wireless channel variability and unpredictability. We
enable this by "building on erasures:" through appropriate coding and smart
wireless jamming, we convert (Gaussian) wireless networks to erasure networks.
We then develop protocols that use interaction and feedback to enable provable
security against active and passive adversaries, even if they are
computationally unbounded. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also promotes the
training of research engineers: we will integrate the research into the
curriculum via the creation of novel coursework combining the underlying
concepts in wireless communication, network coding/protocols, and information
theory. The research in this project, if successful, will contribute to the
fundamental sciences of information theoretic network security and secure
network coding. Given our increasing dependence on wireless devices as a portal
for socio-economic activities, wireless security will have broad implications in
mobile commerce.