* 1321776
* On-site Reuse of Graywater and Stormwater: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Jeffrey Jacobs, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2015
* USD 100,000.00

1321776 (Jacobs). The Water Science and Technology Board of the National
Research Council (NRC) is undertaking a study that will analyze the risks,
costs, and benefits of on-site water reuse of stormwater and graywater and
approaches needed for its safe use. The NRC study will be carried out by a
committee of approximately 12 volunteer experts. The committee will hold
approximately four meetings to receive briefings, gather information, deliberate
critical issues, and write its report. Parts of most meetings of the committee
will be held in open session with non-governmental organizations, relevant
federal, state, and local agencies, other experts, and other interested parties
in order to engage a broad group of individuals from the water management and
policy community. The on-site reuse of stormwater captured through rainwater
collection systems or graywater (wastewater generated from showers, washbasin,
and laundry) can significantly reduce overall domestic water needs. On-site
graywater and stormwater reuse systems can also produce benefits to the
environment, such as reduced stormwater runoff or reduced energy use associated
with water delivery and treatment. However, there are concerns and a significant
shortage of scientific information about the associated life-cycle costs, energy
savings, and potential risks to human health that accompany various
applications. Additionally, there are concerns about the effects of extensive
graywater reuse on the environment and on existing wastewater infrastructure.
The study will analyze the risks, costs, and benefits of onsite water reuse of
stormwater and graywater and approaches needed for its safe use, thereby
providing important guidance to state and local governments and federal agencies
on this topic. The committee?s report should produce a comprehensive reference
of value to federal and state public health, natural resource, and environmental
agencies; U.S. Congress; science community?academic and agency; environmental
nongovernmental organizations; water managers; individuals? and entrepreneurs
and consultants. Parts of most meetings of the committee will be held in open
session with non-governmental organizations, relevant federal, state, and local
agencies, other experts, and other interested parties in order to engage a broad
group of individuals from the water management and policy.