* 1321954
* Constraining the Secular Compositional Evolution of the Upper Continental Crust Using Ancient Glacial Deposits and Creation of an Upper Crustal Reference Suite
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Roberta Rudnick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2015
* USD 226,004.00

The Earth is unique amongst the planets of our Solar System in having a crust of
silica-rich, low-density rock that forms our continents. It is upon this
platform that our species evolved and it provides the essential resources needed
to maintain our society. Understanding the processes by which the continental
crust formed is one of the grand questions in geology. A clue to the origin of
continental crust is its average composition. The crust's composition also
factors prominently in determining the amount of heat producing elements that
remained in the Earth's mantle after formation of the crust; these elements
provide the energy needed to drive plate tectonics. Within the continental
crust, most of the heat-producing elements are concentrated in the upper 10 km.
Hence, determining the composition of the upper crust, and associated
uncertainties, is crucial in understanding continental crust formation and
evolution, as well as the energy balance of the Earth's
interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks insights into the composition
of the upper continental crust through analysis of glacial sedimentary deposits
from around the world. These deposits date from 2.9 to 0.3 Ga and provide
insight into how the average composition of the Earth's upper crust has changed
with time. The changing composition can, in turn, be used to infer the processes
that formed the crust, as well as the changing conditions prevalent at the
Earth's surface. The fine-grained matrix of the tillites will be analyzed for a
comprehensive suite of major and trace elements and isotopic compositions. The
effects of weathering and of changes in atmospheric composition on crustal
composition will be assessed. These samples will form the basis of an upper
crustal reference suite that will be made available to the community for further
characterization of the upper continental crust through time.