* 1321474
* The Coronal Global Evolutionary Model (CGEM)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* George Fisher, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2019
* USD 1,395,787.00

This grant is for partial support of a project selected and funded under the
2012 NASA-NSF partnership for Space Weather Modeling Collaborations. The project
is a collaborative effort, led by UC Berkeley and with participation also from
Stanford University and Lockheed-Martin. The objective is to develop a data-
driven Coronal Global Evolution Model (CGEM) to use observations of the evolving
photospheric magnetic field to drive a time-dependent model of the coronal
magnetic field, with the aims of both understanding how solar eruptive events
work and predicting such events. The model's Earth-facing hemisphere will be
driven using electric fields derived from the observed evolution of photospheric
line-of-sight magnetic fields and electric currents. Far-side data inputs will
be from an existing flux transport code, combined with helioseismological far-
side observations of new active regions, with empirical parameterizations of
orientation and flux. Because this model includes large-scale coronal electric
currents, it is a substantial improvement over existing real-time global coronal
models, which assume potential fields. Data products available from the model
include: 1) the evolving photospheric electric field, Poynting flux, and
helicity flux; 2) estimates of coronal free energy and non-potential geometry
and topology; 3) initial and time-dependent boundary conditions for MHD modeling
of active regions; and 4) time-dependent boundary conditions and flux tube
expansion factors for MHD and empirical solar wind models.

When completed, the CGEM Model will be delivered to the Community Coordinated
Modeling Center (CCMC) for global runs on demand at moderate resolution for use
by the general science community. Modules used to derive surface electric fields
from magnetic evolution will be run continuously at lower resolution at the
Stanford/Lockheed Joint Science Operations Center (JSOC) for general use by the
scientific community. As the JSOC serves as the main repository and distribution
node for data from the Solar Dynamics Observatory satellite mission, CGEM output
will be readily available to members of the solar-physics and space-weather
communities as a tool for both scientific research and space weather
applications. The build-up and release of magnetic free energy in the corona is
one the most important manifestations of solar eruptive activity, and the model
will improve the forecast of these events, which is highly relevant to National
space weather goals.