* 1321511
* Neotectonic History of the Eastern California Shear Zone based on U-Pb/U-Th Dating of Syntectonic Precipitates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Katharine Maher, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2015
* USD 139,874.00

The likelihood of an earthquake to occur at a specific place and time depends on
a number of parameters that are difficult to constrain. For example, short-term
estimates of strain rates that exceed longer-term fault slip rates are one
parameter that we consider to increase the risk for near-future release of
accumulating strain. At many active plate boundaries, there is a general
agreement between modern and the long-term geological constraints on crustal
deformation rates. However, in the Eastern California Shear Zone (ECSZ),
southern California, the geological estimations are half of those suggested by
the geodetic data. Notwithstanding, the long-term geological record of fault-
slip rates is based on a collection of palaeoseismological data from the past
50,000 years, which compared to the approximately 20 Ma of fault activity in the
ECSZ can only offer a very partial understanding of long-term faulting
processes. This study will combine microstructural analysis, isotopic and
geochemical constraints, and advanced in situ absolute (SHRIMP-RG) dating
techniques to study the timing and formation mechanisms of syn-tectonic opal
precipitates from the ECSZ, with the aim of developing a new approach for
directly dating fault activity, and to ultimately establish a long-term record
of fault activity. Specifically, this project will seek to determine (1) the
fluid source and formation mechanisms of fault-related opals; (2) the timing of
opal precipitation and the temporal association with brittle deformation events
(e.g., syn-tectonic/post-tectonic). Outcomes of this project include the
development of a new approach for (1) direct dating of paleo-earthquakes using
in situ SHRIMP-RG Th/U and U-Pb dating techniques applied to fault-related
material; (2) dating fault activity from initiation (millions of years) to
present time. Important anticipated outcomes from this case study on the Mojave
Desert segment of the ECSZ include long-term constraints on the timing of
initiation and history of fault activity that will help to resolve discrepancies
between estimated long- and short-term strain accumulation
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the recent and devastating earthquakes, there
is a growing public concern that high-magnitude earthquakes are more frequent
today than in the past, along with a demand for more accurate prediction. Thus,
a major goal of this project is to provide up-to-date palaeoseismological data
to both the scientific community and the general public. This project will
develop a new high-spatial resolution dating techniques for fault related
materials that will then be available to the scientific community through two
shared analytical facilities. Data from this project will be contributed to the
U.S. Geological Survey paleoseismic database.