* 1321489
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Overcoming Barriers to Diffusion and Adoption of Sustainable and Resilient Building Materials in Coastal Areas of Southern Mexico
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Ann Johnson, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2016
* USD 143,138.00

1321464 (Biles) and 1321489 (Matta). The objective of this EAGER research
project is to: (1) understand social, cultural and economic barriers to the
diffusion and adoption of locally developed sustainable and resilient building
technologies for residential dwellings in the coastal region of the State of
Yucat√°n, Mexico; and (2) examine how local and transnational networks for the
conduct and dissemination of research can enable overcoming those barriers. The
study area is ideal to implement the proposed bottom-up approach study barriers
to the diffusion and adoption of "indigenous" technologies since: it is
especially prone to the effects and escalating risk of natural hazards (e.g.,
high winds) and global climate change; local collaborating materials scientists
have studied and prototyped two candidate building materials to be evaluated,
one for new construction (wood-plastic composites) and one for retrofit/repair
(low-cost cement-polymer mortar); and, local stakeholders have yet to embrace
innovations. The project will investigate barriers to the diffusion and adoption
of building technologies through the lens of recent conceptual and analytical
social science perspectives, including social network analysis and science, and
technology and society (STS) studies. Historically, the strongest technological,
cultural and aspirational connections have run from the Global South to the
Global North. Recently, transportation and communication innovations have made
South-South interaction more viable and vibrant. Social science research,
however, has not assessed the impact of more intense, multi-scalar South-South
networks on the diffusion and adoption of new building technologies. By testing
the proposed research hypothesis, new knowledge will be created to understand
how to integrate social considerations influencing technology diffusion and
adoption into the process of conceiving, researching and developing new building
technologies, and shepherding them from the laboratory to the field. The project
will provide opportunities for a diverse team of researchers (1 minority, 2
women, and 2 early-career) and students to participate in substantive
international research. With respect to societal benefits, research will
contribute to the mitigation of the impacts of disasters in the study area, with
potential application to coastal regions of the US and elsewhere. The project
will also promote bottom-up collaboration as an alternative means of improving
quality of life and represents the first building block for a transnational
network for the dissemination of knowledge in coastal regions of the Global
South. This award is co-funded by the Global Venture Fund (GVF) of NSF's Office
of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the CBET/ENG Environmental
Sustainability program.