* 1321958
* DC: Small: Collaborative Research: DARE: Declarative and Scalable Recovery
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Haryadi Gunawi, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 235,663.00

One dominant characteristic of today's large-scale computing
systems&lt;br/&gt;is the prevalence of large storage clusters. Storage clusters
at the&lt;br/&gt;scale of hundreds or thousands of commodity machines
are&lt;br/&gt;increasingly being deployed. At companies like Amazon, Google,
Yahoo,&lt;br/&gt;and others, thousands of nodes are managed as a single
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As large clusters have brought many benefits, they
also bring a new&lt;br/&gt;challenge: a growing number and frequency of failures
that must be&lt;br/&gt;managed. Bits, sectors, disks, machines, racks, and many
other&lt;br/&gt;components fail. With millions of servers and hundreds of
data&lt;br/&gt;centers, there are millions of opportunities for these components
to&lt;br/&gt;fail. Failing to deal with failures will directly impact
the&lt;br/&gt;reliability and availability of data and
jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, we still hear data-loss stories even
recently. For&lt;br/&gt;example, in March 2009, Facebook lost millions of photos
due to&lt;br/&gt;simultaneous disk failures that "should" rarely happen at the
same&lt;br/&gt;time (but it happened); in July 2009, a large bank was fined a
record&lt;br/&gt;total of 3 millions pounds after losing data on thousands of
its&lt;br/&gt;customers; more recently, in October 2009, T-Mobile Sidekick,
which&lt;br/&gt;uses Microsoft's cloud service, also lost its customer data.
These&lt;br/&gt;incidents have shown that existing large-scale storage systems
are&lt;br/&gt;still fragile to failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the
challenges of large-scale recovery, the goal of this&lt;br/&gt;project is to:
(1) seek the fundamental problems of recovery in&lt;br/&gt;today's scalable
world of computing, (2) improve the reliability,&lt;br/&gt;performance, and
scalability of existing large-scale recovery, and (3)&lt;br/&gt;explore formally
grounded languages to empower rigorous specification&lt;br/&gt;of recovery
properties and behaviors. Our vision is to build systems&lt;br/&gt;that "DARE to
fail": systems that deliberately fail themselves,&lt;br/&gt;exercise recovery
routinely, and enable easy and correct deployment of&lt;br/&gt;new recovery
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For more information, please visit this
website:&lt;br/&gt;http://boom.cs.berkeley.edu/dare/