* 1321506
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a Computational Tool for Modeling, Simulation, and Design of Next Generation Discrete Droplet Microfluidic Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Raghunathan Rengasamy, SYSENG LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a simulation and design software for droplet-based microfluidic devices.
Designing microfluidic platforms for biological and biochemistry applications is
a laborious process involving several experimental trials. Scaling up a basic
design to a parallelized device is another challenge. As a result, computational
tools that can hasten the discovery process are essential. The proposed work is
on the development of a rational design approach that will comprehensively
access the vast design space for developing massively parallelized microfluidic
architectures. The intellectual merits of the work are related to: (i) the
development of a combined linear algebra and graph theory approach to simulate
the behavior of large-scale droplet-based microfluidic platforms in a
computationally tractable manner, and (ii) research on a specialized genetic
algorithm (GA) approach, which will integrate with the simulation module for the
design of customized droplet-based microfluidic platforms based on any desired
objective. The first phase of the proposal will focus on the development and
demonstration of a microfluidic platform for a specific combinatorial sequencing
problem. A deliverable for this phase is a software system that would receive
inputs from the user and deliver a CAD device design. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be the
development of several novel design concepts for microfluidic lab-on-a-chip
devices that provide the ability to control chemicals at a molecular level. This
will profoundly enhance our understanding of the fundamental workings of these
devices. Precise control of chemical composition and concentration will lead to
discovery of materials that help in protein crystallization and stem cell
growth. This will be a valuable resource for pharmaceutical (multibillion dollar
industry) companies for drug screening and combinatorial protein designs.
Additionally, these platforms also can be designed for biological applications
such as preferential separation of cancer cells from healthy cells. Initial
customers for this software will be universities and research labs. As the
technology successfully negotiates the validation cycle, the software either may
be licensed directly to customers or used in a design consultancy mode with
industries for specific design projects. The grand vision of the project is the
development of an automated system that will synthesize droplet-based
microfluidic platforms using either 3D printing or Xurography starting from just
a design concept of a user.