* 1321391
* Numerical Methods for Transmission Eigenvalues
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Jiguang Sun, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 71,211.00

The transmission eigenvalue problem has attracted many researchers in the
scattering and inverse scattering communities recently. Although simply stated,
the problem is not covered by any standard theory of partial differential
equations. Numerical treatment of transmission eigenvalues is very limited to
date. Effective numerical methods will enhance the understanding of the problem
and provide tools for mathematicians and engineers to compute transmission
eigenvalues. This proposal aims at robust numerical methods for transmission
eigenvalues for the Helmholtz equation and the Maxwell's equations. In
particular, the following research topics will be carried out. 1) Iterative
methods for the Helmholtz equation. Based on a fourth order reformulation, an
associated generalized eigenvalue problem will be solved by the finite element
method. Then iterative methods will be applied to search roots of a related
algebraic function which turn out to be the transmission eigenvalues. 2)
Continuous finite element method for the Maxwell's equations. The transmission
eigenvalue problem of the Maxwell's equations will be written in a suitable weak
form first. Then the curl conforming edge elements will be used to compute the
transmission eigenvalues. 3) Iterative methods for the anisotropic Maxwell's
equations. This approach is again based on a forth order reformulation of the
transmission eigenvalue problem of the anisotropic Maxwell's equations. An
associated generalized Maxwell's eigenvalue problem will be used to set up an
algebraic equation whose roots are the transmission eigenvalues. Then iterative
methods can be applied to search the roots of the algebraic equation. It is an
extension of the iterative methods for the Helmholtz equation. However, the case
for the Maxwell's equations is much more difficult and require additional
technical treatment.

The proposed research will be a pioneer numerical study on transmission
eigenvalues for the Helmholtz equation and the Maxwell's equations. The results
are important for the development of mathematical theory for transmission
eigenvalues and can be used to compare various estimates in inverse scattering
theory. The proposed research will provide mathematicians and engineers reliable
tools to compute transmission eigenvalues. It will lead to new methods for
studying the inverse scattering problems such as inverse electromagnetic
scattering problem for anisotropic media. Since transmission eigenvalues can be
used to estimate material properties of the scattering object, the proposed
research has potential usage in non-destructive testing, geophysical
applications, medical imaging, etc. For example, it is possible to detect the
presence of cavities in the dielectric from the location of the transmission
eigenvalues. The numerical results will be disseminated to mathematician for
analytical study of transmission eigenvalues and engineers for detection and
reconstruction of unknown objects. In addition, successful accomplishment of the
proposed project will enhance the research capacity of the university and
provide graduate students valuable research opportunities.