* 1321617
* Oceanographic Instrumentation CY 2013
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Thomas Glennon, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2014
* USD 35,212.00

A request is made to fund new and replacement instrumentation on the R/V
Endeavor, a 185' general purpose research vessel operated by the University of
Rhode Island as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
(UNOLS) research fleet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R/V Endeavor is a well-
equipped, intermediate sized research vessel that is owned by NSF and operated
under a Charter Party Agreement by the University of Rhode Island. The vessel
was built in 1976 and refit in 1993. She can carry up to 17 scientists on
cruises up to 30 days in duration. The vessel supports projects from all
disciplines of oceanography. In 2012, R/V Endurance completed 215 days at sea.
NSF funded projects accounted for 123 days or 57% of the total sailing schedule.
In 2013, R/V Endeavor is scheduled for 205 days with NSF days accounting for 54%
(111 days) of the total sailing schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic
instrumentation requested in this proposal
includes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MC-800 Multicorer
$37,515&lt;br/&gt;Upgrade of CTD Connectors and Cables $35,212&lt;br/&gt;
$72,727&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under criterion two
of the Proposal Guidelines. They provide infrastructure support for scientists
to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-
funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate
review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance
and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from
any US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.