* 1321519
* Deep-crustal Reactive Fluid Flow in the Mesozoic White-Inyo Magmatic Arc, California
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Peter Nabelek, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2017
* USD 226,599.00

Water, besides being obviously present on the Earth?s surface, is also an
integral part of the deep continental crust. In the crust, water is bound-up
structurally in minerals and occurs in pore spaces of rocks, even many
kilometers below the Earth's surface. During tectonic events, such as plate
subductions and continental collisions, water is released from minerals during
metamorphic reactions, and together with pore water can serve as a medium for
heat transport and can promote weakening of rocks that are undergoing
deformation. In this project, the Principal Investigator and students will study
fluid flow that has occurred during the Mesozoic era in the White-Inyo Range of
eastern California. During this era, the White-Inyo Range was buried deep within
the western margin of North American crust that was experiencing metamorphism,
magmatism, and volcanism as the oceanic Farallon tectonic plate was subducting
beneath the continent. Geologic evidence in the range suggests that deep-crustal
fluids promoted the emplacement of granitic plutons, by enhancing deformation of
their host rocks, and were responsible for hydrothermal alteration of the crust
within the range. The PI and students will study the Mesozoic hydrothermal
system by analyzing the thermodynamic equilibrium relationships among preserved
metamorphic minerals in collected rocks, by analyzing fluid-induced shifts in
the ratios of carbon and oxygen in carbonate minerals, and by computer
simulations. It is expected that the key factor that influenced the geometry of
fluid flow and potential advective heat transport was variable permeability of
rocks within the White-Inyo range. The expected outcome of the project will be a
better understanding of the influence that deep-crustal fluids have on the
geologic development of continental margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The White-Inyo
Range is an excellent example of an exhumed continental magmatic arc. Magmatism
in the arc occurred during two time periods, 180-165 Ma and 102-83 Ma ago, and
it overlapped in time with magmatism in the Sierra Nevada Range. Previous
structural and metamorphic studies have established that the plutons intruded a
regional anticline that contains greenschist-facies shales, limestones,
calcareous argillites, and sandstones. Intrusion of the plutons generated
heterogeneous hydrodynamic systems, with heterogeneous fluid flow stemming from
variable permeabilities and foliations of the rocks. In the project, mineral
equilibria, metamorphic reactions, and C and O isotope ratios in carbonate
minerals will be used to determine which rocks experienced syn-metamorphic fluid
flow. These petrologic and geochemical portions of the project will be the
foundation for computer simulations of reactive fluid flow, on both contact-
aureole and regional scales, within the magmatic arc. The computer simulations
will couple fluid flow with heat transport and metamorphic reactions, and they
will include provisions for latent heat of crystallization of melts, heats of
metamorphic reactions, and for fluids generated by the reactions and plutons.
The project will have an impact on understanding conductive and advective heat
transport within magmatic arcs and on the role that fluids have on promoting
deformation and recrystallization of rocks in the deep continental crust.