* 1321596
* The Gordon Research Conference on Multidrug Efflux in Ventura, VA, March 17-22, 2013
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Helen Zgurskaya, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 04/30/2014
* USD 20,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference on Multidrug Efflux that will take place in
Ventura, California in March 17-22, 2013 focuses on multi-drug systems in
bacteria and man to allow cross-disciplinary interaction. There is very good
evidence that efflux transporters contribute to some of the earliest resistance
responses in bacteria. Patients have died from antibiotic resistant organisms at
some of our most advanced hospital centers in the United States, and it is
important to identify approaches to prevent the onset of antibiotic resistance.
Furthermore, it is increasingly clear that multidrug transporters are important
in human beings, for example in the blood brain barrier, in protecting the brain
from toxins but also in preventing therapeutic agents from accessing the brain.
This creates a form of "sanctuary drug resistance" that allows the development
of brain metastasis in patients with cancer, and allows HIV infection to persist
in the CNS, and reduces the efficacy of anti-seizure medication and psychiatric
medication. Efflux systems play important roles in pharmacology in determining
the rate of drug excretion from the body. Efflux transporters may also confer
resistance to cancer cells in patients, and approaches to circumvent this have
been studied for many years. At the center of all of these physical systems are
efflux pumps. The description of regulation of resistance mechanisms by
fundamental physical processes and a role of polyspecific transporters in
Alzheimer's disease will be discussed for the first time. Various strategies of
pharmacological modulation of function of MDR transporters to improve clinical
outcomes will be discussed at large. This powerful combination of topics will
facilitate greater understanding and collaboration between these thematic
topics. The conference is interdisciplinary in its nature and brings together
Biology, Physics, Chemistry and Pharmacology disciplines. Traditionally a large
number of graduate students and post-doctoral fellows participate in this
meeting. Well-known scientists and their post-docs and students from diverse
background have been invited. The selection of participants is primarily based
on scientific excellence, but to balance gender and equally qualified
minorities, people from diverse backgrounds and scientists with disabilities
will receive preference. The goal of 2013 Multidrug Efflux Systems GRC is to
bring together scientists from diverse fields to interact, learn from each
other, identify new approaches