* 1321375
* STTR Phase I:  Site specific delivery of cancer stem cells inhibitory peptides
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Drazen Raucher, Thermally Targeted Therapeutics, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 229,881.00

This Small Business Research (SBIR) Phase I project tests the application of a
thermally responsive biopolymer, simultaneously to deliver breast cancer therapy
and to prevent disease recurrence. Encouraging responses to multimodal
treatments (surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy) are too often followed by more
aggressive and resistant breast cancers, attributed to cancer stem cell survival
and proliferation, as regulated by the oncogenic role of Notch signaling. This
Phase 1 project seeks: (1) to achieve targeted reduction of breast tumor stem
cells during treatment through externally triggered delivery of potent
chemotherapeutics via Notch signaling pathway inhibitory peptides that are
optimized to selectively accumulate within breast tumors, (2) to evaluate in an
established, in vivo mouse model of breast cancer this approach?s capacity to
reduce breast tumors and spare healthy tissue, and (3) to identify, in a
subpopulation of treated animals, the presence or absence of tumor recurrence
over 5 months. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad, commercial impact of
this project lies in its technological potential to deliver a therapeutic
peptide that targets and inhibits cancer stem cells, thereby boosting prevention
of and lowering likelihood for cancer recurrence. Success in the proposed
experiments would further indicate that this technology can be modified to
achieve the targeted delivery of other highly specific anti-cancer drug that are
designed to target any solid tumor, increasing treatment specificity and
efficacy, while reducing cytotoxicity in normal tissues. It would further
indicate that the technology can be modified for other diseases requiring
targeted delivery of therapeutics. Immediately, however, cancer recurrences
arising from triple-negative breast cancer are a rapidly increasing clinical
problem. They are associated with poor prognosis and limited systemic
therapeutic options, diminish gains achieved through current standard of breast
cancer care and weigh heavily on patients in remission and strategies of their
treatment team. Success in the proposed in vivo studies of the biopolymer could
lead to clinical translation, commercialization, and most importantly greater
effectiveness in initial cancer regimens, with greatly lessened likelihood of
recurrence, of broad clinical and health care significance and impact.