* 1321777
* Investigation of Metamorphic Timescales
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Frank Spear, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2016
* USD 264,700.00

The theory of Plate Tectonics provides an explanation for the formation of
mountain chains as the crumpling of the Earth's crust where two plates collide.
Based on the apparent longevity of mountain belts, the slow progress of plate
motions, and calculations of the time scales required to heat the crust to the
temperatures recorded by metamorphic rocks in mountain belts, it has generally
been assumed that mountain building processes take many tens to hundreds of
millions of years. Preliminary studies of the principal investigator, however,
have revealed that the entire cycle of heating and cooling for at least some
metamorphic rocks occurred over no more than a few million years and perhaps in
as little as a few hundred thousand years. These time scales are one to two
orders of magnitude faster than previously believed and are on the same order as
human evolutionary timescales (a few million years at most). That is not to
imply that mountains appear out of flat lands in a few generations of humans,
but it does present the radically new proposition that mountain belt evolution
may have affected human migratory pathways and associated climate
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to test this new hypothesis
by conducting a comprehensive study of the timescales of metamorphic cycling in
the classic metamorphic terrane of central New England, USA. The study will
involve extensive sample collection along strike from northern Vermont to
southern Connecticut, analysis of the samples by standard petrographic
techniques (optical microscopy, microstructural analysis, elemental mapping
using the electron microprobe, cathodoluminescence imaging, trace element
analysis, reaction history analysis, thermobarometry, and pressure-temperature
path calculation. The novel aspect of this research is to apply newly developed
transport models to samples that display clear evidence for diffusional
modification of chemical zoning. The theoretical justification for this approach
is the fact that diffusion is thermally activated, so most diffusion occurs
within 25-50 degrees of the maximum temperature experienced by a sample. Indeed,
the largest uncertainty stems from uncertainty in this maximum temperature and
new thermodynamic models are being developed to better constrain this value. The
initial application of this new method by the PI revealed the short time scale
described above and provided the impetus for this proposal. Cursory examination
of samples already in the PIs collection indicate that samples appropriate for
this type of analysis are readily available, and several extensions of the
method to other minerals and diffusion couples will be explored. The goal of
this specific proposal is to constrain the temperature-time history of the
entire metamorphic belt of central New England. The insights gained from this
study will provide justification for its application in other terranes which
will ultimately provide greater understanding and appreciation for the true
dynamic nature of the Earth.