* 1321614
* Information Sharing and Coordination Challenges in Financial Market Regulation: A research agenda setting workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2013
* David McCaffrey, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2013
* USD 80,269.00

This 1.5 day invitation-only workshop will be held in Washington DC in early
2013, and will address challenges in information sharing and coordination in
financial market regulation. Topics to be addressed include the challenges
created through the volume and complexity of the data as well as the dynamic
relationship between markets, financial instruments, technologies, and
institutions involved in the markets and their regulatory processes. Therefore,
computational scientists as well as information and social scientists will be
included among the participants, and participants from industry, academia, and
government will be invited. A workshop report will be published a s a result of
this workshop.

The 1.5 day invitation-only workshop, to be held in Washington DC in early 2013,
will address challenges in information sharing and coordination in financial
market regulation. Topics to be addressed include the challenges created through
the volume and complexity of the data as well as the dynamic relationship
between markets, financial instruments, technologies, and institutions involved
in the market and the regulatory process. Experts in computational science,
information science, and social science will be invited from industry, academia,
and government. The multi-disciplinary approach will increase the likelihood of
impact on future regulatory practices.