* 1321413
* RAPID: Spatial scale of flowering and seed production in Posidonia oceanica - the influence of clonal structure
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Peter Raimondi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2014
* USD 85,530.00

The sea grass Posidonia oceanica, a clonal species, is the dominant habitat
forming, foundation species in coastal areas of the Mediterranean Sea. This
species also provides additional ecosystem services through its role in
stabilizing shorelines and immense primary productivity. Over the last century
and particularly over the last 50 years, P. oceanica meadows have been
contracting, in large part due to anthropogenic factors, and there has been
considerable effort directed at restoration of degraded meadows. These efforts
have almost always involved the transplantation of rhizomes, under the
assumption that expansion and local replenishment of meadows would occur via
vegetative growth. These efforts have met with little success. The PIs challenge
the prevailing assumption that sexual reproduction for this clonal species is
largely unimportant to population demography and rescue. They will take
advantage of a recent and on-going mass flowering of P. oceanica at several
sites in the northern Mediterranean. Preliminary data from one of the sites show
spatial patterns of flowering within the sea grass communities. If these
patterns are related to clones, identified through genetic analysis, that
knowledge could be of great help in conserving and restoring local populations
of this species. It would also shed light on a fundamental question about the
relative functioning of sexual and asexual reproductive modes in a long-lived
species. Flowering events such as the ones now taking place are both rare and
unpredictable, making this an unusually good opportunity for this project.

Broader Impacts: This work began as a student project under the direction of the
PIs, and the two female undergraduate students involved in the initial project
will play a primary role in the research described in this proposal, under
appropriate supervision and with new training in molecular techniques. Results
will provide new insights that could be very useful in conservation and
restoration biology.