* 1321261
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Peptide Hydrogel for 3D Cell Culture
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Xiuzhi Sun, PepGel,LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2015
* USD 269,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to use a
newly discovered peptide (h9e) hydrogel technology to provide an affordable and
easy-to-use 3D cell culture system with high throughput screen and accurate in
vivo representative. To bridge the fundamental understanding of cellular
characteristics and the extensive complexity of tissue and organs, hydrogel is
the most promising material for 3D cell culture. Most of the existing hydrogel
materials are limited under the physiological conditions, complex operating
steps for cell encapsulation, difficulties for cell recovery from culture
scaffold and high production cost. The objectives of this project are to 1)
develop desirable h9e-medium hydrogel for cancer, normal and stem cell culture
and 2) reduce hydrogel production cost. The success of this project will provide
a superior 3D cell culture system with convenient cell encapsulation and
recovery properties. Standard user-friendly protocols and successful examples of
different cell lines growing in this system will be built. The optimal
procedures of h9e chemical synthesis will be delivered for large scale synthesis
with lower production cost. Furthermore, the proposed works will provide new
insight about how drug discovery and tissue regenerative development be achieved
based on an in vitro 3D cell culture system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be to provide
an advanced life science tool for cell/tissue culture industry with over $6.0
billion global market. Simplification of operating process of 3D cell culture
and reduction of hydrogel synthesis cost will greatly advance this technology to
be used routinely for both academic and industry. Drug discovery and
regenerative medicine development will be benefited from this high throughput
screening and better in vivo representative cell culture system and extent to
affect the pharmaceuticals, biotechnology and life sciences industries, which
possess over $1,001.5 billion global market. Furthermore, the injectable
capability of h9e hydrogel system will introduce many potential biomedical
applications such as drug delivery, wounds healing, which are beyond the
proposed 3D cell culture. The proposed approach will be broadly disseminated
through international meetings, peer-reviewed journals, company website, and
other outreach activities. Fundamental knowledge derived from this proposed
technology will bridge the gap between cellular information and in vivo system
and benefit all-level students, scientific community and entire society. The
more accurate data derived from this tool will reduce the research use of animal
models, which will relief the extensive criticism within our society.