* 1321065
* HCC: Small: How Do-It-Yourself Makers are Reinventing Production, Labor, and Innovation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Garnet Hertz, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2015
* USD 340,402.00

The contemporary landscape of information technology production is one that has
been profoundly influenced by the emergence of so-called "maker culture" in the
1960s and 1970s. From Mac OS X to Android, from TiVo DVRs to Linksys network
appliances, from Amazon.com to Google Chrome, the technology landscape is full
of products that depend upon open source and similar alternative models of
production. Society currently finds itself in the middle of a new maker movement
that both harkens back to the earlier model and also departs from it in
significant ways. It is rooted in a growing network of "makerspaces" that
expands ideas and practices of the Web generation into hardware and
manufacturing. Makerspaces are cooperative studios where people develop new
approaches to technology design based on the open sharing of software code and
hardware designs through the use of technology such as computer controlled laser
cutters, 3-D printers, and microcontroller kits. Makerspaces are places where
new models of innovation are explored, where values of openness and
participation are re-assessed, and where new relationships between people and
technology are forged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand these phenomena, this
project will conduct ethnographic research at four makerspaces, studying them
from a socio-technical perspective. The goal of the project is to understand the
relationship between cultural and material practices in the maker movement.
Accordingly, the focus is on the daily practices in makerspaces, with particular
attention to how they experiment with models of social organization, distributed
collaboration, and peer production. Specific research sites have been chosen to
highlight key questions. Two are located in the United States, in centers of
information technology (IT) innovation and production (New York and San
Francisco); two are located in China, at key sites for the development of new
models of commercial development (in Shenzhen, a major Chinese production hub,
and in Shanghai, a center for the Chinese creative and IT industry). Through
ethnographic investigation, the project will examine the questions of how DIY
(Do-It-Yourself) making as a practice, and makerspaces as physical sites,
contribute to the development of new models of technical, economic, and social
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within a broad cultural and sociopolitical
context, this research will study peer production, DIY and open source making,
models of innovation in action, and the material production of IT work. This
exploration will help us to understand non-professional expertise and
alternative forms of technical knowledge, distributed collaboration, and inter-
cultural exchange of ideas and artifacts. This study complements previously
published investigations of peer production by focusing on the effect of
physical sites on social organization and open source production. The project
provides a concrete, ethnographic foundation for emerging questions of
materiality in human-computer interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
As sites of DIY production, makerspaces provide an important interface between
technological production and the everyday world. At the same time, they may also
represent important sites for rethinking contemporary processes of technological
and commercial innovation. This research will help to assess and understand
these possibilities, support educational developments in this area (such as
makerspace infrastructures within schools), explore alternative forms of small-
scale commercial production, incentivize participation, and develop intellectual
property. To the extent that makerspaces embody a set of broader cultural values
about relationships between people, technologies, and the innovation cycle, this
project will provide empirical and conceptual material to support social
processes around these questions. As a large-scale public practice, DIY
production provides an important forum for connecting academic-based and
citizen-based models of knowledge production, and the opportunity for outreach
into communities in which scientific and technical work is part of their
identity.