* 1321343
* ESCAPE: Equitable Science Curriculum Integrating Arts in Public Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2020
* Kathie Nielsen, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2020
* USD 6,438,103.00

The Equitable Science Curriculum for integrating Arts in Public Education
(ESCAPE) addresses a profound problem: science learning deficits among the
growing population of elementary students who are non-native English speakers.
Focusing on six high-need Southern California school districts, ESCAPE targets
grade 3-5 English Language Learners (ELLs) in developing the academic language
needed to understand scientific concepts. To address learning challenges posed
by difficult scientific vocabulary, the project integrates the arts' more
concrete strategies to illustrate the sciences' more abstract concepts,
exploiting similarities between these disciplines' shared basis in crosscutting
concepts like pattern, cause/effect, scale, proportion, and quantity. The grade
3-5 focus is crucial because comprehension at this level is pivotal to future
achievement. Led by University of California-Irvine STEM faculty (with support
from UCI's CalTeach preservice science teacher development program), the
partnership includes teachers and administrators from the Orange County
Department of Education and six school districts, WestEd educational
consultants, and the Segerstrom Center for the Arts. ESCAPE expects to increase:
1) teacher content and pedagogical knowledge in Earth, Physical, and Life
Science; 2) integration of arts to boost ELL learning; and 3) student
achievement on science and language development tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
four years, each of 150 teachers receives 220 hours of team-based professional
development in using science kits and illustrating science concepts through the
arts. Program effectiveness is measured using a random assignment design.
Principals in each of the six districts volunteer their schools for the project;
within each district schools are randomly assigned to treatment or control
conditions. Program effects on students' and teachers' science knowledge and
achievement are measured by pre- and post-tests for students and teachers. The
goal of the research is to measure the effect of the intervention on teachers'
science content and pedagogical knowledge, as well as the effect on student
science achievement. Causal mechanisms are investigated, including how school
and teacher characteristics modify the effects as well as differential effects
on ELLs and native English speakers, and the mechanisms underlying these
differential effects. The quantitative analyses is based on multilevel
regression models, with students nested in classrooms (teachers) that are nested
in schools, and accounting for a host of control variables. These methods
provide unbiased estimates of program effects. Qualitative data include teacher
implementation logs, feedback forms, and focus
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ESCAPE aims to provide sustainable teacher
professional development that increases teachers' science content and
pedagogical knowledge, while overcoming impediments to ELLs' STEM learning. Over
the project's five years, 150 teachers will teach ~21,000 students, and ~180
CalTeach preservice teachers will be trained. Among the project's products is an
ELL-accessible curriculum for Earth, Physical, and Life Science in grades 3-5
and a video-based online system for training teachers (providing a university
Certificate in Teaching Science through the Arts), which will be deployed and
tested with CalTeach pre-service teachers and teachers in Southern California
school districts. This will assist in the national dissemination of this model
for improving teacher and student achievement.