* 1321164
* Nets: Small: Mapping Internet Backbone as an Underlay for Improved Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Mehmet Gunes, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2017
* USD 319,999.00

As the largest man-made complex network, the Internet grows with no central
authority. Thousands of small and medium size Autonomous Systems connect
individuals, businesses, universities, and agencies while focusing on optimizing
their own communication efficiency and economic objectives. Each network is
built by operators with different technical expertise and range a from small
local organization network to a large transcontinental backbone. This integrated
research and education plan aims to develop an Internet Topology Mapping System
that will provide an underlay for improved communications in various application
domains. The project attempts to provide significant improvements at multiple
levels of Internet topology measurements and transforms the resulting
measurement data into useful information for modeling and extracting knowledge
from the Internet topology. This project: (i) builds upon novel ideas in
approaching the challenges in large-scale topology data handling to capture
Internet characteristics and dynamics, (ii) provides valuable longitudinal
Internet topology measurements and a customizable graph indexing tool for large
scale graph databases, (iii) integrates complex network theories to understand
and suggest ways to improve the Internet backbone, and (iv) closely integrates
K-12, college, and graduate education into its research activities.

Intellectual Merit: The motivation of the project is to develop a comprehensive
system that will capture the Internet topology at fine granularity and
periodically provide snapshots of the Internet backbone. The mapping system will
then be utilized to investigate topological characteristics of the Internet and
provide an underlay for applications to optimize their communications. Compared
to the existing Internet topology measurement platforms, the system will (i)
build Internet topology graphs with higher accuracy as the system integrates
several mechanisms to efficiently handle large-scale measurement data; (ii) work
at higher level of granularity by providing backbone topology maps at link
layer; (iii) periodically release annotated network topologies in addition to
the raw measurement data so that the community can utilize them in their
experiments and optimize network communications; (iv) help in understanding
Internet topology dynamics and providing network enhancements; and (v) provide a
graph indexing tool to process and analyze large-scale networks.

Broader Impacts: Understanding the topological characteristics of the Internet
is an important issue for various communities including the government, academia
and industry. Network research community depends on such Internet mapping
systems to understand characteristics of the Internet so that better protocols
and services are developed. Moreover, new network paradigms such as cloud farms
and content distribution networks require knowledge of the underlying networks.
The mapping system will help these communities to conduct topography analysis
and study large-scale characteristics of the Internet. The project integrates
research to all levels of education including science projects, seminars, and
summer camps for K-12 students and curriculum development and mentorship of
college and graduate students. The services developed within the project will be
available to researchers and practitioners. Similarly, the developed tools,
data, and course material will be available to public via open-source
distribution.