* 1321557
* Conference: 20th Annual Southeastern Regional Yeast Meeting to be held March 8-10, 2013 at the University of Alabama at Birmingham
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Robert van Waardenburg, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2014
* USD 4,800.00

Intellectual Merit: The 20th Annual Southeastern Regional Yeast Meeting (SERYM)
will be held on the campus of University of Alabama at Birmingham from March
8-10, 2013. This annual meeting provides a unique opportunity for yeast
researchers from states in the Southeastern region of the U.S. to come together
to share their preliminary research findings and discuss new research tools and
emerging technologies. As model organisms, yeasts are ideal for the study of
complex molecular, cellular, and biochemical processes. Researchers studying
these simple eukaryotes have made significant contributions in areas as diverse
as DNA damage/repair, RNA processing, cell cycle progression, chromosome
segregation and organelle biogenesis/ maintenance. The meeting has been
organized to encourage student participation in both platform and poster
presentations, provide student participants with timely evaluations of their
performance, and provide students with opportunities for one-on-one scientific
interactions with senior scientists in attendance. The 2013 meeting will feature
a full schedule of poster and oral presentation by predominantly student and
post-doctoral trainees and a keynote lecture by a leader in the field, Randy
Schekman (University of California-Berkeley).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The SERYM 2013 conference brings together scientists studying basic
biological processes in fungi and thus provides a collaborative forum for the
exchange of research results, ideas and technical expertise. A key strength of
this meeting is the opportunity for both undergraduate and graduate students to
present their research in platform and/or poster formats. More than half of the
participants are students or postdoctoral trainees; these groups generally
present 60% of the platform talks and 88% of the poster presentations. These
presentations will be evaluated by assigned judges, awards will be presented to
the top two oral and poster presentation and all trainees will receive their
judging sheets to provide valuable feedback. To increase participation of
undergraduate and graduate students from groups that are underrepresented in the
sciences, who have never attended this meeting and who have financial need, 16
travel awards will be made to help defray meeting costs. The regional nature of
this meeting provides opportunities for students to discuss their research work
with leading scientists (often for the first time), laying the foundation for
future scientific development and collaborations. The SERYM meeting exposes
students to recent advances in the fields of molecular and cell biology from
studies using yeast and thus provides a stimulating and rewarding educational
experience.