* 1321242
* Reinvigorating Elementary Science through a Partnership with CA Teachers (RESPeCT):Sustainable research-based professional development with teacher leaders in a high-needs district
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Kathleen Roth, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2020
* USD 7,659,637.00

The Reinvigorating Elementary Science through Partnership with California
Teachers (RESPeCT) project is a partnership-driven effort based on mutual trust
and a shared vision among Pomona Unified School District (PUSD), California
State Polytechnic University, Pomona (CPP) as Core Partners, and the non-profit
Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS) as a Supporting Partner. The RESPeCT
project is developing, implementing, and studying an innovative and sustainable
solution to critical problems of national importance--the unacceptable number of
K-6 students who are failing to develop a rudimentary understanding of science,
and the clear and persistent achievement gaps in students' understanding of
science. The RESPeCT project builds on and puts into practice a successful
videocase-based, analysis-of-practice professional development approach, in
combination with a leadership development component, for Kindergarten through
sixth grade teachers in a high-needs district. Over the five year life of the
project, RESPeCT is developing a cadre of 42 K-6 Teacher Leaders, with support
from CPP science and mathematics faculty, and these Teacher Leaders will sustain
and lead future RESPeCT professional development efforts to reach all K-6
teachers in PUSD, supporting the teaching of challenging science content for all
students. The RESPeCT Project directly benefits 168 teachers (30% of PUSD
elementary teachers) and over 7,500 K-6 students and is transforming the way
science is taught and learned in PUSD. Ultimately, all 511 elementary PUSD
teachers and their students will benefit from the RESPeCT project. PUSD is
designing a fiscal plan to continue and sustain the RESPeCT PD program and
partnerships with CPP faculty far beyond the life of the project. The RESPeCT
research team employs a rigorous research design, including a control group of
teachers, to examine the impact of the RESPeCT professional development on PUSD
students, teachers (including Teacher Leaders) and CPP faculty. RESPeCT is an
Implementation project in the Current Issues Related to STEM Content focal
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major contribution of the RESPeCT project is the
development of videocases and shared curriculum materials aligned to the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS) that integrate selected Common Core State
Standards (CCSS) from Mathematics and English language arts (ELA) to empower
teachers to teach science while relieving pressures to focus solely on
mathematics and ELA. The development of fourteen modules related to life,
physical, and earth and space science, concentrated within two cross-cutting
concepts (energy &amp; matter and stability &amp; change) from the NGSS and
incorporating mathematical and ELA standards is a major component of this
project. The materials will be available to districts and teachers across the
country. In addition, the RESPeCT project includes professional development for
university faculty in leading elementary teacher learning communities. Insights
into teaching and learning gained by university faculty is helping science,
mathematics, and education faculty reform courses for science and mathematics
majors and preservice teachers. RESPeCT serves as a national NSF-MSP model for
broad-based collaborations that transform science teaching and learning. The
project has special relevance for motivating and supporting teachers who serve
students from underrepresented groups.