* 1321411
* EAGER: Virtual Arctic Archeological Repositories and the Democratization of Science: The Alaska Peninsula Project
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Herbert Maschner, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/29/2016
* USD 299,676.00

This project is an Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) to apply
the technology developed through the Virtual Zooarchaeology of the Arctic
Project, PI Herb Maschner, to artifact collections as a pilot project for
developing a Virtual Repository for Arctic Archaeology. The PI accurately argues
that access to collections, especially archaeological collections that have
distributed ownership and are often stored in remote locations, is one of the
primary barriers to broad, comparative studies in the north. The NSF Virtual
Zooarchaeology of the Arctic Project (VZAP) provides an exceptional model for
using 3D virtualization and online analysis tools to solve this key problem for
northern research, but an EAGER project is proposed because many of the
intricacies of providing the means for on-screen analysis need to be discovered,
perfected, and implemented before this will work for archaeological and
ethnographic collections. The construction of a Virtual Repository of Arctic
Archaeology, using the Lower Alaska Peninsula and Sanak Islands Project as a
test study, is will create a model for the implementation of a full virtual
museum collection. The project will put the entire NSF funded Alaska Peninsula
collections online in a searchable 2D and 3D analytical infrastructure to create
easy access and analysis by bringing these collections to northern scholars and
the world. Timing is critical, the PI will complete this project in the context
of preparing these collections for return to the Museum of the North and Native
Corporations who are the actual owners of much of the materials.