* 1321406
* Conference: Post-transcriptional   Gene Regulation in Plants to be held July 25-26, 2013 in Providence, RI Following the American Society of Plant Biology Meeting
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Anireddy Reddy, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2014
* USD 8,000.00

Intellectual Merit: A satellite meeting on "Post-transcriptional Gene Regulation
in Plants" will be held on July 25 and 26th at the Rhode Island Convention
Center, Providence, Rhode Island, following the American Society of Plant
Biology meeting. The Program Committee of the ASPB has approved this meeting.
Regulation of gene expression at the posttranscriptional level has taken center
stage in recent years. This field is growing at a rapid pace with many new
researchers. Many novel experimental and computational tools are being developed
to address the extent of this regulation globally and its impact on plant
growth, development and responses to diverse stresses. New unexpected paradigms
of gene regulation are emerging from these studies. All aspects of post-
transcriptional regulation of gene expression ranging from RNA biogenesis,
structure and function will be covered in this meeting. This meeting will bring
together a diverse group of researchers from different disciplines (e.g,
biology, computer sciences, statistics) that are investigating various aspects
of gene regulation at the post-transcriptional level to share recent exciting
developments in this area and further stimulate research. This meeting will
promote integration of experimental and computation approaches to address large-
scale problems in this area. This meeting will facilitate collaborations among
researches in different&lt;br/&gt;disciplines. The objectives of this meeting
are 1) to bring researchers at all levels (undergraduates, MS/PhD students,
postdocs, early career and senior researchers) from diverse fields to present
and discuss new developments and cutting-edge tools related to all aspects of
post-transcriptional regulation, 2) to provide an opportunity to new and
established researchers in this field to develop collaborations across
disciplines, 3) to facilitate networking and career-building opportunities for
younger researchers, and 4) to enhance participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This meeting will facilitate interactions among researches in different
disciplines and among researchers at different career stages. Participation in
the meeting is open to everyone and all the speakers will be selected from the
submitted abstracts. In choosing the speakers, the organizers will ensure that
early career investigators, postdoctoral research associates, students, women
and members of underrepresented groups are well represented. The American
Society of Plant Biology has a diverse membership and the announcement of the
meeting will be sent to all ASPB members. To further broaden the diversity of
the participants, the meeting will be advertised on web portals that are devoted
to promoting the participation of underrepresented minorities. To encourage
participation of undergraduates, part of the funding will be dedicated to
support to undergraduates. In providing travel support, priority will be given
to women, young researchers and underrepresented minorities, who might not be
able to attend for financial reasons.