* 1321763
* Timing of Intracontinental Deformation across the Eastern Mono Basin, California and Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Michael Petronis, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2017
* USD 154,422.00

Modern deformation between the North American and Pacific plates is distributed
across a wide zone of western North America from the San Andreas fault eastward
into the western Basin and Range Province. The eastern Mojave Desert and the
region between the Sierra Nevada and Great Basin form a zone of distributed
deformation that accommodates about 25 percent of the relative motion between
the Pacific and North American plates. Deformation to the south is localized
within the Eastern California Shear Zone and to the north in the Walker Lane
Belt, which today is characterized by northwest-trending faults with associated
earthquake focal mechanisms and GPS velocities that are indicative of
transtensional deformation. This project tests the hypothesis that deformation
associated with the transtensional system during the early to mid-Miocene was
located east of the Sierra Nevada front in the area of the Mono Basin prior to
stepping east into the Mina Deflection in the late Miocene. To do so the
research team is carrying out a detailed paleomagnetic study of the Oligocene to
Pliocene mafic to intermediate lava flows, rhyolitic ignimbrites, sediments in
the Mono Basin area (Huntoon Valley, Adobe Hills, Antelope Mountains, Cowtrack
Mountains) to determine the spatial and temporal patterns of vertical axis
rotation. Field structural studies coupled with 40Ar/39Ar geochronology of
volcanic and intrusive rocks are used to constrain the fault geometry,
kinematics, magnitude of fault slip, and the timing of deformation.

The Eastern California Shear Zone and Walker Lane Belt, a zone that stretches
from the Mojave Desert to northern California/northwestern Nevada, are important
fault systems that accommodate a substantial portion of the motion of between
the North American and Pacific plates, with most of the motion taken up by the
San Andreas fault. However, the tectonic evolution of this complex fault zone
remains poorly understood. This project aims to resolve an important part of the
puzzle in that it would contribute to a better understanding of how deformation
shifts through time. The project has a significant component of student
involvement. Improving students' technological and basic science skill-sets will
train and foster research endeavors for minority and underrepresented students.