* 1321470
* Smart Manufacturing Advancement
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* James Davis, Cache Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/29/2016
* USD 29,997.00

1321470 (Davis). Smart Manufacturing (SM) is integrating network-based data and
information that comprises the real-time understanding, reasoning, planning and
management of all aspects of a manufacturing and supply chain enterprise. SM is
facilitated through use of advanced sensor-based data analytics, modeling and
simulation in real-time. SM is about game-changing potential to energize
innovation, address productivity, achieve new and structurally different
performance goals, and drive the competitive advantage of investments in plant
assets. Unfortunately, a cost effective infrastructure to integrate real-time
manufacturing intelligence and active management across the control systems of
an entire production operation does not exist today. This is the ultimate aim of
the Smart Manufacturing Leadership Coalition (SMLC). SMLC has been formed around
a set of goals that no one company can accomplish alone. SMLC enables
stakeholders in the smart manufacturing industry to form collaborative R &amp;
D, implementation and advocacy teams for development of the approaches,
standards, platforms and shared infrastructure that facilitate the broad
utilization of manufacturing intelligence. The SMLC is a non-profit organization
committed to overcome barriers to the development and deployment of SM Systems
through development of a shared infrastructure called the Smart Manufacturing
Platform (SM Platform). SMLC activities are built around joint industry and
university-driven development, application and scaling of a shared
infrastructure that will achieve transformational economic-wide impact,
manufacturing innovation and global competitiveness. SMLC supports the
manufacturing industry through pursuing a comprehensive technology that no one
company can undertake. Without a modern industrial infrastructure, adoption of
SM systems is not economically viable. Process control and automation systems
implemented in a piecemeal fashion will continue to limit innovation and
capability. SMLC will build the business, interoperability and technology
models, demonstrations, infrastructure, and project teams across multiple
industry segments. Through the SM Platform, SMLC will help companies address
manufacturing-related challenges across the automotive, food, military,
materials, chemical, oil and gas, refining, pharmaceutical, information
technology, process control and automation industries. SMLC also supports
collaborative research, development and commercialization. Education and
workforce training resources for smart manufacturing will be developed for
universities, technology schools, and small and medium manufacturers.