* 1321796
* Active Deformation in the Arabian-Eurasian Continental Collision Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Robert King, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2015
* USD 171,708.00

This project is aimed at determining the spatial and temporal (mainly in the
case of earthquake and volcanic processes) distribution of crustal strain
throughout the full extent of the Arabia-Eurasia continental collision zone.
These investigations of the 2011, magnitude 7.2, Van, Turkey earthquake that
occurred in the collision zone are particularly important in regard to
understanding the earthquake cycle and the role of earthquake deformation in
accommodating continental convergence. This project uses GPS observations
developed over the past 20 years in direct cooperation with host-country
partners, including Turkish, Armenian, Georgian, Azeri, Saudi Arabian, and
Russian research institutions, and InSAR observations to constrain active
deformation. In addition, partner institutions will extend and enhance geodetic
observations throughout the region. Seismic, neotectonic, and other geophysical
data are incorporated in the analysis and interpretations, and kinematic
modeling strategies are used to investigate alternative hypotheses regarding the
principal active structures throughout the collision zone. These kinematic
constraints are used to investigate and constrain dynamic processes (i.e., the
principal forces) driving continental collision and deformations in the
collision zone, and the response of the lithosphere to these forces (i.e.,
lithospheric rheology).

The results of this study have direct implications for earthquake and volcanic
hazards throughout the collision zone. This is particularly important because
historically the most destructive earthquakes in terms of the loss of life and
property have occurred along continental collision zones and associated zones of
lithospheric translation. Improved understanding of earthquake hazards is a
major concern to our partners and a primary motivation for them to contribute
resources to the study. Furthermore, capacity building for the host-country
partners provides geodetic tools that have a broad range of applications in
cartography, navigation, surveying (land management and infrastructure
development), and weather forecasting among others.