* 1321692
* CAREER: Sparse Modeling and Estimation with High-dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Ming Yuan, Morgridge Institute for Research, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 217,757.00

With the recent advances in science and technology, high dimensional data are
becoming a commonplace in diverse fields. The goal of this proposed research is
to develop methods and theory for several basic classes of statistical problems
associated with this type of data. Among the central questions are the nature of
sparsity in different contexts, and how it determines our ability or inability
to deal with high dimensional data. The investigator studies a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space based framework to exploit sparsity for general predictive
problems. The framework underpins the connections among various popular methods
that encourage sparsity, and provides an opportunity to study them in a unified
fashion, which in turn will foster the development of improved methods and
algorithms. The investigator will also consider the problem of covariance matrix
estimation and selection. The research concentrates on understanding the nature
of and connection among various notions of sparsity for large covariance matrix,
and their relationship with Gaussian graphical models.

From the world's most powerful telescopes to the finest atomic force
microscopes, from the flourishing financial market to the fast-growing World-
Wide Web, high dimensional and massive data are being produced at an astonishing
rate. Immediate access to copious amount of interesting and important
information presents unprecedented opportunities, but also creates unique
challenges, to mathematicians in general and statisticians in particular.
Development of statistical theory to understand the nature of their fundamental
characteristics, and methodology to address the associated issues, including
those discussed in this proposal, will advance our intellectual exploration and
knowledge, and undoubtedly benefit a multitude of scientific and technological
fields -- genomics, medical imaging, communication networks, and finance are
just a few well known examples.