* 1321720
* Effects of Saharan Dust on African Easterly Waves and Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Terrence Nathan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 413,154.00

The primary objective of this research project is to advance understanding of
the effects of Saharan mineral dust on the African easterly Jet, African
easterly waves, and tropical cyclones. A unified work plan is designed that
combines theory, numerical experiments, data assimilation, and model
verification. Standard analytical, numerical, and diagnostic methods will be
used to execute the plan. A new theoretical framework will be developed whose
goal is to illuminate causal relationships between Saharan dust, the African
easterly jet, and African easterly waves. The theoretical framework will serve
as a tool for interpreting results obtained from the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model, which will be used to carry out comprehensive
simulations involving dust-radiative-microphysical interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research includes advancing
understanding of how Saharan mineral dust operates over the synoptic scale
environment to the tropical cyclone scale to affect the path and intensification
of tropical cyclones. This research will assess the relative importance dust-
radiation and dust-microphysical interactions on tropical cyclone activity,
which will lead to improved prediction of TCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the research include model validation results with various data sets,
which is critical to assessing model performance and forecasts. This award will
develop a new understanding of the effects of dust on tropical cyclones, which
can be used to help improve existing diagnostic and statistical tools for
tropical cyclone forecasts. Additionally, this award will provide research
training for both undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;