* 1321891
* Connecting Small-scale Humidity Variability to Dynamical Processes Governing Madden-Julian Oscillation Transitions
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Paquita Zuidema, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2018
* USD 318,759.00

This project studies the role of low-level atmospheric moisture in the
development of convective clouds associated with the Madden-Julian Oscillation
(MJO). The MJO is an envelope of organized convection that propagates from the
Indian Ocean to the Pacific Ocean and constitutes the dominant form of
intraseasonal precipitation variability in the tropics, and also has important
consequences for US weather. The present work is a follow-on to the Dynamics of
the MJO (DYNAMO) field campaign, which took place in the equatorial Indian Ocean
in 2011-2012 and involved the deployment of radars and other observing assets on
Gan Island in the Maldives. One hypothesis of the campaign, also pursued in this
project, is that the deep, organized convective clouds associated with MJO
initiation develop only when the atmospheric boundary layer, which contains most
of the moisture in the atmospheric column, becomes sufficiently deep over a
sufficiently large region. The primary task of the present work is to generate
humidity datasets using radar and scanning radiometer data collected as part of
the campaign, through techniques involving 1) the Bragg scattering of S-band
radar signals in cloud-free air; and 2) a combination of radiometer data and the
differential attenuation of radar returns from clouds at two wavelengths (S- and
Ka-band in this case). The analysis of these humidity products will be
complemented by numerical experiments carried out with the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader scientific
impacts due to the value new techniques for determining humidity, particularly
techniques that can be applied in future field campaigns, as well as the value
of the new humidity datasets for the research community. In addition, the work
seeks a better understanding of the initiation of MJO, which would be of
societal value to the extent that it results in better predictions of the MJO
and its downstream consequences. In addition, the work has an educational
component, including the use of the datasets in classroom teaching and the
support of two graduate students.