* 1321581
* EAGER: "Correlation of Explosibility and Dispersion Characteristics of Combustible Engineered Nanomaterials"
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* M Mannan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2015
* USD 105,960.00

CBET - 1321581&lt;br/&gt;The fast growth in the production and use of
nanomaterials has overcome the rate at which the hazards associated with these
materials have been studied. While most of the studies on this aspect have been
devoted for the understanding of nanomaterial toxicology resulted from workplace
exposure, very little attention has been given to the fire and explosion hazards
associated with combustible engineered nanomaterials. Thus, there is an urgent
need for technical criteria from which the fire and explosion risk associated
with combustible engineered nano materials can be quantified. Existing research
on dust explosions hazards involving micro-sized dust materials have concluded
that the severity of a confined dust explosion could increase as the particle
size decreases to a certain level after which the particle size has no
significant effect. As the result, there are many uncertainties that prevent
making generalized conclusions that explains the behaviors of both micro and
nano sized particles in dust explosion phenomenon. Therefore, thorough
understanding will bring forward BROADER IMPACTS leading to the development of
comprehensive experimental and theoretical information for supporting
regulations and risk analysis for the use and production (intended/unintended)
of nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;In this study, commercially available metallic and
non-metallic combustible engineered nanomaterials, together with their micro-
scale counterparts, will be investigated. The conventional explosibility
characteristics, essential in determining the likelihood and severity of a dust
explosion, of these nanomaterials in terms of minimum explosive concentration
(MEC), maximum pressure (Pmax), maximum pressure increase rate ([dP/dt]max), and
minimum ignition temperature (MIT) will be evaluated experimentally. Further,
because nanomaterials have propensity to agglomerate; and because the degree of
agglomeration have a significant effect on the explosion behavior, it is
critical to have a complete understanding of the dispersion and agglomeration
behavior of nanomaterials and determine the relationship between the
corresponding particle diameter and surface area and the ignition tendencies.
This extensive investigation will provide more insight in potential correlations
between the maximum rate of pressure rise and the properties of nanomaterials
such as chemical composition, surface area, diameter, porosity of nanomaterial
aggregates, etc. The results will serve as the basis for the development of the
fundamental theory of nano dust explosion. This justifies the INTELLECTUAL MERIT
of this project.&lt;br/&gt;Because of the limited information available about
this area and the uncertainty in the behavior of nanomaterials, the proposed
research can be considered as a "high-risk" project. However, the research
outcomes from this work have the potential for providing valuable qualitative
and quantitative information that will contribute to address the safety issues
encountered by industry regarding estimation of the explosion risks associated
with engineered nanomaterials ("high-payoff"). Therefore, this research fits
better the requirements for a NSF EAGER program instead a standard NSF program,
which is intended for more established areas of research. The research proposed
will employ existing equipments at our laboratories at Texas A&amp;M University
to study the dust explosion for combustible engineered nanomaterials. The
results from the proposed research will set the foundations so that extensive
long-term research projects could be realized to achieve complete understanding
of related phenomena such as combustion mechanism and explosion properties.
Further, this research will help to establish robust and consistent test
methodologies in order to quantify the fire and explosion risks associated with
engineered nanomaterials. This project will be valuable in determining the areas
where a gap in knowledge exists and where future research should be focused.