* 1321355
* Understanding Climate Change and Environmental Transition: Analyses of Sediment Core Materials from the Sesecapa Lagoon, Pacific Coastal Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Molly Morgan, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 43,950.00

With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Molly Morgan will
coordinate the analysis of a geological core collected from the Sesecapa Lagoon
in Pacific coastal Guatemala. Using radiocarbon dating, floral, faunal and
geological and chemical analysis Dr. Morgan will develop a detailed and
chronologically sensitive reconstruction of climate change and environmental
transformation for this portion of the Pacific coast. Because human habitation
of this coastal region extends over multiple millennia it provides a comparative
record which will allow researchers to examine the multi-directional
interactions between environmental change and societal response. It is expected
that the core will document ca. 6,000 years and thus cover the entire occupation
span. Archaeologically the region documents athe shift from residential mobility
and low-level food production to permanent sedentism and sociocultural
complexity and the rise of complex society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
paleoclimatic research recognizes that this period following the last "Ice Age"
experienced shifts in climate that must have affected human populations, but
understanding of local mechanisms are often lacking and detailed associated
culture change remain obscure. On the Pacific coast of Middle America, as well
as tropic coasts in many other regions of the world, these changes included the
formation of lagoons and beach formation and progradation. These would be
documented in the core. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to the new light which will be
shed on regional archaeology the project has multiple broader impacts. The
research will document a major type of landscape transition - the closing off of
saltwater estuaries and the subsequent formation of freshwater lagoons - a
currently ongoing process on the Pacific coast. The work will provide a detailed
understanding of beach accumulation rates and landscape effects. Communities
living in this wetland area today can use this information to plan for changes
that they will face as rivers continue to dump sediments along the coast and
estuary environments transform. Secondly the results may be more broadly
generalized.