* 1321047
* CSR: Small: Cross-layer HW/SW solutions towards Energy-Efficient Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Tajana Rosing, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/28/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Facilitating workload consolidation and improving server utilization are
critical for reducing cost and improving energy-efficiency of modern
datacenters. One major challenge for improving utilization is to do so without
affecting the quality of service (QoS). On modern servers, various co-located
jobs may share critical resources including 1) micro-architectural resources
such as last level cache, memory bandwidth, and functional units, etc., and 2)
energy resources including grid power and distributed batteries that provide an
additional power source especially during high load period. Multiple co-located
jobs may contend for shared these resources, causing interference, threatening
application QoS or even triggering the circuit breaker and resulting in costly
downtime and severe QoS violations.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses these
challenges by designing a cross-layer system that effectively manages workload
consolidation, quality of service (QoS) and various energy sources to optimize
for energy efficient computing. Our system spans several layers, including
profiler, static compiler, online lightweight monitoring and prediction, runtime
execution management, hardware power state control and energy sources control.
The compilation technique identifies and inserts markers in contentious code
regions in low-priority applications, as well as critical regions in high-
priority applications that require QoS protection. The lightweight runtime
utilizes the compiler hints, monitors the QoS, power consumption, etc., and
adaptively adjusts the pressure applications generate to the shared resources
such as shared cache and memory bandwidth, manages battery (dis) charges and
hardware power states to guarantee QoS and achieve efficient power shaving.