* 1321641
* SAVI:  Building a framework between the EU and the USA to harmonize data products relevant to global research infrastructures in the environmental field
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2021
* Charles Meertens, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 176,398.00

Title: Collaborative Research: SAVI- Building a framework between the EU and the
USA to harmonize data products relevant to global research infrastructures in
the environmental field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is designated as a
Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and is being co-funded by NSF?s
Office of International Science and Engineering. Four US environmental
observatories (National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), Ocean
Observatories Initiative (OOI), Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar
(AMISR) and collectively EarthScope, comprising USArray and the Plate Boundary
Observatory (PBO), operated respectively by the Incorporated Research
Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) and UNAVCO) are working together with their
respective counterparts from the European Union on developing common data
policies and standards relevant to global research infrastructures in the
environment field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals include developing
new understanding through broad harmonization of data and constructing multi-
discipline, synergistic data products that have wider societal importance. In
addition, these activities will help the scientific community to better develop
coupled models that better capture critical feedbacks and interactions of the
earth system. These models are needed to help make these types of data more
accessible to decision-makers at many levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linking
these existing programs provides a unique opportunity for early career
researchers and students to learn in a multi-disciplinary environment and to
benefit not only from the US participants but also their European counterparts.
The observatories will be developing graduate and post-graduate courses and the
workshops will seek to include early career scientists and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will focus on addressing
societally relevant challenges. Through case studies, ways of harmonizing data
will be investigated with the goal of making the data from these observatories
easier to include in effective decision-making. Disasters, carbon and water will
likely be the first set of issues addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
is creating opportunities for enhancing the career trajectories of a new
generation of researchers in Europe and the U.S. The virtual institute is
providing mechanisms for exposing early-career scientists to interdisciplinary,
multi-institutional activities focused on environmental data and
cyberinfrastructure; arming them with new scientific tools to address
challenging questions in harmonizing environmental data to help in effective
decision making; and showing them how international partnerships can help to
solve global problems. It is recruiting a diverse set of US and European
students to create collaborative networks of environmental data and
cyberinfrastructure experts across these countries.