* 1321227
* Creative Robotics: an inclusive program for fostering diverse STEM talent in middle school
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Michele Welter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,455,306.00

This partnership brings together the Robotics Institute (Carnegie Mellon
University), two institutions experienced in educational research and teacher
development (Marshall University and West Liberty University) and school
districts in West Virginia (Mingo County Schools) and Pennsylvania (Allegheny
Valley School District). The key innovation of this project in the focal area of
Identifying and Cultivating Exceptional Talent is its incorporation of robotics
into courses for middle school students in a non-competitive setting to identify
and cultivate talent in "exceptional computational thinking" and "exceptional
engineering design." The project utilizes the Arts &amp; Bots program which
enables teachers to introduce craft-based robotics projects to students in
disciplines as varied as art, science, health, or English.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work is the analysis of the role of
creative technology in student engineering engagement and the identification of
unrecognized creative STEM talent. This contributes to STEM talent theories on
computational thinking and engineering design and refines working definitions of
technology fluency. The broader impacts include the integration of creativity
with technology, refined professional development materials for teachers to
support STEM talent, and models for school district-wide deployment of
curricular innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By executing the project with pre-
service educational partners, a pathway to scaling is built so that the program
may spread across a widening footprint of school districts. Research and
evaluation focus on student engagement, knowledge, and attitudes as well as
teachers' abilities to identify and support student talent.