* 1321410
* Thermodynamics of Rare Earth Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Alexandra Navrotsky, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,999.00

Rare earth elements are critical to materials used in technologies ranging from
magnets to batteries to LED lighting. They are considered 'critical' materials
in the sense that such technologies cannot work without them and, at the same
time, their supply is limited and/or subject to geopolitical manipulation. The
source of rare earths, as of all elements, is the Earth, and a variety of rock
types are mined for these elements, which must then be concentrated, separated,
and purified. These rocks (ores) contain a variety of host minerals, which
typically contain rare earths in low concentrations in complex minral structures
together with other elements such as uranium, thorium and niobium. Though the
thermodynamic properties of these multicomponent mineral solid solutions define
their formation and occurrence in the Earth and constrain processes for the
mining, processing, and purification of the rare earth elements, these
properties are poorly known at present. This project entails a systematic study
of the thermodynamics of formation of a selected set of synthetic rare earth
materials in order to understand the effects of different rare earths and other
elements, as well as of the structures, on stability. The results will provide
fundamental data for more complete, efficient, and economical extraction and
separation of rare earths from mineral sources, thus fulfilling the Sustainable
Chemistry, Engineering, and Materials (SusChEM) objectives. At the same time the
data will be useful in modeling the transport of rare earths in the geologic
environment, the origin of rare earth deposits, and the use of rare earths as
geochemical indicators in petrologic processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High
temperature oxide melt solution calorimetry, a specialized technique tailored to
determing heats of formation of refractory oxide systems, will be used to
measure heats of formation of selected systems. The samples will be synthesized
and characterized extensively prior to calorimetry. The overall goal is to
quantify the thermochemistry of charge-balanced ionic substitutions of rare
earths in minerals. Phases in the RE2O3- H2O- CO2- HF system, including the
major rare earth ore bastnasite, will be studied. The enthalpies of formation
and mixing of RE solid solutions in perovskite and pyrochlore systems will be
characterized.