* 1321882
* A Reversible Rheology for Water-Weakened Quartz
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Caleb Holyoke, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2017
* USD 420,124.00

The overall goals of this project are to use experimental techniques to
investigate : 1) the effect of chemical environment (water fugacity), strain
rate, and temperature on the strength of quartz single crystals deformed in an
axial compression; 2) the effect of the same parameters on the strength of
synthetic quartzites (quartz aggregates) made from the same starting material as
the single crystals; and 3) the fundamental relationship between the strengths
of single crystals and polycrystals. These goals will be accomplished by
performing experiments on annealed synthetic quartz single crystals and
synthetic quartzites over a wide range of temperatures, water fugacities, and
strain rates in a Griggs-type piston-cylinder rock deformation apparatus using a
molten salt cell for precise determination of mechanical data. Specifically, the
researchers will: 1) perform temperature-,strain rate-, and pressure-stepping
experiments on single crystal cores in of synthetic quartz crystals, which have
been heat-treated to establish a constant density and uniform distribution of
freezable fluid inclusions, to investigate basal <a>, prism <a> and prism <c>
slip systems; 2) reverse the sequence of experimental temperature, strain rate,
and water fugacity conditions to test whether these rate laws are reversible; 3)
hot-press polycrystalline quartz aggregates made of powders fabricated from the
same heat-treated synthetic quartz materials, and subject these polycrystalline
quartz samples to temperature-, strain rate-, and pressure-stepping experiments,
testing for reversibility, and comparing the results with T, strain rate, and
water fugacity sensitivities of basal and prism slip. The mechanical data from
these experiments will be used to develop predictive models of deformation of
natural quartzites at tectonic rates.

Displacements of middle to lower crustal thrust faults and low-angle normal
detachments associated with collisional tectonics and channel flow are commonly
localized within quartz-rich lithologies. Postseismic visco-elastic relaxations
in quartzo-feldspathic rocks below plate-scale continental fault zones are
therefore thought to be governed by quartz strength. Motivated by the importance
of quartz deformation to tectonics and rheology of the continental lithosphere,
many experimental studies have been performed to investigate the deformation and
recovery mechanisms of quartz, and quantify mechanical relations that can be
applied to tectonic loading of the crust. Yet, the mechanism(s) of water
weakening of quartz continues to be unresolved and little work has been
performed to determine the effects of water fugacity, strain rate and
temperature on the strength of the common slip systems in quartz. This project
uses new experimental methods to address these problems. Simple models can be
constructed that relate the strengths of the individual slip systems to the
strengths of the quartzites over the range of experimental conditions and
extrapolate the results to naturally deformed quartzites. Data from these
experiments can be used in field-based research and numerical simulations of the
viscosity of the continental crust at plate boundaries and may aid in the
understanding of the processes in the continental crust that cause the
deformations related to earthquakes.