* 1321523
* STTR Phase I:  Fungal Expression of Antimicrobial Peptides for Addition to Animal Feed
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Mark Marten, Mycoinnovation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop
antimicrobial peptides (AMP) as an alternative to antibiotics that are used as
growth promotants in animal feed. It is common practice to add low doses of
medically important antibiotics to animal feed to improve production efficiency.
However, this practice has been shown to lead to antibiotic-resistant bacterial
strains, which have the potential to infect humans. As an alternative to
traditional antibiotics, the goal is to test the potential of antimicrobial
peptides. Because antimicrobial peptides are not used for human therapy,
concerns regarding bacterial resistance are significantly diminished. The key
limitation in using AMP has been the inability to produce them at cost effective
levels. To overcome this challenge, the first step of this project will be to
express a number of different AMP in filamentous fungal fermentations, which
have the potential to produce tremendous amounts of recombinant protein at
greatly reduced cost. If successful, this proof-of-concept study will justify
additional research to determine the efficacy of AMP in livestock.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, is the
reduction of antibiotic use in animal feeds. Some estimates place the worldwide
market for animal-feed antibiotics at over $4 billion annually. However, to
reduce bacterial antibiotic resistance, the FDA has recently published new
guidance restricting traditional antibiotics to therapeutic use. Numerous
alternatives to medically important antibiotics have been proposed, but the
application of antimicrobial peptides shows great promise. The most significant
limitation to their commercial application has been cost of production. Thus,
the ability to economically manufacture these peptides would represent a
significant benefit to the agricultural industry as it would allow farmers to
maintain high levels of productivity while not generating antibiotic-resistant
strains that pose a danger to humans.