* 1321069
* NeTS:  Small: Online Management, Experimentation, and GAme (OMEGA) of Large-Scale Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Murat Yuksel, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 09/30/2017
* USD 216,000.00

As critical applications are converging onto the Internet, effective response to
large-scale network dynamics like failures and demand spikes is gaining more
importance. Major portion of the time for handling such network dynamics is
determining how to respond, mostly performed manually in the current practice.
Experienced human administrators are typically the ones who can quickly find a
close-to-optimum response. However, as the networks are getting larger and more
diverse, managing and attaining effective responses for an online operational
network necessitates meta-tools to swiftly learn and characterize the network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop tools for automated management
of a running network by framing heuristic optimization, empirical learning,
experimental design, and network management with a simulation interface. The
project will develop an online management and experimentation system for large-
scale networks in an environment that enables trainee administrators to explore
what-if scenarios, without having to risk the network operation. The project
will also develop algorithms for empirical characterization of network dynamics,
and tools for quick and close-to-optimal configuration of numerous network
parameters in response to failures or customer traffic
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate behavioral scientific
concepts into the practice of operational network management. The automated
management using online optimization may establish a foundation for managing
multi-owner systems, e.g., power grid, transportation, and water infrastructure
networks. The project's heuristic optimization and experiment design methods as
well as the approach to operator training are applicable to training in safety
and mission critical industries where mistakes of ill-trained administrators are
intolerable, e.g., airline pilot and nuclear reactor administrator training.