* 1321319
* Elementary Teachers Engaged in Authentic Math and Science (ETEAMS)
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* James Silliman, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,497,936.00

The Elementary Teachers Engaged in Authentic Math and Science (ETEAMS) project
provides a new, innovative professional development pathway for elementary
preservice teachers to also seek certification to teach science or mathematics
at the middle school level. The project is a collaborative effort, with Texas
A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi and the Corpus Christi Independent School
District working together as partners to engage new teachers in field research
focusing on the unique coastal environments of the region. Participants in the
program contribute to research teams based at the University that are studying
and modeling ecological phenomena of the Gulf Coast along southern Texas,
including variation in seagrass composition, the depositional history of tidal
flat regions, variation among beach clams, and flatworm behavior. In addition to
gaining greater knowledge in science, technology, and mathematics, participants
gain first-hand experiences with practices associated with contemporary field
research and the use of information technologies to consolidate and analyze
data. Participants also work alongside scientists to synthesize research
results, and they work with practicing teachers of the participating school
district to enrich the school curriculum with their findings from the research
experiences. The effectiveness of the project in increasing self-efficacy in
science and mathematics, enhancing teaching efficacy, increasing understanding
of the nature of science, and promoting effective teaching behaviors are being
studied using a longitudinal matched group research design that enables the
project team to compare participant outcomes with those of teachers and students
at schools with similar educational and demographic
profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field research experience is a key feature of
a new professional development pathway that prepares preservice elementary
teachers for certification as science or mathematics teachers at the middle
school level. The focus on marine biology provides opportunity to increase the
science content knowledge of pre-service teachers in all the basic sciences, as
well as in the integration of STEM areas of study. The enhanced teacher
preparation program also includes special workshops to increase content
knowledge in STEM fields, and regular planning sessions with master teachers to
work on lessons, learning activities, and curricular units that are informed by
the field research experiences. As new national and state curriculum standards
for STEM fields place increasing emphasis on synthesizing practices and content
across STEM fields, this innovative approach to the professional development of
elementary and middle school teachers examines new ways of engaging new teachers
in direct experiences with those practices and crosscutting ideas.