* 1321578
* STTR Phase I:  Synthetic Biology 2.0: A platform for the automated design of cell factories incorporating synthetic enzymes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Alexandre Zanghellini, ARZEDA Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project brings together
computational enzyme design with systems biology to create a fully integrated
platform for novel pathway designs. The approach chosen will combine specific
databases and a novel pathway synthesis tool. This computational tool will use
the information present in the databases to automatically discover, or "design",
novel pathways for fermenting natural renewable feedstock to virtually any
chemical of human interest. In the Phase II Experimental Plan, the goal is to
further advance the concept by developing a high-performance pathway
prioritization module to estimate each designed pathway yield and impact on
organism metabolism, and experimentally test the performance of the system. To
our knowledge, the proposed research is the first attempt of combining
computational enzyme design with computational pathway prospecting and modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project,
if successful, will be to engineer biosystems and cell factories for industrial
applications, especially in the field of bio-based chemicals and biofuels. Most
successes to date in the field of synthetic biology have involved recombining
natural enzyme building blocks into novel pathways. However, recent developments
in computational enzyme design make it possible to have designer enzymes to
enhance nature's catalytic repertoire. Being able to have an automated,
computer-aided design tool that leverages new capabilities to create novel
metabolic pathways employing synthetic enzymes will bring us closer to truly
synthetic biology.