* 1321216
* Designing for Equity by Thinking in and about Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2019
* Albert Cuoco, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 06/30/2019
* USD 7,980,020.00

The five-year Targeted Partnership and Implementation project, Designing for
Equity By Thinking in and about Mathematics (DEBT-M), is a community of
mathematical practice devoted to closing the opportunity gap for marginalized
secondary mathematics students in Pittsburgh. Core Partners in DEBT-M are the
Education Development Center (EDC) as the lead, and the Pittsburgh Public
Schools (PPS), the University of Pittsburgh (UPITT), and the Carnegie Mellon
University (CMU). The project team is investigating how the opportunity gap can
be addressed through a focused program of professional development that involves
teachers, mathematicians, and mathematics educators as equal partners. The
context for this work is the mathematics program in grades 6-12 in PPS with
around 4000 students in this grade band, more than one quarter of whom are
struggling, underrepresented mathematics learners. The target audience is the
teachers of these students, as well as the IHE faculty in Core Partner
institutions. The primary STEM field involves mathematics that surrounds high
school algebra. Goals for the IHE partners include close alliances with the
teachers in Pittsburgh and participation in the development and implementation
of new experiences for the whole partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DEBT-M's
inaugural year is followed by two consecutive two-year cycles of immersive
summer professional development with intensive school-year follow-up. During
each year, four follow-up activities support teachers in shifting practice in
the classroom and furthering the community of doers of mathematics: colloquia,
monthly seminars, bi-weekly study groups, and visits by all partners to
participating schools. Regarding thinking about mathematics and mathematics
learning, the project team focuses on what mathematics is and how experiences
have shaped teachers' perspectives. Teachers also focus on how mathematics
education has shaped learner identities. DEBT-M provides experiences and
opportunities to construct what they conjecture are critical perspectives,
dispositions, and expertise that in turn enable all partners to collectively
determine what aspects of practice to address and how to address them. The last
week of each summer is focused exclusively on this collaborative, professional
effort. Partners and participants together draw on their summer work and
learning to make decisions about implementing classroom practices in courses
with struggling students', decisions that are supported, studied, and analyzed
throughout the school year with the study groups, seminars, equity fellows, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DEBT-M includes both an external evaluation and a design-
based, internal research component. The internal research study investigates,
tests, and refines a set of conjectures about how school districts can, at
scale, both transform teaching to embody a rigorous disciplinary approach and
significantly reduce mathematics opportunity gaps that exist for African-
American and low-SES students who have been systemically marginalized over time.
A mixed-methods approach is used to answer the research questions, with analyses
of a variety of data, including student surveys of identity and connection to
teacher; PD and classroom video; teacher habits of mind assessments; district
artifacts; recordings of parent-and-child focus groups; and annual interviews
with teachers and school- and district-leaders. The external evaluation is
designed to assess the quality of the professional development, its impact on
teachers' instructional practices, and its impact on student achievement.
Teachers are recruited from the one urban school district (PPS), with a focus on
high schools and their feeder middle schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Products of
the DEBT-M project are expected to include new professional development
materials that integrate mathematical content with explicit treatment of both
the practice of mathematics and the practice of engagement for all students with
a clear focus on working with marginalized students. The project team brings
together instruments that assist in the diagnosis of aspects of high school
settings that impact on mathematics professional development and student
learning efforts.