* 1321168
* CGV: Small: A Patch-based Framework for Capturing a World in Motion
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Pradeep Sen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,719.00

Although the real world is dynamic, many techniques used to image/capture it are
fundamentally sequential in nature. For example, capturing a high-dynamic range
(HDR) image of a scene (which contains a wide range of illumination) without
special hardware involves taking a set of sequential images at different
exposures, each one measuring a small range of illumination. However, this
approach has problems when reconstructing the HDR image of dynamic scenes with
moving subjects, since the individual frames are not registered correctly.
Problems like this appear in many research areas, from medical imaging to
computer vision.

In this project, the PI and his team are developing a common framework that
addresses artifacts from motion for a variety of different applications. Their
key insight is that patch-based optimization can be used to handle motion
inconsistencies without explicitly solving the challenging problem of accurate
motion estimation. This produces results that are reconstructed from different
inputs in a consistent manner without motion artifacts. The PI is exploring how
this framework can be applied to several important research areas, from high-
quality imaging to computer vision applications such as the reconstruction of
dynamic scenes. Improved capture of dynamic scenes has the potential to
transform the way certain imaging procedures (such as medical imaging) are done.
Scientific results of this work are disseminated through technical publications
at top venues in the graphics/vision communities, and the PI plans to release
the algorithms developed online. Finally, this project involves high school and
under-represented students into the research effort.