* 1321956
* Experimental Studies on Melting (Mg, Fe)O Ferropericlase
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Kanani Lee, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2016
* USD 208,850.00

The origin and subsequent evolution of the Earth and other planets in our own
and other solar systems is dictated by several factors including original
composition and the melt behavior of the constituent phases. However, estimates
of the melting temperature of Earth's mantle, which comprises more than three-
quarters of the Earth's volume and nearly two-thirds of its mass, remain
controversial and elusive. The conditions at which the mantle melts and
solidifies is especially important for understanding compositional
heterogeneity, which constrains deep structure and mixing and is crucial for
inferring the thermo-chemical evolution of the Earth, from planetary accretion
and the magma ocean, to continental growth, the formation of the oceans and
atmosphere, and the current state of the core-mantle boundary. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Currently the mantle is nearly entirely solid, but it has not always
been this way. During the formation of the Earth, the mantle was likely
completely molten - a magma ocean - before it began to solidify as it cooled.
How the mantle crystallized, i.e., from the top, the bottom, or somewhere in
between, is unknown. Evidence for melt at the core-mantle boundary, at least in
pockets, is strong, as it is near the surface. Investigating the melt behavior
of one of the most abundant minerals in the mantle, ferropericlase (Mg, Fe)O, at
high pressures will test hypotheses on Earth's formation and elucidate the
geochemistry of the deep mantle. Additionally, this experimental investigation
will help constrain current temperatures of the Earth by estimating the
temperatures at the core-mantle boundary. The experiments will be studied by
2-dimensional mapping of temperature, composition and texture of sample
materials placed under the extreme high-pressure, high-temperature conditions of
the Earth's early mantle as produced by a laser-heated diamond-anvil cell, in
order to identify the conditions at which melting occurs and its subsequent
influence on the composition and morphology of the molten and surrounding
regions.