* 1321595
* SAVI: Building a framework between the EU and the USA to harmonize data products relevant to global research infrastructures in the environmental field
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Taylor, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,012,731.00

Title: Collaborative Research: SAVI- Building a framework between the EU and the
USA to harmonize data products relevant to global research infrastructures in
the environmental field.

This award is designated as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and
is co-funded by NSF's Office of International and Integrative Activities. Four
U.S. environmental observatories (National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON), Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI), Advanced Modular Incoherent
Scatter Radar (AMISR) and collectively EarthScope, comprising USArray and the
Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO), operated respectively by the Incorporated
Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) and UNAVCO) are working together
with their respective counterparts from the European Union on developing common
data policies and standards relevant to global research infrastructures in the
environment field.

The project goals include developing new understanding through broad
harmonization of data and constructing multi- discipline, synergistic data
products that have wider societal importance. In addition, these activities will
help the scientific community to better develop coupled models that better
capture critical feedbacks and interactions of the earth system. These models
are needed to help make these types of data more accessible to decision-makers
at many levels.

Linking these existing programs provides a unique opportunity for early career
researchers and students to learn in a multi-disciplinary environment and to
benefit not only from the U.S. participants but also their European
counterparts. The observatories will be developing graduate and post-graduate
courses and the workshops will seek to include early career scientists and
students.

The proposed activities will focus on addressing societally relevant challenges.
Through case studies, ways of harmonizing data will be investigated with the
goal of making the data from these observatories easier to include in effective
decision-making. Disasters, carbon and water will likely be the first set of
issues addressed.

This program is creating opportunities for enhancing the career trajectories of
a new generation of researchers in Europe and the U.S. The virtual institute is
providing mechanisms for exposing early-career scientists to interdisciplinary,
multi-institutional activities focused on environmental data and
cyberinfrastructure; arming them with new scientific tools to address
challenging questions in harmonizing environmental data to help in effective
decision making; and showing them how international partnerships can help to
solve global problems. It is recruiting a diverse set of U.S. and European
students to create collaborative networks of environmental data and
cyberinfrastructure experts across these countries.