* 1321551
* Workshop and Assessment of New Technologies for Rapid Detection of Infectious Diseases, January 1, 2013 - December 31, 2013, University of Alabama Birmingham
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Sergey Mirov, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 97,283.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The purpose of this proposal is to examine the
potential of exploiting recent advances in photonics and nanotechnology in the
development of new low-cost technologies for rapid detection of infectious
diseases. The specific aims are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific Aim 1-
Examine Current Grants and identify key active researchers (subcontract to
InnoPace Systems, Inc)&lt;br/&gt;Task 1.1 Examine NSF Grants in ENG and other
Directorates&lt;br/&gt;Task 1.2 Examine NIH and other agencies Grants in this
space&lt;br/&gt;Task 1.3 Examine Publications and Patents of
grantees&lt;br/&gt;Task 1.4 Use results of Tasks 1.1 to 1.3 to Identify
researchers with high impact publications and/or
inventions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific Aim 2 Examine, identify and demonstrate
detection of biomarkers associated with infectious diseases (UAB)&lt;br/&gt;Task
2.1 Examine and choose infectious diseases biomarkers appropriate for detection
within 2-3 &amp;#56256;&amp;#56400;m spectral range.&lt;br/&gt;Task 2.2 Assemble
and validate portable Optical Nose -quartz fork photo-acoustic detection
platform via detection of one relevant infectious disease
biomarker.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific Aim 3- Identify opportunities for new
investments in research in this space (subcontract to InnoPace Systems,
Inc)&lt;br/&gt;Task 3.1 Hold a series of seminar/webinars with key researchers
and seek recommendations. Seminars will include one that engages appropriate
experts at the Center for Disease Control (CDC).&lt;br/&gt;Task 3.2 Identify
opportunities for new investments in research in this space