* 1321510
* The Chronology of Warfare In The Huaura Valley, Central Coast of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Margaret Brown Vega, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 70,341.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Margaret Brown Vega and
colleagues from the U.S. and Perú (Proyecto Awqa Pacha) will conduct
archaeological research in the Huaura Valley on the Central Coast of Perú.
Archaeologists have long sought to identify the causes and long-term
consequences of war. Through a program of systematic survey and radiocarbon
dating of fortifications, Proyecto Awqa Pacha seeks to contribute to these
efforts. The project will establish the timing of fortification in the Huaura
Valley during the first millennium BC, a span of time during which monumental
defensive architecture was first built in the Central Andes. This span of time
(the Early Horizon, ca. 900-200 BC, and subsequent transitional period, ca. 200
BC-AD 200) encompassed unprecedented regional interaction, followed by a
breakdown of regional relationships, and subsequent reconfigurations that
culminated in new regional polities. This is an ideal region for examining the
role that war plays in such social changes.

Focused studies of fortifications establish the timing and spatial patterning of
conflict, and permit examination of aggressive and cooperative interactions
between groups living in a climate of war readiness. Prior research in the
region suggests multiple pulses of fort construction. Relative chronologies
prove too coarse to assess the contemporaneity, and changing distribution, of
fortifications over time. Fieldwork will focus on acquiring samples for building
a more refined chronological sequence of early fortifications using Accelerator
Mass Spectrometry. These data will permit spatial analysis of contemporary
fortifications to better understand group conflict throughout this millennium.
Specifically, these data will be used to test for intravalley or intervalley
conflict.

The research has multiple intellectual merits. A refined model for the
development of fortifications in the Huaura Valley will enable other scholars to
reconsider the broader regional phenomena of this early period of warfare on the
Peruvian coast. Because many early fortifications are reused by later people,
understanding this early period of warfare is critical to analyzing subsequent
periods of culture change. The corpus of dates produced by this research will be
a significant contribution to the radiocarbon database for the Central Andes.
Beyond the Central Andes, the Huaura Valley case study will contribute new data
and a more refined approach to assessing different scales of group conflict.
Broadly, this assessment is fundamental for building, from archaeological data,
adequate explanations of the causes and consequences of warfare. These data hold
great potential for examining human-environment interactions, and assessing the
relationship between climate records and cultural processes.

The broader impacts of the research are in training students and fostering
international collaboration. Undergraduate students from the U.S.A. and Perú
will be trained in data management, field acquisition of data, and analytical
methods through hands on experience and individualized teaching. They will also
participate directly as part of an international scholarly collaboration.
Project results will be presented collaboratively and widely shared with
scholars and the public via both print and digital mediums. The project's
database will be accessible to other scholars in the future for both teaching
and research activities.