* 1321141
* SHF: Small: Helping Developers Improve the Energy Consumption of Smartphone Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Ramesh Govindan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 499,953.00

The capabilities of mobile devices have increased dramatically and end-users are
able to perform a wide range of useful tasks on their smartphones. However, the
usability of these devices is strongly influenced by their energy consumption.
Despite advances in hardware and battery design, a poorly coded application can
drain a smartphone's battery with numerous energy-expensive operations.
Developers lack the tools and techniques to identify when and where the energy
consumption profiles of their applications can be improved. This research aims
to help developers understand how energy is consumed within their applications,
and to help them change their applications in ways that will lead to reduced
energy consumption. Given the widespread use of mobile applications and the
prevalence of energy consumption-related problems, this work will impact both
end users and developers by improving applications? energy efficiency and
enabling further research in this area. The results of this research will also
have marked educational impact through the training of future software engineers
in predicting, estimating, measuring, and managing the effects of their system
designs and implementations on energy consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes three inter-related thrusts. The first thrust develops program
analysis techniques for online measurement and visualization that provides
energy consumption information to developers at the level of individual lines of
an application?s source code. Using this capability, the second thrust
identifies a set of energy-aware development best practices via an empirical
study of the relationship between energy consumption and implementation
structure at the application's architecture, design, and code levels. The third
thrust uses the best practices to propose a set of energy-reducing refactorings
to the developers and help them to identify the changes that will lead to the
most energy efficient applications.