* 1321339
* Transforming Academic and Cultural Identidad through Biliteracy
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Armando Martinez-Cruz, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,462,069.00

Transforming Academic and Cultural Identidad through Biliteracy (TACIB) is a
Partnership of California State University-Fullerton (CSUF), the Anaheim Union
H.S. District and the Discovery Science Center as Core Partners, and Anaheim
City School District and the California Association for Bilingual Education as
Supporting Partners, that advances fifth to eighth grade student achievement in
and attitudes toward mathematics and science through integrated dual-
language/dual-immersion strategies in an urban predominantly Latino community in
southern California. The TACIB prototype recognizes home linguistics and culture
as assets, is integrated in multiple dimensions of the educational support
system (formal, informal, pre-service, in-service, family, community, higher
education), and honors and develops positive STEM identity and cultural identity
among students who speak Spanish and English. TACIB further achieves its goals
for middle school students and promotes sustainable outcomes by: increasing the
quality and number of teachers in mathematics and science with bilingual
authorization in the partner school districts; engaging parents in student
science and mathematics learning; expanding the capacity of an informal science
institution (Discovery Science Center) to offer programs in Spanish; developing
awareness of and engagement with science and mathematics education in elementary
and secondary schools among university disciplinary STEM faculty; and bolstering
the capacity of CSUF to prepare bilingual teachers of science and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the use of a multiple-methodology
research employing qualitative and quantitative strategies, including quasi-
experimental design with treatment and comparison groups, the TACIB research
agenda addresses the following questions: a) What are the effects of a dual-
language approach on student achievement in and attitudes toward science and
mathematics?; b) What instructional activities in dual-language classrooms
facilitate students' active engagement in learning science and mathematics?; and
c) How does parental engagement with dual-language teachers and community
partners enhance parents' knowledge of and participation in students'
educational activities? Through the work of this Prototype MSP, the STEM
education community will benefit from the knowledge built related to what it
takes to create dynamic learning ecosystems that respect and engage the
linguistic and cultural dimensions of students, families, and communities in
order to promote achievement in and positive dispositions toward mathematics and
science.