* 1321530
* STTR Phase I:  Rapid Diagnosis of Tuberculosis at the Point of Care Using a Handheld Volatile Biomarker Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Manoranjan Misra, NanoSynth Materials and Sensors Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 222,316.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop an
inexpensive and rapid sensing technology for detection of tuberculosis (TB) at
the point of care (POC). Rapid screening of TB in rural areas is difficult
because current diagnostic methods are expensive, time consuming (several days
to weeks), and require specialized equipment (laboratories and hospitals) that
are not readily available in rural TB rampant areas. This sensing technology
utilizes a solid-state sensor based on metal functionalized 3D TiO2 nanotube
arrays that bind specific volatile biomarkers that are given off by the
mycobacterium that cause TB. The readout for the end-user is an electronic
signal that gives a rapid, positive/negative answer based on change in current.
The sensor is simple to operate, requires no specialized biological reagents for
sensing (i.e. antibodies, fluorescent tags, etc.), and requires a simple
potentiostat for operation. This project has the potential to be developed into
an inexpensive rapid POC device for screening populations at risk for TB using a
breathalyzer like device that requires minimal training to
operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is substantial. TB is a devastating infectious disease in the world with
approximately 14 million people worldwide infected. Although incidences within
the Western World have declined, there is still a worldwide pandemic within
countries of Asia and Africa. The company intends to address the market need for
a rapid diagnosis of TB, specifically in endemic countries where there are
insufficient resources for diagnosis of the disease in rural areas. In addition
it is envisioned that this project will expand the application of the TiO2
nanotube sensing platform to other diseases beyond TB and other fields. For
example VOBs are known to be associated with heart transplant rejection, lung
cancer, ischemic heart disease, preeclampsia of pregnancy, diabetes mellitus,
and breast cancer. The technology can also be applied to non-biomedical
applications such as detection of volatile organic compounds in drinking water,
and detection of improvised explosive devices.