* 1321890
* Pursuing the Nucleus: Experimental, Theoretical, and Analytical Investigations of Bubble and Crystal Formation in Magma
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Thomas Shea, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2017
* USD 266,200.00

Magmas are generally composed of three main components, a melt, one or several
types of minerals, and a vapor phase in the form of bubbles. The formation and
growth of minerals (or crystals) and of the vapor phase (bubbles) exerts a major
influence on the behavior of their host magmas because they modify the magma?s
physical properties (e.g., viscosity/fluidity, volume) and influence its
thermodynamic state (e.g. heat and mass distribution among phases), ultimately
controlling what type of eruption (e.g. effusive vs. explosive) will occur. The
formation of crystals and bubbles from the melt occurs via a process of
spontaneous ?nucleation?, during which the crystal and vapor-forming components
aggregate to a critical size. These nuclei then grow by further addition of
components to the newly formed melt-crystal or melt-bubble interface. It is
critical to understand the nucleation process in magmas because the initial
number of nuclei controls the final distribution of crystals or bubbles. This
proposal aims to better understand the formation of crystal and bubble nuclei
via experimental and analytical approaches. The results could influence our
understanding of nucleation theory, and experimental data could be implemented
in predictive physical and numerical magma ascent and eruption models.

The energetics and kinetics of nucleation are increasingly well understood for
glass ceramics, a class of engineered materials in which a glass hosts a high
population density of nm-scale crystals. The development and characterization of
industrial glass ceramics has stimulated technological developments in
nanoanalysis and spectroscopic investigation of glasses, providing unprecedented
opportunities for studying nucleation in naturally-occurring aluminosilicate
melts. In its fundamental form, the Classical Nucleation Theory may be used to
model experimental nucleation data for natural melts, but only if key
assumptions concerning interfacial energy (for crystals) and surface tension
(bubbles) are relaxed. Lack of firm understanding of these energy terms,
operative at the nanometer scale and therefore elusive to conventional imaging
techniques, is especially troubling because the theory stipulates that their
influence over nucleation rate is profound. An additional complexity is that
while nucleation in magma appears to occur homogeneously for crystals, thus
involving just two phases, nucleation of bubbles may occur more typically by a
heterogeneous process, involving energetic relationships among three phases.
This project proposes to (1) experimentally investigate crystal and bubble
nucleation in an intermediate (andesitic) and a silicic (rhyolite) melt, (2)
revisit classical nucleation theory in the context of these natural magmas, (3)
explore the spatial frontier (i.e., nanoscale) of incipient crystallization via
cuttingedge analytical instruments presently available, and (4) perform a novel
dynamic crystallization experiment to evaluate the influence of magma flow and
shearing on crystal nucleation. The proposed effort to understand bubble and
crystal nucleation kinetics hasfar-reaching implications for the field of
physical volcanology, which is increasingly concerned with phase transformations
occurring during magma ascent.