* 1321610
* Travel Grant for 9th World Congress of Chemical Engineering, August 18-23, 2013 in Seoul, Korea
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2013
* Raymond Adomaitis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2013
* USD 29,700.00

The 9th World Congress of Chemical Engineering will be held August 18-23, 2013
in Seoul, Korea. To increase the presence of US researchers at the Congress,
this proposal seeks support to offset the travel expenses of approximately 20 US
faculty who will participate as speakers. It should be noted that all of the
speakers invited by the PI have strong ties to the Process and Reaction
Engineering division of CBET.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The invited speakers consist
of two main subgroups:&lt;br/&gt;1. The twelve to fourteen speakers making up
two new reaction engineering sessions organized for the World Congress by the PI
and Dr. Maria Burka;&lt;br/&gt;2. An additional group of process systems faculty
invited by the PI, selected to add a strong systems component to already
established sessions at the World Congress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The reaction engineering sessions will focus on computational, energy,
and environmental aspects of reaction engineering, as well as microchemical
systems and modeling the interaction of reaction and transport mechanisms.
Furthermore, the sessions on sustainability, energy, and process safety will
receive a substantial benefit from our invited systems-oriented speakers,
bolstering the quantitative aspects of these important ChE research areas. The
PI has invited a mix of early-career and more established speakers with an
emphasis on the junior faculty who stand to improve their international presence
by participating in this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The
exchange of ideas and current trends in Chemical Engineering research between
the US, Korean, and other international participants has the potential to
broadly impact the Congress participants. US participants supported by this
travel grant will benefit from Congress themes that include university-industry
cooperation and chemical engineering education. The proposal PI will encourage
speakers supported by this travel grant to participate in publishing their work
in the special issue of Chemical Engineering Science that will be devoted to the
World Congress.