* 1321694
* 2013 Catchment Science GRC/GRS, June 16-21, 2013 at Proctor Academy, Andover, New Hampshire
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Thomas Bullen, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ni-Bin Chang
* 03/31/2014
* USD 40,150.00

Catchments are fundamental landscape units that contain interpretable physical,
chemical and&lt;br/&gt;biological signals in their soils, drainage waters and
ecosystems and record the effects of&lt;br/&gt;climate warming, atmospheric
deposition, land use shifts, catastrophic events and other
global&lt;br/&gt;change drivers. Catchment Science, the focus of the Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) and&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) for which
we seek financial support, is a truly interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;and
international endeavor conducted by hydrologists, ecologists and biogeochemists
whose&lt;br/&gt;goal is to explore and understand catchment response signals in
order to better anticipate future&lt;br/&gt;challenges facing water and
ecosystem managers. The purpose of this conference is to
bring&lt;br/&gt;together established and developing experts in the field of
Catchment Science to share the&lt;br/&gt;results of cutting-edge research,
develop new collaborations, and assess where we are and&lt;br/&gt;where we need
to go in order to understand the future of catchments in an era of global
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intelletual Merit. The theme of this GRC/GRS is
"Catchments Through the Looking Glass:&lt;br/&gt;From Microscopes to
Telescopes". There is compelling evidence that global change is
affecting&lt;br/&gt;the physical, chemical, and biological resources of
catchments in many parts of the world, and&lt;br/&gt;Catchment Science is
increasingly at the forefront of driving our understanding of the
many&lt;br/&gt;implications of global change. As catchment scientists, we each
have our own unique&lt;br/&gt;perspectives and vantage points from which we view
our scientific approach and interpret our&lt;br/&gt;data. This GRC/GRS will
bring together leading experts in the field who will explain how
their&lt;br/&gt;particular vision and research environment have shaped the
direction of their cutting-edge&lt;br/&gt;research and how their approaches can
be useful and applicable to other scientists and endusers&lt;br/&gt;working in
the field. The GRC/GRS will focus on four sub-themes that span a broad
range&lt;br/&gt;of Catchment Science perspectives: 1) "Changes in latitudes,
changes in attitudes", where we&lt;br/&gt;will assess the similarities and
differences of conducting catchment science in polar,
boreal,&lt;br/&gt;temperate, arid and tropical settings as well as the societal
implication and application; "Doors&lt;br/&gt;of perception", which will
consider how the scale of our scientific lens, from microscopic
to&lt;br/&gt;telescopic and with different levels of stakeholder involvement,
shapes our understanding of&lt;br/&gt;catchments; "Animal, vegetable, mineral",
where we will explore the inextricable linkages&lt;br/&gt;between biota and the
Earth's surface that help to determine catchment function
and&lt;br/&gt;sustainability, particularly under climate change concerns; and
"Tools you can use", which will&lt;br/&gt;showcase novel analytical techniques
and conceptual approaches that have revolutionized the&lt;br/&gt;field. The GRC
provides the ideal format for promoting better communication and
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the various research approaches comprising Catchment
Science, allowing a more focused&lt;br/&gt;attack on identified issues and
improved international collaboration in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Our ability to successfully conduct Catchment Science in the future
in&lt;br/&gt;response to global change rests largely in our ability to nurture
the next generation of catchment&lt;br/&gt;scientists. This GRC will be
immediately preceded by our second two-day Gordon Research&lt;br/&gt;Seminar
(GRS), the participants of which will be mainly graduate students and recent
advanced&lt;br/&gt;degree recipients from the various fields of Catchment
Science, as well as senior scientists who&lt;br/&gt;will serve as mentors and
discussion leaders. We expect all GRS participants will attend the&lt;br/&gt;GRC
conference the following week, with the result of greatly increased
participation of young&lt;br/&gt;scientists in the Catchment Sciences GRC
series. We anticipate that the GRS is likely to&lt;br/&gt;increase the ethnic
diversity of the GRC, attesting to the continually changing demographics
in&lt;br/&gt;Catchment Science. In addition, our invited speakers and discussion
leaders are nearly half&lt;br/&gt;female, reflecting our efforts to promote
gender diversity in our program. The products of these&lt;br/&gt;efforts include
increased communication among all levels and fields of catchment scientists,
as&lt;br/&gt;well as the dispersal of new ideas throughout the broader
scientific community.