* 1321398
* Collaborative Research:   Did Miocene Core Complexes in Western Arizona Initiate as Late Cretaceous Extensional Shear Zones?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2015
* John Singleton, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 10/31/2015
* USD 60,957.00

In the North American Cordillera, metamorphic core complexes are generally
interpreted to record a single phase of large-magnitude Tertiary extension.
However, growing evidence suggests many Cordilleran core complexes underwent
Cretaceous deformation that fundamentally influenced their Tertiary tectonic
development. In particular, mylonites in mid-Tertiary core complexes may have
reactivated Late Cretaceous extensional shear zones. The primary goal of this
project is to determine the relationship between Late Cretaceous deformation and
Miocene core complex development in the Harcuvar and Buckskin-Rawhide Mountains
in western Arizona. This study tests the hypothesis that lower plate shear zones
in these core complexes are composite structures that initiated during Late
Cretaceous extension. Research will evaluate the age and tectonic significance
of lower plate fabrics and assess how Late Cretaceous structures influenced the
location, geometry, and style of Miocene core complex extension. Research goals
will be accomplished through a multidisciplinary approach involving geologic
mapping, microstructural analysis, U-Pb geochronology, 40Ar/39Ar
thermochronology, and Ti-in-quartz geothermometry. The Harcuvar and Buckskin-
Rawhide core complexes are outstanding sites to address this topic because
several portions of the lower plate are not overprinted by Miocene strain and
because clear cross-cutting relationships are present between mylonitic and non-
mylonitic lower plate rocks. In addition, these are classic localities where
some of the widely accepted models of core complex formation were developed.

Research on core complexes continues to play a central role in our understanding
of fundamental tectonic processes, including the origins and mechanics of large-
magnitude extension and the long-term behavior of major fault zones. The
anticipated results of this research will provide insight into many of these
extensional processes. For example, the locations of core complexes and the low-
angle geometry of core complex structures may have been strongly influenced by
older tectonic activity. In addition, if core complex extension initiated during
the Late Cretaceous, the slip rate and displacement on mid-Tertiary detachment
faults may be lower than originally believed. The discovery of Late Cretaceous
extension in core complexes would also have important implications for
understanding the tectonic evolution of the Cordillera during the Laramide
orogeny.