* 1321191
* 2013 Atomic Physics GRC, June 23-28, 2013 at Salva Regina University in Newport, Rhode Island
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2013,04/30/2014
* Deborah Jin, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2014
* USD 5,000.00

The funding from this grant will be used to support students so they can attend
the twenty-first in a series of Atomic Physics Gordon Research Conferences to be
held at the Salva Regina University in Newport, RI from June 23-28, 2013. This
meeting will continue the tradition of focusing on emerging areas of research
within the discipline and major advances in existing areas of atomic physics and
related fields. The program and speakers are to be chosen based on input from a
wide range of practicing atomic physicists. The areas to be addressed at this
conference include both theoretical and experimental developments, with emphasis
on areas that offer significant challenges and opportunities as we look to the
future of the field. In 2013, we include sessions on Quantum Simulation and
Optical Lattices, Mesoscopic Physics, Quantum Information and Quantum Optics,
Dipolar Gases and Cold Molecules, Rydberg atoms, Pulsed Light Spectroscopy,
Precision Measurements, and Bose and Fermi Gases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
informal nature of the conference, in which no proceedings or publications
result, allows for the kind of free exchange of information and open discussion
not always possible in other venues. The Atomic Physics Gordon Conference
provides a unique opportunity to assemble a critical number of leading
researchers in related but differing specializations, along with significant
numbers of students and young researchers, who bring new points of view to the
most exciting and demanding problems at the forefront of physics research.
Effort will be made to welcome a diverse pool of registrants to the conference.