* 1321508
* STTR Phase I:  Quantum Cascade Laser Spectrometer for Bio-medical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Igor Trofimov, Princeton Technology Advisers Company Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will involve
research and development of mid-infrared multi-spectral imaging, leading to the
first commercial instrument capable of chemical imaging of bio-medical samples.
We will develop and demonstrate key technologies to dramatically improve the
sensitivity and image contrast of live tissue and other biological samples in-
situ. Conventional mid-infrared spectroscopic imaging is based on Fourier
Transform Spectrometers that either utilize incandescent light sources, or mid-
IR beamlines of synchrotron sources. The applications of the incandescent light
sources, however, are severely limited for in-situ studies of biological samples
due to low brightness. The synchrotron sources have obvious limitations for the
widespread acceptance because of their high cost. Our innovative approach is
based on employing recently developed Quantum Cascade lasers that combine a
broad tuning range for high selectivity, high output power for high sensitivity,
and a Gaussian beam for diffraction limited spatial resolution. This will
significantly enhance the utility of mid-IR spectroscopy for biomedical
applications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
to give researchers a novel tool to leverage the power of mid-infrared
spectroscopy in chemical mapping of biological samples. Mid-infrared
spectroscopy is arguably the most widely used technique for chemical
fingerprinting. The combination of the discriminating power and sensitivity of
mid-infrared laser spectroscopy with diffraction limited resolution of laser
microscopy will produce new capabilities and a qualitative leap forward in the
field of bio-imaging. The proposed laser micro-spectrophotometer addresses an
approximately $450M market of mid-IR spectroscopic equipment. Successful
development of the technology will have broad implications for the challenges
facing modern-day biology and medicine: from the analysis of individual cells to
complex tissues, and from the characterization of the physiological status of a
sample to sophisticated disease pattern recognition methods. In addition to
advancing scientific understanding in these fields, the proposed micro-
spectrophotometer will find applications in explosives and chemical warfare
detection, pharmaceutical and petro-chemical industries, as well as in pollution
control.