* 1321859
* Collaborative Research: Tracing the Geomorphic Signature of Strike-Slip Faulting in Marlborough Hill Country, South Island, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Alison Duvall, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 305,664.00

When active, strike-slip faults are among the most dangerous geologic features
on Earth. At present, characterizing in detail their slip rates, seismic hazard,
and evolution over a range of timescales challenges the earth science community.
An under-exploited tool in strike-slip fault characterization is quantitative
analysis of the geomorphic response to lateral fault motion to extract tectonic
information directly from the landscape. At present, studies of this nature
typically focus solely on vertical motion in mountain systems. This research
will develop a new framework for applying geomorphic analysis to strike-slip
fault systems and in doing so, will move the scientific community toward a more
comprehensive and quantitative understanding of the geomorphic response to
lateral crustal motion, which we currently lack. A suite of parallel right-
lateral strike-slip faults known as the Marlborough Fault System (MFS), South
Island, New Zealand offers an excellent natural laboratory for this problem.
From north to south, fault initiation ages as well as cumulative fault
displacement are thought to decrease whereas slip rates increase over four fold,
providing snapshots of different stages of fault evolution. Using the MFS as a
natural experiment, this project will test the degree to which surface processes
and landforms can be used as a quantitative indicator of lateral fault activity.
Geomorphology, thermochronology, and numerical modeling will be applied to
document regional erosion history, identify differences (or similarities) in
landscape morphology between regions of variable slip rate, fault age, and
degree of vertical motion, and make quantitative predictions about the surficial
response to different strike-slip fault scenarios using landscape evolution
models.

The primary goal of this work is to test the degree to which landscape response
can be used as an indicator of strike-slip fault activity. Studying the
landscape response to strike-slip faulting within the Marlborough Fault System
has the potential to improve our understanding of horizontal fault zone activity
and the geomorphic response to fault motion, at this location and in general;
ultimately mitigating the hazards associated with living in and around strike-
slip faults. Seismic activity occurs frequently within the greater Marlborough
region, including along faults that were previously unknown (as in the case of
the destructive Darfield 2010 magnitude 7.1 and Christchurch 2011 magnitude 6.3
earthquakes). Results from this work will benefit seismic hazard assessment at
this location, as well as at many other locations around the world where far
less is known about active strike-slip faulting. Detailed study of the timing
and magnitude of vertical motion along the primary fault strands as well as
along the secondary contractional structures within the MFS will also provide
new constraints on the tectonic evolution of the New Zealand orogen and foster
already strong international collaboration between U.S. and New Zealand
geologists.