* 1321870
* The Seventeenth GENI Engineering Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Parameswaran Ramanathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 01/31/2014
* USD 49,966.00

This project supports hosting the three day seventeenth edition of the GENI
Engineering conference, including organizing and hosting the demo session, to be
held July 21-23, 2013 in Madison, Wisconsin. The GEC location will be held at a
Madison hotel within walking distance of the university campus and the
demonstration session will be held in a university facility. The GENI Project
Office organizes three major GENI Engineering conferences (GECs) per year, in
which the entire GENI community meets to review current status, and to decide on
subsequent steps in GENI's evolution. These GECs include community-based working
groups leading GENI's design and planning, and demonstrating progress with live
experiments. About 250 leading researchers and Ph.D. students from diverse US
institutions will gather in Madison to showcase their ideas and results. In the
demo session each demo will be provided with a wired connection to the GENI
infrastructure. Additionally, wireless connectivity will be available for
demonstrations and participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Global Environment
for Network Innovations (GENI) is a virtual instrument that is rapidly emerging
in prototype form across the United States. GENI aims to transform experimental
research in networking and distributed systems, as well as emerging research
into very large socio-technical systems, by providing a suite of infrastructure
for 'at scale' experiments in future internets. GENI is designed to address
three issues: &lt;br/&gt;- Science Issues: We cannot currently understand or
predict the behavior of complex,&lt;br/&gt;large-scale networks.&lt;br/&gt;-
Society Issues: We increasingly rely on the Internet but are unsure we can trust
its security, privacy or resilience.&lt;br/&gt;- Innovation Issues: Substantial
barriers to at-scale experimentation with new architectures, services, and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;GENI addresses these issues via scale (from federation)
and support for two kinds of experiments: 1) controlled and repeatable
experiments, which will greatly help improve our scientific understanding of
complex, large-scale networks; and 2) in-the- wild trials of experimental
services that ride atop or connect to today?s Internet and that engage large
numbers of human participants. The GEC conference and associated demo sessions
are a key component of the integrated development process for GENI. The GECs
provide integration points for GENI development, provide time for face-to-face
technical discussions about engineering, and ensure that the GENI development
community is fully aware of evolving system feature
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEC meeting and Demo sessions provide graduate
students with both an opportunity to demonstrate and explain their work to the
GENI community prior to formal publication. It is a key part of helping new
graduate students understand what is being done with GENI and who amongst their
peers at other institutions might be valuable resources. It also supports
outreach to new community members, including the emerging US Ignite community.
GENI is already being used as an instrument for research. This proposal supports
the development and use of the research instrument.