* 1321612
* Immunotoxicity in Humans with Lifetime Exposure in Ocean Pollutants
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2020
* Philippe Grandjean, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2020
* USD 1,505,842.00

Seafood is a main source of human exposure to methylmercury and persistent
pollutants that biomagnify in ocean food chains. Among the persistent
contaminants, most attention has been paid to the lipophilic contaminants, such
as the polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). However, perfluorinated compounds
(PFCs) also appear to biomagnify in ocean food chains, with the highest
concentrations in marine mammals at high trophic levels.

In humans and other mammals, the developing immune system may be a particularly
vulnerable target organ. Experimental evidence and studies on marine mammals
suggest that ocean pollutants can adversely affect several immune function
parameters. Epidemiological research is crucial to determine whether a human
health risk is present at current environmental exposure levels, and to assess
whether developmental immunotoxic effects lead to permanent functional
alterations with possible implications for health and immune-mediated disease
later in life.

In this project, an epidemiological research team at the Harvard University
School of Public Health, in cooperation with colleagues at the University of
Southern Denmark and the Faroese Hospital System, will study previously
established birth cohorts of over 1,000 human subjects with a wide range of
exposures to PFCs and other immunotoxicants in two North Atlantic fishing
communities, the Faroe Islands and Greenland. Both populations are vulnerable
due to high-level seafood consumption, and traditional diet includes marine
mammals at high trophic levels. Due to differences in dietary habits, a wide
range of exposures exists, with highly elevated PFC exposures in Greenlanders.
The team will use serum concentrations of antibodies against vaccine antigens as
a marker of immunotoxicity. Prenatal exposure information and background
immunology data are already available from the cohorts; this preexisting
information along with banked serum samples will therefore allow this new study
to cover exposures onwards from intrauterine development and to document
outcomes in childhood through to adulthood.

Broader Impacts: The new understanding of ocean immunotoxicant risks gained in
this study is expected to benefit public health officials and environmental
managers responsible for making policy decisions related to the utilization of
marine resources related to seafood production. Such benefits should extend
beyond the study areas to populations worldwide where seafood is a significant
component of the daily diet.

JOINT FUNDING BY NSF AND NIEHS: The original proposal on which this project is
based (R01 ES021960-01) was submitted to the National Institutes of
Environmental Health Sciences (NIH/NIEHS) in response to Funding Opportunity
Announcement RFA-ES-11-013 , ?Oceans, Great Lakes and Human Health (R01)?, an
opportunity jointly sponsored by NSF. This project is cooperatively funded
through separate awards from NSF and the National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences (NIEHS). This award constitutes the NSF contribution to the
project.