* 1321932
* Mechanisms and Efficiency of Ductile Strain Localization Below Major Continental Strike-slip Faults: Numerical Experiments Incorporating Laboratory-derived Rheologies
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Yuri Fialko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2016
* USD 204,579.00

This project will investigate the long-term deformation and strain evolution due
to major strike-slip faults in the continental crust. In particular, the project
will use numerical models to evaluate the efficiency of various strain-softening
mechanisms, such as thermo-mechanical coupling, grain-size reduction, and
mylonitic fabric, and assess the degree to which these promote or inhibit strain
localization, individually and in combination, in response to long-term fault
slip. This will be accomplished using finite element models that will
incorporate realistic geotherms, far-field loading rates and loading histories,
depth-dependent compositions, and constitutive relationships inferred from
laboratory experiments. The simulations will investigate conditions under which
permanent shear zones may develop in an initially unstrained ductile substrate.
The magnitude and distribution of deviatoric stresses in the ductile lower crust
and upper mantle will be evaluated, and inferences made about the long-term
strength of continental lithosphere as a function of temperature regime,
composition, deformation rate, total displacement, and other relevant factors.
Observables that will be brought to bear on the model predictions include grain
size distributions from the exposed mid-to-lower crustal shear zones, inferences
of deviatoric stress from petrologic and micro-structural data, seismic
structure and anisotropy below active fault zones, and geodetic observations of
transient and secular deformation due to major strike-slip faults. The
respective data and models will be used to test the hypothesis that the
distributed viscoelastic flow and localized shear in the ductile substrate
represent end member behavior of fault zones with different degree of maturity,
with localized shear prevalent on high-slip rate, high total offset (e.g. plate
boundary) faults, and diffuse deformation dominating for immature faults.

The degree to which strain is localized in the ductile part of the lithosphere
below major faults is a major unresolved question in continental tectonics. Two
classes of models have been proposed: one postulating a broadly distributed
viscous deformation in the lower crust and upper mantle (the "thin lithosphere"
model), and another one postulating extension of localized shear well below the
brittle-ductile transition (the "thick lithosphere" model). Understanding the
mechanics of lithospheric shear zones is essential for a number of problems in
continental tectonics, including the long-term strength of the Earth's crust and
upper mantle, stress transfer from the relative plate motion to seismogenic
faults, and, ultimately, seismic hazards. Geological and geophysical evidence
has been presented in support of both the "thin" and "thick" lithosphere models,
possibly indicating differences in deformation styles between various locations,
tectonic settings, deformation rates, and total displacements. If such
variability exists, it is of interest to establish the main controlling factors
and governing mechanisms on the observed deformation styles. Realistic models of
long-term deformation informed by the experimentally determined ductile
properties of rocks will bear on the long-standing debates such as the block-
like versus diffuse deformation in the continental interiors, the effective
strength of the continental lithosphere, and the mechanisms of transient
deformation following large earthquakes.