* 1321428
* STTR Phase I:  Multi Scale Solution Tool For Solving Complex Life Science Problems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Andrew Myers, Multi Scale Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 254,957.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the feasibility of software for the development of solutions to
complex life science problems. Life science is truly an interdisciplinary field
for which real collaborations can substantially advance the level of technology
and product development. However, collaboration between industry and
academic/government institutions is currently limited by (a) necessity for
industrial collaborators to analyze large amount of complex and specialized
information, (b) various heterogeneous nondisclosure policies to protect
intellectual property rights of collaborators, and (c) legitimate concerns of
businesses that disclosures of their R&D problems to the public could weaken
their business position. To address these fundamental limitations, software will
be developed with the following innovative components: (1) Text and data mining
model for finding nonobvious biological relationships, and (2) Secure workspace
for data storing and sharing implemented in new program language that enforces
confidentiality and integrity policies of data resource. Phase I will produce
preliminary software and documented results of feasibility studies. The results
of these studies will be analyzed to evaluate broader impacts and commercial
potential of proposed software.

The broader impact/commercial impact of this will be to develop innovative,
unique software that will drastically change the way problems in life science
and other interdisciplinary fields are currently solved. The software is
intended to advance the level of product development in life science and other
interdisciplinary industries, and to aid in analyzing large text data. The
targeted customers will be life science small businesses as they have a great
need for external collaboration but they have limited resources and expertise.
Other potential customers include university professors and independent experts
with relevant expertise in subject areas. It is anticipated that, once the
proposed tool has matured, it also will be used by large industrial customers
for troubleshooting problems that require bold action and broad cooperation.