* 1321018
* Computational Algorithms for Imaging, Design and Inverse Problems of Particle Propagation in Heterogeneous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Kui Ren, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 259,565.00

This project is concerned with the computational study of some imaging, optimal
design and inverse problems related to systems of kinetic equations that model
the propagation of particles in complex heterogeneous media. The objective is to
develop fast and robust numerical algorithms by intelligently utilizing
information on the structures of both the model equations and the inverse
problems that we obtained through computational and mathematical studies of
them, sometimes in simplified settings. Precisely, the proposed research include
(i) to develop fast forward and inversion algorithms by preconditioning the
computation with computationally less expensive models; (ii) to develop
efficient computational strategies for uncertainty quantification and variance
reduction in the imaging and inverse problems involve randomness; and (iii) to
develop and validate direct non-iterative methods for imaging in extended
targets in heterogeneous media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main motivation for
the study is the application of the problems in (i) optimizing the delivery of
radiation therapy to caner patients; (ii) designing efficient nano-scale
semiconductor devices; and (iii) imaging extended targets in highly-scattering
random environments. The proposed research is expected to have long-term impacts
in the practices of intensity-modulated radiation treatment planning for cancer
treatment, semiconductor solar cell design for energy harvesting, and imaging in
heterogeneous environment for homeland security applications. The project
involves a significant education component that aims at training both
undergraduate and graduate students. The ideas and techniques developed in this
project will be incorporated into a graduate level class on numerical methods
for imaging and inverse problems which will benefit graduates who are interested
in applying advanced mathematical and computational techniques to solve real-
world problems. The lecture notes for this graduate class will be made
accessible to the general public through the PI's webpage hosted by the PI's
institution.