* 1321083
* III: Small: Analysis and Models of Social Network Structure, Growth and Dynamics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Ben Zhao, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2017
* USD 515,992.00

Online social networks (OSNs) such as Facebook and LinkedIn are valuable
infrastructures for communication and interactions between a large volume of
Internet users. For years, researchers have been trying to answer fundamental
questions about the formation of these complex networks, their ongoing
evolution, formation of internal structures, and change at different time
scales. Since answering these questions requires real dynamics datasets at
scale, most prior studies have been significantly constrained by a lack of data.
The Principal Investigators have been granted access by an OSN provider to a
uniquely detailed and complete trace of dynamics over 2+ years of a social
network. The goal is to mine and analyze the traces of network dynamics to
validate existing models and guide new models for fine grain network dynamics.
Objectives include analysis of the preferential attachment model at different
stages of network growth, developing new models of network dynamics at fine
granularity in both time and graph topology, and explorations of applications
driven by novel metrics of graph dynamics.

The work has the potential to dramatically change our understanding of dynamics
in online social networks. By taking an empirical, data-driven approach to
network modeling, they can shed light on how traditional models of network
dynamics deviate from ground truth. In addition, they are developing empirical
models that are more effective at accurately predicting network events at small
scales. Both PIs Zhao and Zheng are heavily invested in educational and outreach
programs for female and minority students: female students and postdocs often
outnumber male counterparts in their lab. The PIs will disseminate their results
to their collaborators atRenren and LinkedIn, and also share results with
researchers at Twitter, Zynga, Facebook and Google through existing technical
contacts and informal visits/talks. For further information, please see the
project webpage (http://sandlab.cs.uchicago.edu/dynamics/).