* 1321599
* Collaborative Research: Stable strontium isotope ratios (88/86Sr) in abiotic and microbially mediated barite
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Elizabeth Griffith, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2015
* USD 41,250.00

Results from the proposed research will generate novel isotope measurements from
barite, a highly stable and widely-distributed mineral found in magmatic,
metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks of all ages, as well as in soils, aerosol
dust, and extraterrestrial material. Establishing the controlling parameters of
stable Sr-isotopic fractionation in barite will open a new avenue for geological
and environmental research including geochemical, hydrogeological, hydrothermal,
and paleoenvironmental studies. This fundamental research will lay the
groundwork for future studies in the earth sciences using measurements of mass
dependent Sr isotopes in barite. Barite may be an ideal vehicle to address
critical questions in the earth sciences, including early earth biogeochemistry,
evidence of potential life in extraterrestrial samples, reconstruction of
temperatures in formation fluids such as springs and seeps, water rock
interactions, tracking provenances of atmospheric inputs into soils, and
reconstructing global changes in Sr2+ budgets during earth?s
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Very few laboratories in the world have developed
methods to measure stable Sr-isotope ratios; and work on this new stable
isotopic system proposed here will provide a unique opportunity to contribute to
the development of this new isotope system in its beginning stages. Graduate and
undergraduate students will have the opportunity to work and interact in
multiple laboratories on this research project (at Kent State Univ., USC, Univ.
of Akron, UCLA, Univ. of Oklahoma) thus developing and mentoring research and
analytical skills. They will conduct careful experiments, collect samples in the
field at an established field site in western Oklahoma and interact with
students involved in this project as well as field sites in western Colorado and
northern Utah. Outreach activities in local high schools will be established
through a published hands-on learning module which investigates fundamental
concepts of the ?greenhouse effect? and will employ our current geology students
to visit their old high schools and relay their excitement for the geosciences
as a future career.