* 1321528
* STTR Phase I:  High-Yield Hydrogen Production from Biomass Sugars by Cell-Free Biosystems for Mobile Electricity Generation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Zhiguang Zhu, Cell-Free Bioinnovations Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will scale up high-yield
hydrogen production from maltodextrin and water mediated by cell-free enzymatic
biosystems and develop prototype mobile electricity generators (MEGs). Cell-free
biosystems for biomanufacturing (CFB2) implement complicated biochemical
reactions in one pot by the in vitro assembly of more than three enzymes and/or
cofactors. The Co-PI at Virginia Tech has demonstrated the production of nearly
theoretical yields of hydrogen from sugars (including hexoses and pentoses) and
water as CH2O (sugar) + H2O 2H2 + CO2 using CFB2. In this STTR I project, Cell-
Free Bioinnovations Inc. will scale up enzymatic hydrogen production from a 2-mL
bioreactor (current laboratory scale) to a 5-L bioreactor and integrate this
process with a proton exchange membrane fuel cell stack for the high-efficiency
generation of electricity. These integrated systems will charge numerous
portable electronics and provide emergency power at low costs. The specific
objectives are (i) scale-up of recombinant thermophilic enzyme production
through high-cell density fermentation, (ii) discovery and production of more
high-activity and ultra-thermostable enzymes, (iii) construction of synthetic
enzyme complexes (metabolons) for easy purification and fast reaction rates,
(iv) further enhancement of hydrogen generation rate by three fold, and (v)
demonstration of prototype MEGs.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the scale-up of
enzymatic production of hydrogen, which is mainly produced from natural gas and
crude oil. Its satellite production facilities and its distribution are not
widely available and are too costly. In the future, the production of low-cost,
green hydrogen from local, renewable biomass sugars would create
biomanufacturing and agricultural jobs in the bioeconomy, lower infrastructure
costs for the hydrogen economy, decrease reliance on finite fossil fuels, and
reduce net greenhouse gas emissions. Prior to large-scale production of
economically competitive sugary hydrogen, several high-end applications are
suggested for development to further improve the CFB2 platform, for example,
MEGs, enzymatic fuel cells, and chiral compound synthesis. MEGs based on sugars
will have some special markets. In addition, the new biotechnology platform CFB2
has unique advantages, such as higher product yields (i.e., neither by-product
formation nor cell mass synthesis), greater engineering flexibility, faster
reaction rates, broader reaction conditions (e.g., high temperature, low pH,
organic solvent, toxic compound), and easier operation and control, compared
with whole-cell fermentation. It is believed that the CFB2 platform could be
used to produce jet fuels and long chain alcohols, store electricity, and fix
CO2 in the future.