* 1321163
* SHF:Small:Fine-Grain Many-Core Processor Arrays for Efficient Enterprise Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Bevan Baas, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 09/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Data centers worldwide use approximately 30 billion watts of electricity with
data centers in the United States using approximately 8 to 10 billion watts.
Power consumption of datacenter systems is expected to continue to grow both
absolutely and as a percentage of national consumption. The goal of the proposed
research is to develop massively parallel processor arrays that work in
conjunction with traditional enterprise-class processors to compute datacenter
workloads with vastly greater efficiency. The proposed research may lead to new
applications and capabilities that were previously constrained by power
dissipation or processing throughput.

Project participants will propose, model, develop, and characterize novel fine-
grain many-core architectures, VLSI chip designs, and application algorithms for
a processor array serving as a co-processor or functional unit. The proposed
programmable fine-grained many-core processor array contains no algorithm-
specific hardware and is of a core granularity that is very lightly explored in
prior work. The array will operate inside or near, and in co-ordination with a
host enterprise-class processor and compute key computational kernels often with
similar or higher performance than the host processor, but with orders of
magnitude higher energy efficiency. During kernel computation, the host
processor could attend to other tasks or enter a low power state. The targeted
workloads include sorting, regular expression based pattern matching,
encryption, data compression, video encoding and decoding, and other enterprise
workloads of high impact that are discovered during the course of the research.