* 1321914
* Collaborative Research: Towards an Understanding of the Collective Behavior of Regional Fault Networks: The Marlborough Fault System, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* James Dolan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 359,607.00

The primary goal of this project is to determine how different faults in
regional fault networks interact with one another to accommodate the relative
motion of tectonic plates over time scales ranging from one to a few dozen
earthquakes. The research team will focus on a particularly promising study area
in northern South Island, New Zealand, where relative motions between the
Pacific and Australian plates are partitioned amongst a set of four, parallel
strike-slip faults known as the Marlborough fault system. Historical and paleo-
earthquake data from the Marlborough fault system, which provides a useful
analog for similar fault system elsewhere in the world (e.g., northern and
southern California, Northwest Turkey, Hispaniola, parts of central and
Southeast Asia, Iran-Pakistan), reveal tantalizing hints of complex earthquake
occurrence, with possible temporal and spatial clustering of earthquakes that
varies from cycle to cycle. But currently there are too few fault slip rate and
paleo-earthquake age and displacement data to fully assess the collective
spatial-temporal behavior of the Marlborough fault system. In order to document
in detail how the four Marlborough faults share the tectonic plate motions, the
research team will determine the rates of slip along each of these faults at a
variety of time scales, ranging from a few to a few dozen earthquakes, as well
as the ages and displacements of past earthquakes. Key to this effort will be
the acquisition of about 300 square kilometers of high-resolution lidar digital
topographic data from the four main Marlborough fault system faults. These data
allow the efficiently mapping and measurement in unprecedented detail of fault
offsets ranging from about 100 meters down to the smallest offsets that occurred
in the most recent earthquakes. The Marlborough fault system is a particularly
target-rich environment in this regard because many of the large fault-crossing
rivers in the Marlborough region exhibit suites of river terrace edges that have
been offset by variable amounts. Combining these offset features with age data
from different geochronometers (radiocarbon and optically stimulated
luminescence) will yield exceptionally detailed fault slip rates at a range of
time scales from individual ruptures back though several dozen earthquakes. The
researchers will also excavate trenches across the four faults to determine
paleo-earthquake ages and displacements, allowing cross-correlation with the
youngest slip rates. The resulting data, together with existing data and the
results of ongoing studies by other groups, will allow documentation of the
behavior of the Marlborough faults over a wide range of temporal and spatial
scales, providing the information necessary for systematic comparison with the
earthquake behavior of similar systems elsewhere in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this project is to advance
understanding of the way regional networks of large faults store and release
seismic energy, with a particular focus on determining the relative importance
of so-called emergent phenomena such as clusters of large-magnitude earthquakes
and periods of transiently elevated storage of seismic energy that may not be
expected in the current understanding of earthquake physics and that are not
accounted for in current seismic assessment strategies. The results will help
the seismic hazard community to understand how regional fault networks
distribute deformation in time and space - the keys to developing more accurate,
next-generation seismic hazard assessment strategies, as well as the basis for
future modeling efforts aimed at understanding the causes of such phenomena.
This international effort will expand already strong scientific collaboration
between the US researchers and their New Zealand collaborators, benefitting both
groups by fostering increased interaction between the groups, both of which face
similar seismic hazards in their respective countries. Specifically, in addition
to working closely with seismic hazard planners at the US Geological Survey to
ensure timely implementation of their results, the PIs are actively
collaborating with colleagues at GNS Science, which is responsible for
implementation of seismic hazard assessment in New Zealand, ensuring that the
results of this project will be also incorporated into New Zealand's next-phase
seismic hazard assessments.