* 1321403
* EAGER: Stochastic Energy Harvesting Models for Wireless and Body Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Alireza Seyedi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2014
* USD 113,173.00

Despite many energy efficient communication techniques developed in the past few
years, energy supply of sensor nodes remains the main challenge in the design of
wireless and body sensor networks. Harvesting energy from ambient sources such
as light, wind or vibration is the most attractive solution to this problem. Due
to the stochastic nature of these ambient sources of energy, the amount of
harvested energy can no longer be described by simple and deterministic models,
rather sophisticated stochastic models are necessary that accurately describe
the variation and correlation of the harvested energy in time and space. Such
models are not available today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
detailed stochastic energy models based on long term empirical measurements of
three different ambient sources of energy, namely human motion for body sensor
networks and solar and wind for wireless sensor networks. For human motion
source, the measurements take place at multiple locations on the subject?s body
using wearable accelerometers, for the duration of two days. For wind and solar
sources the measurements are performed using multiple pyranometers and wind
sensors, for the duration of one year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analogous to the
channel and traffic models widely in use today, the energy models resulting from
this research will provide a basis upon which many research projects concerning
design and performance analysis of harvesting-aware communication techniques can
be built. These models will be disseminated through publications as well as code
provided freely on the Internet.