* 1321572
* STTR Phase I:  Chronically implantable sensor array for optimal studies of human diseases in mouse models
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Jules Magda, Applied Biosensors, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 273,831.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I Project aims to optimize
and test prototypes of continuous, multi-analyte sensors based on stimuli-
responsive hydrogels. The proposed sensor array will be capable of monitoring
multiple biomarkers relevant to several common human diseases such as diabetes,
ketoacidosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and even obesity.
During this project, the first generation wired sensors will be validated by
long-term in vitro and in vivo (mice models) testing. Although the long-term
(beyond current project) goal and final application of the device developed
here-in will be in humans, in this project we will focus on developing a sensor
targeting needs in animal research and the scientific community. This strategy
creates a strong foundation and generates confidence in the sensor for clinical
studies in few years. The proposed work will be accomplished within three
subprojects: 1) Validation of long-term stability of hydrogel-based sensors in
plasma, 2) Optimization of first generation wired implantable sensor array, 3)
Long term validation of sensors in mouse models and basic histology studies. The
team strongly believes they can accomplish these aims and build a product ready
to serve the animal research and scientific community by the end of this
project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project stems from the strong demand and an unmet need for continuous multi-
analyte sensor in human and in animal-research market. Before attempting to
enter the huge and difficult-to-penetrate human-market for continuous metabolic
sensors the team will first generate revenue by providing devices for the more
accessible animal market while continuously improving the sensor array. There
are approximately 50 million research animals in the world. Assuming an average
sales price of $250 per/sensor and the proposed technology addresses 1% of the
total market, annual sales could exceed $100 million. This technology will
provide researchers with a new tool to continuously monitor relevant biomarkers
in a given animal over many days, which not only increases the efficiency of
studying animal models but also supplies greater detail of their metabolism than
is currently allowed by periodic sampling. A continuous monitoring system would
save money, speed research, and provide greater insights into the pathogenesis
and new potential therapies of diseases.