* 1321071
* EXP: Collaborative Research: A cyber-ensemble of inversion, immersion, collaborative workspaces, query and media-making in mathematics classrooms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Ronald Cole, Boulder Language Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 09/30/2016
* USD 100,000.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education EXP project, the PIs focus on
designing classrooms as collaborative workspaces and learning how such learning
environments can foster learning well. They are addressing these issues in high
school mathematics classrooms. Learners view videos and read textbooks as
homework to begin to learn new content and to deepen their understanding of
material already covered. The classroom is "flipped"; rather than the teacher
lecturing, the teacher plays the role of mentor and facilitator as learners work
in the classroom at making sense of what they've read or heard, applying what
they are learning, and deepening their understanding and capabilities. The hard
work of learning is thus done along their peers as collaborators and the teacher
available as a mentor. Based on cognitive and socio-cognitive theories of
learning, the PIs have designed an ensemble of strategies and technological
tools for promoting learning in such an environment. The tools include video for
story telling in support of reflection, electronic pen-and-ink, and intelligent-
tutoring type systems, but the innovation is in the integration of these tools
into an ensemble. Research addresses how such an ensemble of technologies can
foster deeply absorbing and effective learning experiences and important
dynamics associated with learning when collaborative workspaces are in place in
formal classrooms.

Many educators and educational theorists are experimenting with the idea of
"flipped classrooms," where learners read or view video lectures outside of
class and spend classroom time working on problems together or working on
projects, in effect, using classroom time for making sense together of what is
being learned, applying what is being learned, deepening understanding, and
mastering capabilities. While such an approach holds promise for promoting
engagement and learning, little systematic research has been done about how,
exactly, to design such learning environments to best promote deep and engaged
learning. The PIs in this project address that issue, focusing specifically on
students learning high school mathematics.