* 1321937
* Testing Models for the Origin of 186Os/188Os and 187Os/188Os Isotope Variations in the Mantle:   Core Signal, Recycled Components, or Intra-mantle Differentiation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* John Lassiter, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2017
* USD 320,000.00

This project seeks to determine the physical and chemical process(es)
responsible for generating variations in the osmium isotopic compositions of
mantle-derived rocks. Previous studies havesuggested that some osmium isotope
variations in lavas from Hawaii and Gorgona may reflect chemical interaction
between the Earth?s mantle and core. If confirmed, this would have wide ranging
implications for the chemical and thermal evolution of Earth?s interior. Testing
this hypothesis through detailed study is therefore of high importance for the
geologic community. Osmium isotopes are affected by the radioactive decay of
rhenium and platinum, and so osmium isotope variations in geologic materials
reflect long-term fractionation of the platinum/osmium and rhenium/osmium ratios
in different portions of the Earth's interior. Several different processes in
addition to core/mantle interaction can affect the osmium isotope compositions
of different mantle reservoirs. These processes include recycling of oceanic
crust and sediments into the mantle through plate tectonics, ancient mantle
melting and melt extraction, and melting of distinct rock types in the mantle
during melt generation today. Therefore, osmium isotope variations can provide
important constraints on several geologic processes that have helped shape the
chemical and physical evolution of Earth?s interior, but only if the different
mechanisms for generating these isotopic variations can be
distinguished.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will examine correlations
between Osmium isotopes and other geochemical tracers in lavas from Hawaii and
Gorgona Island, thought to be related to deep-seated mantle plumes, and in
several suites of mantle-derived peridotites that span a range in composition.
These analyses will allow the supported researchers to test and confirm or
refute several hypotheses that have been proposed to explain unusual enrichments
in 186Os (an isotope generated by the decay of 190Pt) in some plume-derived
lavas. By combining high-precision 186Os/188Os data with complementary isotopic,
major, and trace element data, the supported research will test several proposed
mechanisms for generation of elevated 186Os/188Os ratios in mantle materials.
The selected lava suites are chosen because they either have been reported to
possess elevated 186Os/188Os in earlier studies (Hawaiian Islands, Gorgona), or
because they possess geochemical characteristics that suggest a significant role
for pyroxenite or eclogite melting in their generation (Australs HIMU lavas).
The peridotite samples will help constrain the long-term coupling (or lack
thereof) between Pt/Os and Re/Os ratios in the upper mantle, and illuminate the
role that melt depletion plays in the 190Pt-186Os evolution of the upper mantle.
Combined, this study will place stronger constraints on the different models
proposed for the origin of Pt/Os fractionation and 186Os/188Os variation in the
mantle than is currently possible, thereby addressing an important and
longstanding controversy in the Geological Sciences and increasing the utility
of the 190Pt-186Os decay system in future geochemical studies.