* 1321857
* Measurements of Thermal Transport Properties of Melts vs. Temperature and Composition: Theoretical Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Anne Hofmeister, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2018
* USD 242,891.00

Volcanic and igneous activity, which involve through production of melts known
as magmas and their subsequent transport and cooling, play a crucial role in how
Earth's layered structure has evolved and cooled over time. Melts differing in
composition from their source produce various rock types found on the Earth.
Earth's cooling rate is affected because melts can move, carrying heat with
them, but impede heat conduction if stationary, because they have low thermal
diffusivity (D). Up to the present, methods to accurately measure D were not
available. The proposed work is timely because accurate measurements of D at
high temperatures (T) are now possible. The proposed study is made possible by
technology transfer from materials science to geoscience. Although the immediate
use for these new data is to better understand the processes of rock melting and
volcanism, and the balance of heat transport by flow and heat impedance by slow
conduction, the findings will help us to understand microscopic processes and
therefore reveal the basic physics of heat transport. Thus, this study thus will
potentially contribute to our understanding of the Earth's history of internal
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, heat transport in melts well
above melting temperature will be quantified using laser flash analysis (LFA)
which lacks commonly occutring systematic errors of contact losses and spurious
radiative transfer gains. Although LFA is the industry standard in materials
science, the investigator's laboratory is the only one in Earth science pursuing
this technique. Thus far they have measured D of a small number of glass
compositions and to at most a few hundred degrees above the glass transition
temperature (because flow terminates data collection from suspended samples),
yet these few results have provided important insights into melt behavior.
Results just above melting of a small number of compositions have provided new
insight into microscopic behavior of complex magmas, but the findings of an
heretofore unrecognized radiative mechanism involving IR photons, needs to be
verified before accurate models can be constructed that permit extrapolation of
these data to conditions in Earth's interior. It is proposed to: (1) Develop a
new graphite cell enabling measurement of D for 'fragile' silicate liquids above
liquidus over a large T range; (2) Independently measure dD/dT of several
geologically important melts by applying their current technique to glasses with
varying H2O contents, for which the glass transition temperature varies
drastically; (3) Determine D as a function of T for diverse lavas from through
the glass transition to superliquidus conditions; (4) Quantify effects of Si,
Fe, and Ca which their present data indicate are important; (5) Construct a new
microscopic model based on the results and formulae for Dmelt(T,X,P), for
subsequent use for a variety of Earth Sciences applications that require thermal
modeling.