* 1321424
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Molecularly Targeted Tracer for Specific and Sensitive Imaging of Cancer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Anka Veleva, Clave Biodesign, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project takes an innovative
approach at tumor targeting by investigating an entirely novel tumor targeting
platform that utilizes bone marrow derived, circulating tumor homing cells as
natural vectors. Through screening of phage display peptide libraries we have
identified high affinity peptide ligands that bind these cells with high
specificity. These high affinity, high specificity peptide ligands and their
applications for molecular imaging of tumor?s blood supply represent the
innovation in this Phase I project. Radiolabeled peptide directed compounds will
be synthersized and their potential to deliver molecular ?payloads? specifically
to malignant vasculature in a mouse model of cancer will be characterized. The
results from this development effort will provide proof-of-principle validation
for a new targeting paradigm in which circulating tumor localizing cell
populations can be exploited for highly transformative and innovative technology
development for the benefit of cancer patients.

The broader impact of this project and the commercialization of the molecular
diagnostic tracer developed here will have important implications for furthering
oncology care through personalized approaches: First, specific and sensitive
imaging based on monitoring of homing of circulating cells to tumor tissue will
be beneficial for tumor staging and re-staging. Second, in addition the outcomes
of this development effort would provide more predictable information relevant
to treatment that has been lacking so far. Close assessment of patient?s
response to treatment by monitoring the presence or absence of circulating tumor
homing cells would improve treatment outcomes and guide the development of
personalized therapies. Third, especially promising clinical direction is to
selectively deliver anti-angiogenic, and therapeutic compounds as anticancer
strategies. Because endogenous cells are utilized as natural biologic vectors,
the barriers to commercialization and clinical implementation of our innovative
diagnostic tracer are much lower than for other emerging technologies.