* 1321203
* Collaborative Research: Negotiating identity and building the landscape: 3rd millennium BC mortuary traditions in Bronze Age Oman
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Kimberly Williams, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 98,349.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Kimberly Williams and
Lesley Gregoricka will conduct three field seasons of bioarchaeological and
geospatial research on Early Bronze Age (ca. 3100-2000 BC) mortuary sites in
northern Oman. This study seeks to investigate shifts in mortuary traditions
over time -- including (a) the construction of monumental tombs, (b) the
geographic origins of the individuals interred within these structures, and (c)
tomb placement on the landscape -- as a reflection of changing perceptions of
rural identity in response to growing interregional interaction with urban
areas. As a highly visible burial center at the crossroads of these
interregional trade routes, the Al Khubayb Necropolis provides a unique
opportunity to examine these temporal changes during a formative period of
transition in the Oman Peninsula, in part by recognizing the importance of
Transitional tomb forms.

The research objective is to evaluate these tombs as symbols of the changing
socioeconomic roles of these Early Bronze Age communities, as rural areas
increasingly engaged with large urban centers to provide them with much-desired
resources, including copper. As engagement in interregional exchange networks
increased, local social hierarchies would have developed, causing conflict
between traditional, kin-based tribal factions and those with increasing power
over aspects of trade and monument construction. Such conflict in group identity
will be visible in the form of conflicting mortuary customs simultaneously
attempting to promote and suppress social differentiation.

This study also posits that increasingly complex exchange networks will result
in significant variability in strontium and oxygen isotopic signatures
(incorporated via diet into the teeth of the individuals who lived and died in
the Early Bronze Age), not only because of increased regional mobility between
the interior of the peninsula and the coast (due to the mining and transport of
copper), but also because of emerging interregional economic ties with the
larger Persian Gulf. Correspondingly, this project seeks to identify broader
shifts in isotopic variation between early and later periods as a correlate of
regional and interregional mobility associated with changing forms of social
organization and definitions of group identity.

The goal of this research program is to provide new perspectives on the question
of identity formation in the periphery. This will be accomplished not by
focusing on the intensively studied end-points of trade, such as Mesopotamia and
the Indus Valley, but in the hinterlands of Oman, where goods were actively
processed and trade carried out. Much research in the past has focused on the
interaction of large, core power brokers with one another; this research will be
transformative because of its focus on a relatively invisible rural people,
whose existence as semi-nomadic pastoralists is poorly understood. As opposed to
viewing changing mortuary and mobility patterns as wholly defined by the
influence of interregional exchange with urban areas including Mesopotamia, such
an approach takes agency into account by focusing on the adaptations of local
communities to the social hierarchies that developed from exposure to these
trade systems.

The broader impacts of this study include the education and training of local
Omanis as part of building a more successful program of archaeological heritage
in Oman. Additionally, this project is committed to increasing student diversity
and providing learning and research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students. Students will not only receive training in bioarchaeological field
techniques but will also be involved in all aspects of inquiry, including sample
preparation, chemical and geospatial analysis.