* 1321143
* CIF: Small: Optimized Receiver Design Integration for Diversity and Cooperative Transmissions Beyond Belief Propagation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2018
* USD 338,430.00

This work develops a novel receiver methodology to integrate signal detection
and forward error correction in multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO)
communications and various diversity transmissions. Moving beyond traditional
approaches relying on belief-propagation, this investigation into the rather
classic open problem of integrated signal detection and decoding involves novel
joint optimization formulations that incorporate binary field parity constraints
imposed by the low-density parity check within maximum likelihood detection
frameworks for unified optimization. This novel framework is general and
encompasses a number of practical transmission models, including distributed
antennas, opportunistic cooperative networking, and signal retransmission as
well as their integrations. This project has broad impacts on engineering,
education, and society. Its success can lead to new research directions, new
tools, and results to help advance other science and engineering fields.

Focusing on multicarrier MIMO signal reception, the investigators will develop
and optimize integrated receivers for important wireless network diversities
including distributed transmissions, cooperative MIMO, and hybrid-ARQ
retransmission systems. The new design methodology emphasizes integration of
multiple constraints from incompatible fields. By reformulating and relaxing
joint detection and decoding problems into convex optimization, the
investigators will design high performance receivers that are efficient and are
robust to various forms of uncertainties in channel state information. Such a
novel approach to receiver design integration represents a fundamental and
practical design paradigm that can fully utilize various a priori signaling and
code constraints for joint detection and decoding against channel distortions
and other non-idealities to achieve high performance, efficiency, and
reliability. The research findings can contribute practically to improvement of
future wireless services and broaden their applications in many practical fields
where quality, efficiency, and distributivity concerns are paramount.