* 1321897
* Metamorphic and Tectonic Evolution of the Tethyan Himalaya, Central Nepal
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 192,172.00

In this project, new petrologic methods are being developed to help constrain
the pressure-temperature-time evolution of metamorphic rocks of the Tethyan
Himalayan Sequence exposed in central Nepal. These rocks are key lithologies for
understanding the early history of the Himalayan orogen and for testing tectonic
models, but their calcareous compositions have defied previous petrologic and
chronologic efforts. Recent petrologic advances, however, indicate that titanite
major element, trace element (Zr), and U-Pb isotope geochemistry can
simultaneously constrain pressure, temperature and age of formation. Titanite is
extremely common in Himalayan calcareous rocks. Crystals exhibit chemically and
chronologically distinct sub-grain domains and preserve crystallization
conditions to temperatures of about 800 Â°C. By determining pressure-temperature-
time conditions for these different domains, we can for the first time map out
the pressure-temperature-time evolution of these rocks. These data will
discriminate among models of collisional orogenesis, particularly the degree to
which the middle and lower crust flows plastically, and may provide a unique
window into the early tectonic history of the Himalaya. Results will also
broadly impact investigations of igneous petrogenesis and ages and histories of
hydrothermal and ore systems. All data will be permanently archived with
MetPetDB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses several fundamental
problems of how continental crust behaves during plate collisions, especially
the degree to which the middle and lower crust flows plastically, and how
extensional systems, which thin the crust, can form when the overall forces
should cause thickening. Our work will also develop new interpretational methods
that will advance research in igneous, hydrothermal and ore-forming processes.
In addition to the research goals of the project, a two to three day workshop
will be held at Tribhuvan University in Kathmandu to help train Nepalese
scientists in analytical and interpretational methods and how these data can be
used to discriminate among competing hypotheses. This work will also support the
research and training of a new PhD student as well as an undergraduate, who we
will seek to recruit from Boise State University?s LSAMP program. The PI
leverages educational opportunities in his undergraduate and graduate courses at
Boise State University, which reaches a different student demographic than other
American universities.