* 1321924
* Collaborative Research:  Windows of Opportunity: Exploring the Controls on the Depths of Eruption-forming Silicic Magma Bodies Using Improved Thermodynamics and Dynamics Models
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Mark Ghiorso, OFM Research
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2016
* USD 159,228.00

A growing number of lines of evidence suggest that silicic magma bodies ? which
give rise to hazardous explosive volcanic eruptions ? are characteristic and
possibly restricted to shallow levels of the Earthh's crust. Why is this the
case? What controls the depths from which eruptions emanate? Is it possible to
generate and erupt silicic magma from deeper levels within the crust? How do
magma properties, such as density and viscosity, interact with crustal
properties, such as rigidity and elasticity, to ultimately control the eruption
of magmas? These questions underlie the scientific motivation for this project
that will address them by developing theoretical models derived from physical
and chemical theory in order to predict the behavior of crustal magmas at the
onset of volcanic eruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
collaborative team will build upon their ongoing effort to develop coupled
thermodynamics and fluid dynamics models, and to apply these models to selected
natural systems. In their previous work, they developed an improved model to
perform thermodynamic calculations of phase relations for silicic magmas and
laid the foundation for coupling thermodynamics and fluid dynamics models by
applying them to several natural systems. With this with this Accomplishment-
based renewal award, they will expand these thermodynamic models to include the
effects of carbon dioxide and sulfur on the fluid phase, and fully couple them
with new and existing fluid dynamics models of both magmas and country-rocks,
permitting rigorous evaluation of the interplay between phase change, magma
dynamics, and country-rock behavior. It is also planned used the coupled models
to several silicic systems including the Bishop Tuff, Peach Spring Tuff, Oruanui
Tuff and Cotopaxi Volcano.