* 1321131
* SHF: Small: Enhancing Power, Performance, and Resource Efficiency of Many-core NoCs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Timothy Pinkston, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2018
* USD 499,998.00

Continued advancement of computing is of critical importance given the
ubiquitous use of computing systems in various forms across a growing landscape-
from implantable and wearable biomedical devices to facilitate personalized
healthcare; to embedded and smart-sensor devices to facilitate efficient
transportation and civil infrastructure; to cloud servers to facilitate data
collection, mining, modeling and discovery; to many other scientific, economic,
and social computing applications touching numerous disciplines and sectors.
Unrelenting progress in semiconductor technologies and continual emergence of
new application areas spur unprecedented development of many-core chip
multiprocessors (CMPs) to satisfy increasing performance expectations and
tightening power and resource constraints of future systems. Along with this
parallel processing paradigm comes many challenges for efficiently
interconnecting tens to hundreds of cores on a chip and possibly many thousands
of chips in stand-alone or distributed systems. To meet the challenges, on-chip
network (or NoC) communication architectures must be developed that provide
scalable performance while both requiring minimal resources and consuming ultra-
low power.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research investigates cross-cutting
approaches and techniques to enhance on-chip network power, performance, and
resource efficiency in CMP systems. Architecture-level support is explored for
effectively exploiting circuit-level power-gating techniques. The objective is
to maximize static power savings and minimize performance penalty of the NoC
while conserving overall system dynamic power and energy expenditure when
applying the techniques. Innovative approaches for minimizing NoC resources and
enabling flexibility in resource utilization are also explored. The objective is
to improve NoC resource efficiency while balancing system-level tradeoffs. The
research plan establishes a systematic, comprehensive, and empirically-based
method of investigating efficient communication architectures for many-core CMP
systems, soundly grounded by theoretical support, that will lead to the design
of promising new approaches and techniques. Beyond its contribution to
fundamental advancements in computing, this research has broader potential
impact to society through its outreach activities to broaden participation in
computing and workforce development of persons from diverse backgrounds.