* 1321454
* STTR Phase I:  Anaerobic fermentation system for isoprene production from lignocellulose
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Eric Singsaas, C5-6 TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 224,292.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop a
facultative anaerobic bacterium that ferments sugars obtained from cellulosic
sources into isoprene, a valuable feedstock used in the production of latex
rubber, plastics, and pharmaceuticals. Isoprene also is used for the production
of chemicals, or polymerized into replacements for petroleum-derived jet fuel.
This work will build on prototype E. coli work by redesigning gene constructs
and expressing them in the facultative anaerobic host Bacillus coagulans. Phase
I of this research will entail synthesizing and cloning a set of isoprene
synthase (IspS) genes into B. coagulans; this work will first evaluate ten
separate potential IPS molecules to determine the best one for isoprene
production in bacteria. The engineered B. coagulans strains will be evaluated
for isoprene production by GC-MS headspace analysis. Achieving anaerobic
isoprene production from lignocellulosic sources within at least an order of
magnitude of the rates achieved in E. coli at the end of Phase I will
demonstrate feasibility. Phase II will then focus on improving the flux of
metabolites through the pathway to this enzyme.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to develop a
high efficiency bacterial strain of Bacillus coagulans to ferment sugars derived
from cellulosic materials, such as pulp and pulp mill sludge into isoprene. The
paper industry produces an estimated 2 million tons of fiber sludge annually.
This material is either discarded in a landfill or burned, adding millions of
dollars to the cost of paper production. The composition of this sludge is ~50%
cellulose and hemicellulose on a dry weight basis, making it an excellent
fermentation feedstock when converted into its constituent five and six carbon
sugars. Isoprene is a platform chemical that is capable of playing a central
role in the future bio-economy. Annual global consumption of isoprene is 1.7
billion pounds per year, of which more than 95% is used in the production of
isoprene rubber, styrene-isoprene-styrene block copolymer (SIS), and butyl
rubber, with an estimated price of $1.30 per pound. The balance is used in the
production of high-value isoprenoid derivatives such as vitamins,
nutraceuticals, pesticides, fragrances, flavors and pharmaceuticals. The project
also will provide an improved understanding of the biosynthetic pathway of
isoprene and other high-value isoprenoid compounds.