* 1321987
* Anthropogenic Influence on Oxidative Capacity and BVOC Oxidation During GoAmazon 2014
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2013,04/30/2016
* Frank Keutsch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2016
* USD 374,922.00

This project is focused on improving the mechanistic understanding of processes
controlling the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere in the Amazon, a region
with high concentrations of biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOC), and
investigating the anthropogenic influences on these processes. These objectives
will be pursued through a field study in the central Amazon downwind of the
industrial city of Manaus (population 2 million), Brazil, during two intensive
operating periods (IOPs) (Feb/Mar and Aug/Oct 2014). The Amazon is a good
location for this work since the intense sunlight, high BVOC emissions dominated
by isoprene, and sustained high OH concentrations result in rapid photochemical
processing and formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA).

In-situ measurements of BVOC oxidation products, such as glyoxal, methylgloxal,
and formaldehyde, that have different OH-dependent formation or loss pathways,
will be used along oxidation product ratios and modeling efforts to determine
the key chemical mechanisms of BVOC oxidation during both the wet and dry
seasons. During the wet season, measurements at the site are expected to provide
data related to "clean" conditions, while during the dry season the polluted
plume from Manaus is expected to impact the site, providing information about
the anthropogenic influence (especially that of NOx) on BVOC oxidation. A better
understanding of these mechanisms will clarify the extent to which hydroxyl
radicals are recycled following reactions with BVOC in tropical forests.

This research will to contribute to improved global/regional prediction of
greenhouse-gas lifetimes and aerosol effects from precursor emissions on
climate, air quality, public health, and the environment. It is an important
contribution to the larger GoAmazon-2014 campaign supported by the U.S.
Department of Energy and the government of Brazil to look at the coupled
atmosphere-cloud-terrestrial tropical systems.