* 1321762
* Accomplisment Based Renewal (ABR) to the award Flight-Worthy Condor: Enabling Scientific Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2020
* Todd Tannenbaum, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 7,499,960.00

In the foreseen future a mix of changes in technologies, user and application
requirements and the business model of delivering computing capacity will
continue to pose new challenges to the effectiveness of high throughput
computing (HTC) technologies. To address these challenges, this ongoing research
and development effort will devise new policy-driven capabilities to increase
throughput within a defined budget by effectively managing extremely large
workloads of homogenous jobs running on homogenous machines provisioned by cloud
services. These capabilities will be augmented with effective schedulers for
servers that have multiple cores of execution, many disks, perhaps several GPUs
each with different capabilities, and multiple networking interfaces. New
communities will be introduced to the power of HTC through customized, easy to
deploy and secure software. Novel tools for profiling the requirements and
dependencies of scientific applications will expand the reach of distributed
computing infrastructures that leverage advanced networks to cross institutional
and national boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advances in HTC technologies
will be delivered through the widely adopted HTCondor software tools. More than
150 domestic universities, a growing number of national and international
science communities and a wide spectrum of commercial organizations employ
HTCondor to improve the throughput of their compute and data intensive
applications. This project will sustain a software engineering process that
enables translational work to occur in a transitional manner, building upon the
previous generation of software while simultaneously continuing to offer and
support dependable software that is suitable to handle the ever growing amounts
of experimental and simulated scientific data.