* 1321793
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Households and Capital Networks in the Moche Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Evan Surridge, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 24,749.00

Under the direction of Dr. Brian Billman, Evan Surridge will excavate and
analyze the remains of residential dwellings at the Moche period sites of Ciudad
de Dios and Quebrada del Leon which are located in the Moche Valley, northern
Peru. These are rural sites located in the hinterlands of two of the region's
most important urban centers during the Middle to Late Moche phases (~AD
400-700). Mr. Surridge's research will analyze ceramic and stone tool remains to
examine how rural households' differential access to mass-produced goods from
urban centers may have structured economic difference and
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The northern Peruvian coast is widely
acknowledged as an important anthropological case study in political
centralization and urbanization, but surprisingly little is known about the role
of the region's large rural majority in these processes. This project approaches
Moche phase urban-hinterland integration by examining how centrally-produced
goods were used in household and community economies. Mr. Surridge will conduct
small scale excavations and analyses of collections from six to eight rural
households. Using architecture and pottery collections as proxy measures of
wealth, the project will determine if wealth differences between households
existed, and if so, whether these inequalities were correlated with access to
mass-produced ritual goods. In order to understand variation in household
economies, the project will also undertake a thorough analysis of the ceramic
and stone tool materials used in household agriculture, food processing and
serving, and craft production. Ultimately, Mr. Surridge will seek to correlate
access to the social and cultural capital of ritual goods with unique economic
practices. In this way, the research will examine how the political and
religious symbolism of an emerging centralized polity affected the economic
relationships and activities of participating
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include
benefits for community involvement, education, and professional scholarship.
Through a partnership with MOCHE Inc., Mr. Surridge will offer a series of
public and school presentations in the Moche Valley communities of Ciudad de
Dios and Quirihuac Viejo. These presentations will be conducted in tandem with
the heritage preservation work of the 501c3 non-profit organization MOCHE Inc.,
and will seek to make the economic and educational potential of archaeological
remains accessible to local stakeholders. Educational opportunities will also be
available for undergraduate students from the University of North Carolina-
Chapel Hill and Peru to work as volunteers and assistants in the excavation and
laboratory phases, where they will be trained in field and laboratory methods.
The research will provide data for Mr. Surridge's dissertation at UNC-Chapel
Hill, and also generate collections for research by Peruvian and international
graduate students. The project results will be shared with a scholarly audience
through publications and professional presentations in English and Spanish,
including submissions to peer-reviewed journals and publication of the resulting
dissertation as a monograph.