* 1321633
* The Columbia River Plateau-Snake River Plain Large Igneous Province: Plume, Flux Melting or Both?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2013,09/30/2014
* Samuel Mukasa, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2014
* USD 210,045.00

Mafic volcanism on continents provides a critical window to a large portion of
the mantle not sampled by plate-boundary magmatism, and is key to deciphering
the mantle melting processes of all nonoceanic magmatic provinces. Much of the
Earth?s surface is made from this type of continental magmatism. The plume
model, which is commonly invoked to explain such magmatism, is increasingly
coming under attack as features inconsistent with such an origin are discovered.
The Columbia River Plateau (CRP) / Snake River Plain (SRP) large igneous
province (LIP) has numerous features that bring the plume model into question.
This project is designed to test the hypothesis of whether CRBG-SRP magmatism is
entirely plume-related or is the result of multiple processes, including
decompression anhydrous partial melting of the upper mantle, and regionally
controlled flux melting attributable to proximity to the continental margin
where the mantle has been hydrated by subduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
three-year research project will involve several key analytical areas: (i)
40Ar/39Ar dating of selected samples from the CRP and SRP suites to establish a
chronologic framework for follow-up geochemical work, and for tectonic
interpretations; (ii) petrographic and microprobe analysis of thin sections to
identify samples best suited for major and trace element modeling to determine
the degrees and depth of melting while also being mindful of any fractional
crystallization effects; (iii) identify a subset of samples from 'ii' for
measurements by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, and secondary
ionization mass spectrometry (SIMS) of the primary melt volatile concentrations
for H2O, CO2, S, F, and Cl in olivine-hosted melt inclusions; (iv) measurement
of major elements by electron microprobe and trace elements by laser ablation
ICP-MS on the same melt inclusions as those characterized for volatiles to
identify the compositions of the most primitive magmas preserved in any form
within the CRP/SRP LIP, and (v) measurement of a complete set of Nd, Sr, Pb and
Hf isotopic compositions for 40 samples pooled from both subprovinces to assess
any relationships there might be with eruption volumes and thickness of the
lithospheric mantle. This work will dovetail nicely with EarthScope-sponsored
geophysical studies of continental lithosphericevolution in the northwestern
U.S. (USArray and the Plate Boundary Observatory), and also with plans currently
on the drawing board to drill the SRP under the auspices of the International
Continental Scientific Drilling Program (ICDP).