* 1322734
* Collaborative Research: Helping Engineering Students Transform Their Understanding of Quantum Phenomenon and Devices
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Derek Reamon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 205,912.00

Although physicists have wrestled for decades about how to teach quantum physics
to physics majors, little research and development has focused on helping
engineering students begin developing the conceptual understandings, problem-
solving approaches, and habits of mind they need to become nanotechnology
designers or engineers working in the quantum realm. In this project, a
collaborative team is (1) refining previously developed curricular modules on
quantum physics aimed at sophomore through senior level engineering students,
(2) developing extensive supporting materials for instructors, to help them
adapt and implement the modules to meet the needs of their students, and (3)
doing research and evaluation on students' learning with these materials, across
a range of different types of institutions.

In refining and assessing the curricular modules, all of which have been
classroom tested, the project focuses on students' ontological conceptions about
quantum-scale phenomena and devices. "Ontological conceptions" means the ways in
which students associate particle or wave (or other) ideas with physical
scenarios, and with entities such as electrons, light, photons, and atoms, while
solving problems. Ontological conceptions are particularly salient in quantum
physics, where experts adeptly juggle "particle" and "wave" pictures of quantum
entities, all while remaining aware that quantum entities are completely neither
of the two. Prior research shows that expert engineering design and
engineering/physics problem-solving, including quantitative problem solving,
build on solid conceptual underpinnings and metacognitive sophistication. For
this reason, the project studies not only whether students become more
sophisticated quantum reasoners, but also how students' conceptions and
metacognitive awareness do and do not shift in response to instructional and
contextual cues. This research provides insights that inform (1) the refinement
of the curricular modules and (2) the creation of supporting materials for
instructors, who can better adapt and implement our modules given a well-
articulated "theory" and patterns of student reasoning underlying our
instructional choices. As part of this research and evaluation, the project is
developing on-line assessment tools for probing students' ontological
conceptions and problem-solving skills in quantum mechanics. These tools are
being used across all participating institutions and also are of more general
use to instructors and researchers.

Intellectual Merit: Development of assessment tools and of resources for
instructors is happening in tandem with the refinement of the curricular
modules, all informed by research designed to illuminate mechanisms of learning
about the quantum realm. This research combines large-group surveys with
detailed video analysis of students using the materials and addressing difficult
problems in both classroom and clinical settings. The development of materials
is also guided by feedback from faculty focus groups that include engineers
engaged in nano-scale work as well as exemplary quantum physics instructors.

Broader Impacts: Previous research shows that incorporating collaborative active
learning into engineering courses improves not only achievement but also
retention, particularly of women and underrepresented minority students. Since
students aiming for careers in nanotechnology, surface science, or solid-state
materials and devices increasingly need a deep understanding of quantum physics,
upper-division modern physics courses aimed primarily at engineering majors are
becoming more common. Therefore, by helping such courses incorporate
collaborative active learning, this project is increasing both the size and the
diversity of the workforce capable of generating and harnessing cutting-edge
discoveries at the nano scale.