* 1322300
* Collaborative Research:  Screencasts for Enhancing Chemical Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* John Falconer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 08/31/2016
* USD 546,718.00

The goal of this TUES Type 2 project is to transform undergraduate chemical
engineering education by completing a library of short, validated screencast
videos. Each screencast is less than 10 minutes and includes narration.
Screencasts provide a personalized method of learning that empowers students,
giving them control over the rate and timing of information delivery. Previous
research shows that screencasts help minimize cognitive overload, increase
student confidence, and allow students to take control of their learning. The
project objectives are to: 1) prepare screencasts for chemical engineering
courses and make them available online, 2) engage experts in validating
screencasts for quality and accuracy, 3) assess screencast effectiveness,
evaluate faculty and student usage, and employ assessment findings to improve
screencasts, and 4) expand usage by supporting faculty adoption of screencasts
and increase ease of student use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project team at the
University of Colorado at Boulder is creating more than 800 new screencasts to
add to an existing library of more than 750 screencasts for twelve undergraduate
engineering courses. Topics have a chemical engineering emphasis, but topics and
courses that reach across engineering disciplines are included. The short
screencasts are organized according to concept maps and textbook tables of
contents. In collaboration with Lafayette College, evaluation of the screencasts
is conducted to inform improvements and provide valuable information on the
impact of screencasts on student learning and screencast usage and adoption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project lie in the potential
to reach a large number of engineering students and faculty. The existing
screencasts, which are available online, have been played or downloaded more
than 1.25 million times in 2012. Additionally, more than 430 faculty have
registered for the www.LearnChemE.com website. The screencasts also are a
resource for learners that benefit from the closed captioning options, such as
hearing-impaired or English as a Second Language students. Moreover, dyslexic
students can use screencasts to supplement textbooks since the information in
the screencasts is presented verbally and thus can be easier for them to
understand.