* 1322883
* Engaging Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Frank Wattenberg, HARRISBURG UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, THE
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2015
* USD 550,001.00

The project Engaging Mathematics: Building a National Community of Practice, is
a faculty development and dissemination initiative, which is expanding the work
of the NSF funded project Science Education for New Civic Engagements and
Responsibilities (SENCER) by increasing the use of the SENCER model to create,
implement, and sustain reforms in mathematics education. SENCER focuses on
learning mathematics and science content through "real world" problems and
engaging students in course work that is framed within complex civic issues.
Engaging Mathematics is creating a wider community of mathematics scholars
within SENCER, capable of implementing and sustaining curricular reforms and
broadening SENCER impacts. The project offers a persistent and recurring program
of national dissemination which includes developing assessment tools to monitor
students' perceptions of the usefulness of mathematics, their interest and
confidence in doing mathematics, the students' growth in knowledge content, and
their ability to apply mathematics to better understand complex civic
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engaging Mathematics is a cooperative program
between three lead institutions, Metropolitan State University, LaGuardia
Community College, and the United States Military Academy and four partner
institutions to develop and assess curricula that teach students mathematics
through civic issues. Mathematics faculty not already affiliated with SENCER
will be invited and encouraged to use the materials developed through the
project and adapt them to their unique institutional
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides an opportunity to develop
faculty capacity to connect learning in mathematics courses to real and relevant
local, regional, national and global issues and thus greatly improve students'
retention of specific mathematics concepts and skills, along with their
understanding of the role of mathematical modeling and quantitative literacy in
everyday life. Engaging Mathematics is producing adaptable mathematics curricula
that use the framework of civic issues to study mathematics and its real-world
applications and utilize active, inquiry-based pedagogies. The Engaging
Mathematics community of practice is generating durable collaborations among
faculty members and institutions, fostering cross-fertilization and adoption of
innovative courses and practices, enabling effective assessment and
disseminating materials to the larger mathematics education community. The
impact of the project is helping students appreciate the value and power of
mathematics, regardless of their fields of study, and to enable undergraduates
to use skills and dispositions developed in these courses to have greater and
more effective engagement with the complex civic issues that face them as
members of society.