* 1322307
* International Travel Grant to Support U.S. Researcher Participation in the March 6-7, 2013 J-RAPID Symposium in Sendai, Japan
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Ian Buckle, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2014
* USD 50,440.00

The magnitude 9.0 Great East Japan Earthquake of March 2011 impacted an
extensive region of Japan and subjected the built environment and social systems
of a technologically advanced society in a way unparalleled by any previous
earthquake. The subsequent tsunami inundated and destroyed cities and
infrastructure along hundreds of kilometers of coastline. The March 2011 event
has significant implications for the northwest United States, particularly in
understanding the likely impact of a great earthquake on the Cascadia subduction
zone. As a consequence, the March 2011 event has been closely studied by U.S.
researchers to understand these impacts, identify knowledge gaps, and begin to
fill these gaps to mitigate future losses from events of this scale in the
United States. Rapid response research investigations of this Japanese
earthquake and ensuing tsunami were supported by the National Science Foundation
(NSF) under a series of RAPID awards and supplements. RAPID grantees
participated in a workshop at NSF in February 2012 to identify emerging research
needs from this event and from major New Zealand earthquakes in 2010 and 2011.
This workshop also included researchers from Japan supported by the Japan
Science and Technology Agency (JST) under J-RAPID awards to investigate the
March 2011 event and from New Zealand who had investigated those recent
earthquakes. This award supports travel for up to 15 U.S. researchers to
participant in the final J-RAPID Symposium to be held in Sendai, Japan on March
6-7, 2013. Organized by JST and Japan's Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science, and Technology (MEXT), this international event will include
participation by researchers from France, Indonesia, Japan, and United States.
Participation in this workshop will allow U.S. RAPID grantees to review progress
since the February 2012 workshop in defining emerging research needs with
Japanese colleagues and other international participants. Major topics to be
discussed at symposium include research needs in geosciences (oceanography and
geotechnical engineering), structures (tsunami impacts), nuclear power plants
(communications and social sciences), and advanced technologies (information
technology, social media, and robotics). The symposium will enable exchange of
international experiences and reactions to the March 2011 disaster and share how
different countries have realigned their priorities for research, preparedness,
and recovery as a result of studying this event.

Knowledge gained by participation in this symposium will be used to set research
agendas and priorities for the next decade and beyond. Symposium participants
will also identify collaborative opportunities for joint research and contribute
to an acceleration of advances in earthquake hazard mitigation. Safer, more
resilient communities in earthquake hazard zones in the United States and around
the world are expected to be the long term impact. Dissemination of the findings
and recommendations from the symposium will be made through the distribution of
Symposium Proceedings to be published by the Japanese organizing committee. This
award is co-funded by the Directorate for Engineering, Division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation, and the Office of International and
Integrative Activities.