* 1322835
* Rapid Grant: Collaborative Investigations of the Impact of Superstorm Sandy on the South Shore of Long Island
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Beth Christensen, Adelphi University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2015
* USD 18,220.00

Superstorm Sandy had a historic impact on the New York and New Jersey
coastlines. This collaborative Rapid Response project will assess the effect of
Superstorm Sandy in estuarine and shallow coastal environments, focusing on the
Western Bays and Jamaica Bay. The project will leverage pre-existing geophysical
and sedimentological data collected by the PIs prior to the storm, and will
complement a related field program planned by investigators at the University of
Texas Institute for Geophysics. Previously sampled sites will be reoccupied for
sediment sampling (gravity and box cores, grab samples) and textural and
geochemical tracer analyses. Multibeam bathymetry will be collected in
previously surveyed areas and will cover a new ebb-tidal delta system and
smaller estuarine channels. These data will be combined with transport indicator
and debris field mapping to evaluate the pathways and mechanisms of sediment
transport during Superstorm Sandy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will lead to a
better understanding of the response of the shallow seafloor to extreme storms
and will help to constrain the regional sediment budget, a potentially important
consideration in the rebuilding process. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be involved in the research. The PIs plan to work with regional partners
(South Shore Estuary Reserve, Operation Splash) and engage in public outreach.