* 1322827
* Full-Scale Development: STEM Guides: Building Coherent Infrastructure in Rural Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Janice Mokros, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,690,708.00

This full-scale project in Maine proposes to derive and develop an educational
model for informal science learning in rural areas where ISE venues are non-
existent. Should the project be successful, it could serve as a model for other
rural areas in the Nation. The target group is youth 10-18 years of age and the
content of the endeavor will vary based on the locality. Partners include the
Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance; 4-H; Cornerstones of Science libraries;
the University of Maine, EDC for evaluation; and local
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will divide the state into small
areas that will be designated as mini-networks. Each mini-network will have more
than 1000 eligible students, a network leader, STEM guides, and volunteers. The
geographic area will be small so that face-to-face interactions will be facile.
Each site mini-network) will derive its own emphases depending on local
expertise and industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rural education is an issue in
this country that needs solutions for both its youth education as well as its
public education. Often these regions are underserved in many ways, including
formal education and economic opportunities, leading to a vicious spiral for
residents. So, this project will essentially be a pilot project to work out the
issues for a broader implementation across the country. Several thousand youths
will be impacted across the state. Exposure to the informal STEM learning should
be reflected in enhancement of the general knowledge base and academic
improvement among the 10-18 year old population, the communities, and the formal
education sector.