* 1322626
* CNIC: US-India Collaborative Research to Decipher Function and Evolution of GABAergic Neurotransmission in Planaria
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Latha Ramakrishnan, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 29,570.00

1322626 Latha Ramakrishnan

This Catalyzing New International Collaboration (CNIC) award supports U.S.-India
Collaborative Research to Decipher Function and Evolution of GABAergic
Neurotransmission in Planaria. Professor Latha Ramakrishnan, St. Cloud State
University will initiate an international collaboration with Dr. Priyadarsi De,
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research-Kolkata to develop novel
reagents for investigating the evolution and function of GABAergic
neurotransmission.

The interdisciplinary research endeavor is to design and fabricate cell-type
targeted nanomaterials for GABAergic gene function analysis in planaria using a
powerful new gene knockdown technique for tissue specific controlled suppression
of gene expression. The technique could provide a discrete tool for the
functional characterization of the GABA receptor family in planarians and inform
our understanding of the evolution of this important pathway. There is
increasing interest in the invertebrate organism as a model for various
neurobiological and developmental studies. The researchers combined expertise
spans chemistry, physical chemistry, molecular biology, and materials science.

The award supports travel for the US PI and senior undergraduate student to
visit the collaborator?s lab in India where they will develop and learn how to
synthesize the polymeric nanoparticles that will be derivatized to promote
specific knockdown of key mRNA targets. Proof of principle experiments will be
carried out by graduate and undergraduate students in the respective
laboratories with the overall goal of submitting a competitive pre-proposal to
the Integrative Organismal Systems, Neural Systems Cluster.

If the project goals are achieved, this research could significantly impact the
neurosciences and other fields such as materials science and nanotechnology. It
may also have far-reaching broader impacts on multidisciplinary research and it
will have provided a unique international research experience for the next
generation of student participants in this project.