* 1322820
* COASSTal Communities of Science
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2020
* Julia Parrish, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,689,292.00

COASSTal Communities of Science is a citizen-science project whose goal is to
increase the scientific and educational reach of a highly successful, action-
oriented and rigorous citizen science program - the Coastal Observation And
Seabird Survey Team (COASST), by adding a new data module on marine debris that
will feature innovative technological approaches including mobile apps and web-
based crowdsourcing. The marine debris module will complement an existing module
on beached birds, allowing COASST to more completely assess coastal
environmental health. For instance, marine debris data, focused particularly on
issues of invasive species, harm to wildlife, and debris sourcing, will be
immediately useful in marine science and resource management. Once designed and
vetted by professional scientists and science educators, the new module will be
implemented by citizen scientists in over 100 in-community trainings conducted
throughout the COASST geographic range, from northern California to the coast of
Alaska, including remote coastal communities with limited access to scientific
information. Over 1,000 new participants will join the program, bringing the
total number of active volunteers to 2,000 within the 4 years of the project.

A complementary social science research component will advance the field of
informal STEM learning by focusing on the factors facilitating recruitment and
especially retention in citizen science projects, using COASST as a model. The
current models of science learning in informal contexts will be extended by
bringing them together with conceptual approaches to the development of
interest, communities of practice, and activity theory. Research will
specifically focus on differences in individual motivation to join COASST;
follow participants as they enter the program and eventually become central
members of the COASST community of practice; and assess the degree to which
individual, programmatic and socio-cultural factors contribute to participant
retention. A linked independent evaluation will assess the depth of learning
individuals experience as a function the training and materials they receive,
and amount and type of data they collect. Both research and evaluation
components will utilize pre/post surveys, interviews, and longitudinal
journaling.