* 1322659
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mild Traumatic Brain Injury, Medical Uncertainty, and Disability in the U.S. Military Healthcare System
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2014,06/30/2015
* Lorna Rhodes, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2015
* USD 23,190.00

The wars in Afghanistan and Iraq are characterized by an exceptionally high
ratio of American troops who survive combat with injuries. It has been estimated
that nearly twenty percent of surviving troops have sustained traumatic brain
injuries (TBI). The vast majority of these are mild TBI, also known as
concussion, the most common type of TBI and the least recognizably visible as an
injury that has lasting effects. In the past twenty years the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) and the Department of Defense have raised the profile of
this otherwise "invisible injury" by connecting brain injury to troops'
puzzlingly persistent memory problems, cognitive impairment, irritability and
anxiety. This ethnographic study of post-9/11 TBI investigates how mild TBI is
organized by clinicians, patients, and benefits specialists as a 'signature
wound" of the country's most recent wars, and the effects of this emerging
causal relationship between head injuries and troops' post-combat experiences.
What historically-specific social processes and suppositions about the self, the
body, the brain, and war-fighting are written into current constructions of mild
TBI? This study uses interviews and observation to collect data about the
everyday experiences and observations of three groups of people, VA patients, VA
clinicians, and veterans' benefits specialists, with the aim of understanding
(1) the production of scientific/medical knowledge about "invisible" forms of
TBI, (2) the consequences of TBI's "invisibility", and (3) its subjective and
institutional meaning as a disability. Though it is not a new injury, mild TBI's
recent association with combat has positioned the military and the VA as
powerful stakeholders in the negotiation of its contemporary meaning as an
injury and as a cause of lasting disability. By documenting the complexities and
consequences of this redefinition of concussion as a serious health risk, this
study contributes to the public's understanding of one of the cultural legacies
of the post-9/11 wars.

This research contributes to the anthropological study of disability and medical
anthropology. The research has the potential to make a contribution to the
understanding of the military health care system when the use of that system has
accelerated.

Given the number of veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan with TBI, this
research is timely. This research will provide much needed detail about how this
disability is treated and the challenges veterans face. The results of this
research will be shared with military professionals and among anthropologists
interested in studies of the military and disability. The project will also
provide for the training of a graduate student in anthropology.