* 1322216
* ATD:  A Novel Statistical Framework for Sensor Fusion
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Abel Rodriguez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 635,998.00

This project introduces a novel framework for the development of sensor fusion
algorithms that incorporates ideas from the statistical literature on factor
analysis. The project emphasizes applications to detection problems, and aims to
develop flexible algorithms that are robust to violations of common assumptions
such as Gaussianity of error distributions and linearity of transfer functions.
The framework described by the investigators includes as special cases some of
the most widely used tools for sensor fusion, such as linear and Kalman fusion
filters, which are generalized to include the effects of non-linearities, non-
Gaussian errors, concomitant variables, and correlations across sensors. One
aspect that distinguishes this project from the more traditional literature on
factor analysis (which has a long history, particularly in the social sciences)
is that, in the context of sensor fusion, the latent factors have real physical
meaning and therefore it is often possible to collect training sets that can be
used to learn structural features of the model. The availability of these
training sets allow the researchers to develop complex models for sensor fusion
whose parameters would not be identifiable without them. In addition to
providing a general framework for sensor fusion with wide applicability, this
project also explores the application of these techniques to problems related to
hyperspectral image analysis, particularly in the context of linear supervised
and unsupervised unmixing.

Recent technological advances have dramatically increase both the sources of
data and the amount of data being collected in all kinds of fields. Making
efficient use of these large amounts of information is a critical challenge in
applications ranging from defense and national security to environmental
sciences and industrial processes. This project develops the next generations of
tools for sensor fusion, i.e., to optimally combine information arising from
sensors located in multiple sites, or by monitoring a single at a very high
frequency. The algorithms developed in this project will be more robust and
generally applicable than most state-of-the-art approaches. In addition, because
of the collaborations between the investigator and external groups at national
laboratories and other government agencies, the tools developed in this proposal
will have a deep impact on the ability of the Department of Defense to
accomplish its missions.