* 1322296
* VOSS: Managing Hybrid Challenge Platforms to Promote Innovation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Kevin Desouza, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,677.00

To be practical and sustainable tools for innovation, the coming generation of
community-engagement and crowd-sourcing platforms need to improve the user
experience of participants, while simultaneously providing a reliable mechanism
for synthesizing participants' contributions into usable problem-solving
outputs. In the present project, a multi-disciplinary research team will explore
how community participation spreads, the effects of feedback on participation,
and the changes in community and collaboration structure over time. Empirically,
the project lays out three research questions: 1) characteristics of
participatory government platforms, 2) behavioral and system challenges over
time, and 3) the impact of managerial and design interventions on individual
behaviors and network structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific platform for
this research is "10,000 Solutions", a many-to-many system managed by Arizona
State University that empowers both individuals and organizations to host and
participate in solutions, challenges, and collective actions. The research team
will study participation in "10,000 Solutions" across online, physical, and
hybrid environments, particularly focusing on participant community building,
trajectories of participation, and output usability. A diverse slate of
experiments, with the application of the application of agent-based modeling and
network analysis, will provide useful insights for theory development on
community engagement and participation, as well as generating best-practice
guidelines for participatory design, operation, assessment and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future advances in economic growth and
national security require new technologies for harnessing the wisdom of crowds
and the power of public innovation. However, these technologies are still in
their infancy, and there is a growing need for robust and flexible platforms
that can move beyond exploratory efforts, toward real-world deployment. The
project will develop evidence-based policies and practices to improve
collaboration while increasing perceptions of accountability, legitimacy and
individual satisfaction, the effectiveness of the work outputs and the adoption
and use of the products developed by the community and through the platform.
Knowing the conditions that increase and sustain collective action will help in
devising policies and practices for building platforms to enhance participation
in government and nongovernment organizations.