* 1322829
* US Ignite Next Generation Developers Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Glenn Ricart, US Ignite, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 01/31/2014
* USD 21,374.00

The US Ignite effort is a joint public/private initiative with the primary goal
of breaking a fundamental deadlock: there is insufficient investment in gigabit
applications that can take advantage of advanced network infrastructure because
such infrastructure is rare and dispersed. And conversely, there is a lack of
broad availability of advanced broadband infrastructure for open experimentation
and innovation because there are few advanced applications and services to
justify it. US Ignite intends to break this deadlock by providing incentives for
imagining, prototyping, and developing public sector gigabit applications and by
leveraging and extending this network testbed across US campuses and cities.
Applications for US Ignite should support national priority areas of advanced
manufacturing, clean energy and transportation, cyber learning, health IT, and
public safety/emergency preparedness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support participation of up to 17 academics and students in a workshop, the
"Next-Generation Developers Workshop," to be held February 1-2, 2013 in San
Leandro, CA. The workshop purpose is to catalyze a long-term, high-level
developer community to advance the creation of next generation Internet
applications, especially those that make use of SDN
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is significant SDN and network
virtualization progress being made by private industry and the NSF Global
Environment for Network Innovation (GENI)project. GENI further extends
virtualization capabilities by allowing the construction of custom combinations
of virtualized computation and communication. However, the process of using
these advances to conceptualize next generation network applications and their
capabilities is lagging. The workshop will identify existing and emerging
standards, APIs, tools, educational materials, and examples that will help
enlarge the US Ignite development community and engage existing members in
capabilities they may not have realized were available. The workshop will
develop sharable lists of issues, barriers, educational materials, missing APIs,
and other impediments to creating next generation applications. In addition, the
workshop will engage faculty and students in the process of understanding the
technology issues associated with US Ignite and in the process of developing
transformative applications.