* 1322299
* VOSS: The Comparative Analysis and Theory of Participation in Socio-Technical Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Christopher Kelty, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2017
* USD 360,474.00

Contemporary organizations are inherently participatory -- especially those that
depend on the Internet as part of their functioning. Unlike older forms of
organization, such "virtual organizations" have the distinguishing feature that
organizational boundaries can be easily flexed or dissolved, allowing the
inclusion of new people and the adoption of new practices broadly understood to
be more participatory, open and transparent. Such a feature is not restricted to
"cyberinfrastructures" but is part of a much more general, but still only poorly
understood, social phenomena highlighted by press accounts of the democratizing
and/or exploitative power of the Internet. This project explores the nature and
effects of such public participation on contemporary organizations. The goal is
to determine which kinds of participation are most beneficial for innovation and
legitimation, as well as what kinds of threats participation might pose, and for
whom. To address these questions, the project will collect and analyze a large
number of ethnographic case studies, using an innovative software environment
for collaborative qualitative research. The project poses three questions: 1.
How does the ontogeny of a virtual organization affect conceptions and practices
of participation? 2. How do new socio-technical systems (e.g. the Internet)
transform participation in Science, Technology Engineering and Medicine (STEM)
over time? 3. What is the relationship between the quality of participation and
the quality of resource creation, curation and re-use? The research uses and
extends a database of over 110 rich case studies of participation, and a
software tool for evaluating participation across multiple cases. For question 1
we add new detail to these case studies, based on themes that have emerged from
previous research; for question 2 we add cases of pre-Internet forms of
participation, to explore more precisely the effects of technological change;
and for question 3 we explore a new set of cases that focus on data as a
valuable resource.