* 1322030
* An Economic Anthropological Exploration of Three Conflicts Over Market Value in the Contemporary U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Jane Collins, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 09/30/2015
* USD 108,044.00

This research addresses how individuals and groups in the contemporary U.S.
measure and conceptualize economic value; that is, how they deploy ideas about
worth, utility, and importance. Drawing on convention theory, and using
ethnographic (interview-based) methods, it focuses on three contexts where
systems of value are in contest: 1) debates over economic contributions of
public sector work; 2) arguments over corporate responsibility that have
resulted in the chartering of a new form of "Benefit Corporation"; and 3) an
experiment with alternative forms of regional economic integration known as
"Slow Money." This study will develop a model of how actors build consensus
around new modes of evaluation. It uses convention theory - a framework that
explores the way meaning is linked to habits, customs, routines, technologies,
and standard practices - but extends that framework to focus on moments of
contention at the interface of social spheres. The ultimate goal of the research
is to provide grounding for more precisely targeted modes of evaluation to
replace the monovalent measures that currently inform public policy.

Systems of evaluation are central to policy formation across many spheres. Nobel
prize-winning economists Joseph Stiglitz and Amartya Sen have argued that new
systems of valuation will be critical to our ability to reshape a global economy
facing widespread downturn. This task requires systematic study of economic
contributions that are not included in measures of value such as Gross Domestic
Product. By mapping and analyzing critical debates over "market value" and its
alternatives, this study will offer a model of what is at stake in various
frameworks for assessing value and of when and how systems of evaluation can
change.