* 1322439
* Surface Signatures of Stratospheric Variability and Trends
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Lorenzo Polvani, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2018
* USD 894,044.00

This project examines the surface climate impacts of trends and variability in
the stratosphere. Motivation for the project comes from observations and
numerical simulations which suggest that the South Polar ozone hole constitutes
an important forcing for the Antarctic climate system, primarily through its
impact on the extratropical jet stream. The forcing is in the sense that the
cooling of the polar stratosphere due to ozone depletion causes the jet stream
to shift poleward, along with the storm tracks and surface westerlies. These
poleward shifts have a variety of consequences for surface climate, including
impacts on the Southern Ocean and Antarctic sea ice. Similar poleward shifts are
expected due to increases in greenhouse gases (GHGs), but while GHG
concentrations are expected to increase indefinitely, polar stratospheric ozone
is expected to recover as a consequence of regulations against ozone-depleting
substances (ODSs). Thus, some cancellation is expected between the surface
climate forcing due to the recovery of ozone in the South Polar stratosphere and
the global increase of GHG concentrations.

The work proposed here has two components, one examining the climatic impacts of
trends in stratospheric ozone (specifically the filling in of the ozone hole),
and the other looking at the effects of stratospheric variability (in both
hemispheres) on surface conditions. Most of the proposed work involves the Whole
Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM), a version of the Community Earth
System Model (CESM) which includes an atmospheric component model with a well-
resolved stratosphere (in addition to fully coupled land, ocean, and sea ice
models). Two additional sets of integrations will be performed, one with GHGs
held fixed at year 2000 levels, and the other with fixed year 2000 levels for
ozone depleting substances (ODSs). These integrations will allow an assessment
of the level of cancellation between the effects of GHG warming and ozone
recovery. The work on stratospheric variability will examine sudden
stratospheric warmings (SSWs) in long WACCM simulations. Work on SSWs has been
hampered by the small sample size of observed SSWs (about 30), but WACCM is able
to produce comparable events, and the sample size in the WACCM simulations
(about 500) is large enough to produce robust statistical analyses.

The work has broader impacts due to the societal value of improved understanding
of the effects of stratosphere variability and change on surface climate. One
portion of the work seeks to determine the effects of ozone recovery in the
Antarctic ozone hole, and its possible opposition to the effects produced by GHG
increases, which would allow better projections of future climate change.
Another portion of the work seeks a better understanding of the effects of SSWs,
which would be of value for long-term weather forecasts.