* 1322285
* Managing Sustained Online Engagement to Solve Community Problems: An Exploration of Virtual Town Hall Meeting Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2013,09/30/2016
* Gert-Jan de Vreede, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2016
* USD 360,304.00

Social web technologies have opened unprecedented opportunities for public- and
private-sector entities to leverage the collective power of remotely-connected
online participants to solve shared problems. However, both practitioners and
researchers report that the most challenging issue in open participatory
problem-solving initiatives is keeping online participants continuously engaged
in a specific project, with sustained interest throughout the entire project
cycle. Mindful of the opportunities and challenges of participatory online
problem-solving, this study aims to accomplish two research goals: First, based
on a theoretical understanding of sustained participatory engagement, we explore
managerial and technological innovations that use social web technologies to
foster online participants' continuous engagement in shared problem-solving
projects. Second, we develop intervention techniques to expedite and sustain the
collective ideation process, to enhance the likelihood that genuinely creative
and useful problem-solving ideas can be effectively and continuously gathered
from participants' ongoing contributions. To achieve these goals, the project
pursues a three phased research plan: In the first phase, we seek to identify
message-presentation formats that increase the conversion rate of online
visitors into contributing participants. In the second phase, we seek to
identify user-interface designs that facilitate goal-oriented human-computer
interaction and sustain participant engagement over time. In the third phase, we
seek to develop and field test brainstorming techniques that leverage social-web
interfaces to promote the collaborative ideation process.

Our proposed study advances practical and theoretical understanding of
engagement in online collaboration to solve shared problems. We have built a
close partnership with a leading crowdsourcing firm, which provides a
participatory technological platform to facilitate collective problem solving in
cities, school districts, universities, distributed research communities, etc.
This organization has made available data from over 250 real-world problem-
solving projects for our analysis. Moreover, the organization has agreed to
implement our proposed technological and process interventions in a series of
empirical comparative field-tests. These investigations will allow us to develop
a theory-driven and evidence-based comprehensive online participatory decision
management system that will employ the affordances of social computing to
support virtual organizations of all types in maximizing participant engagement
in creative collaborative deliberation and problem-solving.