* 1322393
* Methods and Algorithms from Harmonic Analysis for Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Thomas Strohmer, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,020,242.00

The investigator develops new mathematical concepts and numerical methods for
threat detection. Early and accurate detection of a chemical or biological
threat are critical to an effective response. Current algorithms and sensors for
threat detection are in many cases no longer able to keep up with the numerous
demands and changing environments as well as the huge amounts of data that need
to be processed and analyzed in order to accomplish these tasks. The goal of
this research effort is to develop novel mathematical concepts and computational
methods that can address the new challenges we are facing in threat detection.
In particular the investigator will focus on the development of efficient,
robust, and scalable algorithms for multispectral sensing modalities and for
threat detection via terahertz imaging. This research exploits recent advances
in harmonic analysis, optimization, and signal processing. The mathematical
tools will include sparse representations, compressive sensing and matrix
completion, random matrix theory, geometrical functional analysis, and numerical
analysis. Two concrete topics of this research effort are: (i) Development of
methods for efficient acquisition, reconstruction and change detection in
hyperspectral imaging; (ii) Construction of terahertz imaging system and
accompanying numerical image reconstruction
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here is a
marriage of several areas of cutting edge mathematics with state-of-the-art
threat detection technology, seeking to bring advanced techniques from applied
harmonic analysis to the Defense and Security sector in form of fast and
efficient computational methods. An important part of this research effort is
the close collaboration of the investigator with experts in the practical
aspects of threat detection. Real world data from threat detection experiments
will be used in this research, both to validate the developed methods and to
improve the mathematical modeling. Strong expectation for success of this
project can be based on existing solid achievements by the investigator in
developing advanced mathematical concepts and turning them into real-world
applications. Beyond the project's broad technological impact, it serves as a
model for the kind of cross-disciplinary activity critical for research and
education at the mathematics/engineering frontier. Hence this research effort
helps to train graduate students in mathematics to develop and enhance skills
that are crucial and urgently needed in our high-tech oriented society.