* 1322033
* Development of the Himalayan Superstructure, Northwestern India
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Carol Wicks, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 139,970.00

This research seeks to determine the structural evolution of the Himalayan
superstructure from the India-Asia suture zone to the deformed foreland. The
term 'superstructure' refers to the low-grade upper level of an orogenic system,
and contrasts with high-grade 'infrastructure' below. Along most of the
Himalayan arc, superstructure rocks are only partially preserved. They occur in
the north, but high-grade crystalline rocks occupy a central swath and recently
accreted material dominates exposures farther south. However, across the eastern
Ladakh - Chamba region of the northwestern Indian Himalaya, superstructure rocks
are continuously exposed from the suture zone to the foreland fold-thrust belt.
The deformation record preserved in these rocks can be used to address two
problems: (1) long-standing controversy over the mechanism that emplaced
infrastructure rocks between superstructure rocks and accreted materials, and
(2) recent recognition that the Himalayan rock record may preserve far less
shortening than that required by plate circuit reconstructions. These issues
will be addressed by a research program combining mapping, analytical work, and
reconstruction. Surface and remote sensing geological mapping using ASTER data
will establish the geological framework across the eastern Ladakh - Chamba
superstructure. These results will be complemented by kinematic analysis
obtained via microstructural studies and thermal history determined via
40Ar/39Ar geo/thermochronology. New and existing structural, thermal, and
chronological data will be integrated via balanced palinspastic reconstruction
to explore deformation modes and determine shortening estimates, thereby
providing a deformation history capable of testing extrusion models and a
revised geological shortening budget to test shortening models. Preliminary
analysis suggests that this work may add nearly 500 kilometers to the Himalayan
shortening budget, which would represent a greater than 50% increase in
preserved geological shortening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mountain-building
processes are commonly explored across systems with ongoing contraction such as
the Alps, Andes, and Himalaya. These mountain belts offer good preservation,
direct constraints on boundary conditions, and the opportunity to simultaneously
interrogate ancient and active deformation. The community of tectonics workers
is still working out the regional geometry and kinematics of many parts of these
systems, particularly along-strike structural variations. The incompleteness of
our first-order knowledge of the Himalaya is highlighted by recent studies of
the Himalaya that propose a variety of radical revisions to our understanding of
initial India-Asia collision and the emplacement of its high-grade crystalline
core. The current project will help address both issues by utilizing an under-
explored aspect of the range: the local preservation of a wide span of its lower
grade carapace rocks in the western Himalaya. By exploring the deformation
history of these rocks, this study is anticipated to provide strong limits on
Himalayan kinematic models. Broader impacts of this work include training of a
Ph.D. student from an underrepresented group, as well as providing research
experience for as many as six undergraduate students. The research team will
continue outreach activities to communicate tectonics to broad audiences
locally, and internationally through creation of Wikipedia pages.