* 1322007
* Collaborative Research: Heterogeneity and Adaptation in American Wealth
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Jody Vallejo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 120,000.00

SES-1322738&lt;br/&gt;Lisa Keister&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1322007&lt;br/&gt;Jody
Vallejo&lt;br/&gt;University of Southern California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chinese
immigrants to the United States and their descendants are a large, growing, and
diverse group whose members are following a variety of paths of adaptation. This
research asks: what factors account for wealth accumulation patterns for Chinese
immigrants, and how can these patterns inform understanding of immigrant
adaptation? Chinese immigrants and their descendants are often discussed in
terms of their high median levels of achievement, but Chinese Americans vary
considerably on education, income, occupation, and labor market mobility. For
example, although their median income is high, Chinese Americans are more likely
than white natives to live in poverty. Given their size and within-group
heterogeneity, this case provides an occasion to study the factors that enhance
or impede immigrant adaptation in general. This study will contribute to the
immigration literature by providing a detailed within-group study of this
important group and by focusing on their wealth (or net worth) accumulation, an
important but understudied measure of adaptation. The project has three specific
objectives. First, it will provide a detailed portrait of wealth for Chinese
immigrants and their children. It will describe wealth ownership for households
at all points in the wealth distribution, comparing Chinese Americans with other
Americans, other recent immigrants and descendants of immigrants, and other
Asians. Second, it will identify unique wealth accumulation trajectories for
Chinese immigrants and their American-born children to distinguish patterns of
immigrant adaptation. Third, it will assess the degree to which entrepreneurship
contributes to wealth accumulation for Chinese immigrants and their children by
using respondent-driven sampling (RDS) to construct a portrait of Chinese
business networks in Southern California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to research in many academic
disciplines including immigration studies, the sociology of race/ethnicity,
Chinese American studies, entrepreneurship, stratification and inequality, and
economic sociology. This research has the potential to shed new light on an
important and growing segment of U.S. society and to broaden understanding of
immigration and adaptation processes and pathways more generally. The research
is also likely to have important broader social impacts. This proposed research
has the potential to inform discussions on immigration, wealth ownership, and
inequality. The investigators anticipate disseminating the findings widely,
including to non-academics, through publications in non-academic journals, op-ed
pieces, and press releases. In addition, the investigators will involve graduate
students in all aspects of the research and will draw on the work in their
graduate and undergraduate courses on social stratification, immigration, and
economic sociology.