* 1322552
* Collaborative Research:  Evidence-based Pedagogy in Engineering Education: Design Heuristics for Concept Generation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Shanna Daly, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2018
* USD 198,409.00

The engineering design ability is critical in all undergraduate engineering
programs. Design fixation is one of the common problems facing engineering
design teams. This project is creating and evaluating tools that will help the
design group avoid the design fixation problem. The work is taking a unique
approach to the problem by creating 77 heuristics to help design groups avoid
the fixation problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technique is based on prior
studies involving both student and professional teams. This prior work has
demonstrated the technique is applicable to both design groups. The prior
success provides a high level of confidence that this work will be successful.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because design is included in all engineering programs and
because the design heuristics are rather generic the work pre performed in this
project is applicable to virtually all engineering programs nationally. As a
result a successful result in this project could be a transformative innovation
for engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also producing
instructional workshops to help instructors utilize the heuristics to enhance
creativity in design courses. The workshops are not single point in time
delivery of information but are distributed throughout time providing a long-
term engagement of faculty. This type of prolonged engagement has proven to be
more effective than other means of development and will produce excellent long
term change.