* 1322704
* OCE-RIG:  Investigating the Use of LIBS for In Situ Heavy Metal Analysis in Ocean Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Anna Michel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 09/30/2016
* USD 99,990.00

Overview: Heavy metal contamination in ocean sediments linked to anthropogenic
inputs often requires remediation efforts and long term monitoring. Such
monitoring is time intensive, requiring sampling, sample processing, and
analysis. Developing in situ sensors capable of measuring heavy metals in
sediments would enable rapid analysis and large spatial observations. Laser
induced-breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) has the potential to be developed into an
in situ sediment sensor for heavy metal analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Highly contaminated sediments exist in
harbors and coastal environments due to shipping, poor management of waste, and
anthropogenic inputs. Because contaminated sediment is detrimental to fisheries,
shell fishing, benthic communities and human health, remediation efforts are
underway in many areas including New Bedford, MA. Of key concern are high levels
of heavy metals. Measurement of heavy metals in sediments is of interest for
identifying areas with elevated levels that should be targeted for remediation
and for monitoring levels during and after remediation efforts. Large spatial
surveys of heavy metal levels in sediments is time intensive due to the current
technologies that exist. Sediments must be collected, processed, and analyzed.
Laser induced-breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) can provide rapid, multi-element
analysis of samples, is virtually non-destructive, requires no consumables or
sample preparation, and can be used in a standoff configuration. Such
characteristics are those required for in situ analysis of sediments. In this
project, the investigator will conduct laboratory experiments to investigate the
potential for using LIBS for in situ sediment analysis. Through the future
development of an in situ sensor deployable on an Autonomous Underwater Vehicle
or Remotely Operated Vehicle, real-time spatial measurements of sediments will
be feasible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The investigator aims to
increase diversity in ocean sciences by mentoring underrepresented groups and
encouraging students to continue to pursue their interests in the field. The
investigator will mentor a Summer Minority Undergraduate Fellow in developing
his/her own research project related to the LIBS project. The student will gain
interdisciplinary experiences in the laboratory and be involved in research day
cruises. In an effort to attract and recruit more female students to ocean
science, two Saturday outreach events will be developed for female students aged
ten to twelve, which will focus on introducing girls to ocean science.