* 1322353
* ATD: Efficient online detection based on multiple sensors, with applications to cybersecurity and discovery of biological threats
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Michael Baron, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 04/30/2015
* USD 252,060.00

The project focuses on threat detection schemes based on simultaneously observed
multiple data sequences. The proper use of multiple sources of information, or
multiple sensors, ensures high sensitivity of the detection procedure. However,
multiple streams of diverse information can cause false alarms. What are the
optimal statistical techniques of combining mixed types of data to yield a quick
and error-free detection? Proposed statistical methods deal with potential
threats by detecting heterogeneities and anomalies and locating change points in
the distribution of multidimensional data. It is assumed that a number of
sensors simultaneously collect and report data sequences. When a significant
event occurs and a potential threat appears, the distribution of one or several
sequences changes. The goal is to detect a threat as soon as possible, subject
to a low rate of false alarms. Derivation of optimal threat detection algorithms
on multiple sequences will be based on the recently developed theory and
methodology of multiple comparisons in sequential experiments. These new
techniques introduced by the PI and his student led to tests of multiple
hypotheses that control both the familywise error rate and the familywise power
at a low expected sampling cost. This suggests several approaches to the quick
multi-sensor change-point detection. Analogues of CUSUM, Bayesian, and
asymptotically pointwise optimal change-point detection tools will be developed
based on the new methodology in order to control the probability of a false
alarm, the missed discovery rate, and to minimize the mean detection delay under
these constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quick detection of threats by
discovering changes in distributions, patterns, and trends is one of the most
vital problems in quality control, market analysis, epidemiology, climatology,
target tracking, and other fields. Among wide areas of application, this project
particularly focuses on detecting breaches in cyber security and biological
threats such as epidemics and bioterrorist attacks. The project will provide
general tools for the prompt reaction to threatening anomalies in real
situations such as (i) recognizing a pre-epidemic pattern and signalling an
epidemic threat based on geospatial public health surveillance data in different
regions, (ii) detecting computer threats and breaches in cyber security, based
on multiple data streams, and (iii) detecting potential threats from extual
analysis of communication networks. An important modern application of change-
point detection on multiple data streams appears in DNA sequencing. The
possibility of utilizing the prior information in sequential change-point
analysis of multiple data streams opens doors for wide applications. It will
allow to predict threats and make forecasts for a number of processes that
exhibit a two-phase or multi-phase behavior, such as the epidemics and inter-
epidemic periods, economic growth and recession, and spikes in energy prices.
Developed methods of fast change-point detection will be used for the early
detection of unknown targets and intrusions, fraud activity, unusual behavior at
vital locations, detection and classification of pre-epidemic trends, and also,
for the prevention of epidemics and terrorist attacks.