* 1322844
* Transforming Students' Mathematical Experiences: Advancing Quality Teaching with Reliability at Scale
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Anthony Bryk, Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 06/30/2018
* USD 3,797,450.00

This project, led by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching,
furthers the reach of the Statway and Quantway Pathways through Networked
Improvement Communities (NICs) of colleges and universities. Initial
implementation of these pathways has shown significant success rates for
developmental math students in only one third of the time typically required for
college-level math credit. This project is scaling and sustaining the initiative
through the design, development, and improvement of a rigorous Advancing Quality
Teaching (AQT) program for faculty. As the Pathways initiative expands beyond
those faculty and colleges that collaborated in the original co-development, a
much broader range of faculty, including adjuncts, working in varied college
work conditions is included. The AQT system is designed to maintain high levels
of efficacy as the initiative is taken up more broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, with the college and research partners in the
Networked Improvement Communities is working towards the following: an
experience which introduces new members into the network through a Deep Study of
Instruction; Pathways Toolkit of Professional Development Resources; the
Advancing Quality Teaching Rubric, a formative tool to guide individual faculty
development; an Improvement Science Workshop that introduces faculty to the
discipline of improvement science and supports their improvement work in their
own classrooms; leadership development to identify and support the project's
National Faculty who will take on significant roles in this NIC; and a Regional
Infrastructure of lead colleges associated with the National Faculty to provide
a local base for the collaborative work of the improvement
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project transforms and elevates
developmental math instruction where faculty employ the discipline of
improvement science to continuously enhance their teaching within a networked
community of researchers and practitioners. It creates a sustainable system for
improvement. The Pathways are anchored in ambitious math learning goals and
deploy research-based pedagogy to make deeper learning common in classrooms. The
project's integration of a Productive Persistence initiative explicitly
addresses the many deep-seated psycho-social barriers that students face. The
project aims to demonstrate how to learn what works, for whom, and under what
conditions and to provide for the spread of this
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Not only do the project's strategic organization
and processes provide for the implementation of the Pathways in other settings,
they also provide a means of addressing two critical needs in the STEM
community: the ability to implement successful innovations reliably at scale,
and the capacity to organize for and see to its own improvement as a natural
embedded aspect of programming. Finally, the project looks to address the
problem that fewer than 20 percent of community college enrollees will reach
college-level math within three years.