* 1322595
* RAPID PROPOSAL:   Accelerating unrest within a large rhyolitic magma system: Laguna del Maule, Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 64,000.00

This RAPID will investigate the cause of unrest at the Laguna del Maule volcanic
field on the crest of the southern Andes, Chile. This volcanic field comprises
the greatest concentration of young, post-glacial (20,000 to <2,000 year old)
rhyolitic lava flows on Earth that have erupted from 24 vents, arranged in a 23
x 16.5 km elliptical pattern with Laguna del Maule in the center. Crystal-poor
rhyolites erupted on opposite sides of the lake basin are nearly identical in
composition and are related to precursor andesitic and rhyodacitic lavas by
crystal-liquid fractionation. This petrologic and structural configuration
suggests that a large body of high temperature rhyolitic melt, extracted from a
batholith-scale crystal-mush reservoir, currently underlies the entire lake
basin; a similar reservoir is postulated to have been the source of the 560 km3
Bishop Tuff super-eruption. Beginning in 2007 satellite geodesy (InSAR and GPS)
indicates that the western side of the rhyolite dome circle began uplifting at
rates that have accelerated to 300 mm/yr by late 2012. Moreover, the inflating
region, 20 km in diameter, is undergoing lateral extension and a series of
normal faults are forming above the center of inflation. The current rate of
uplift is 4-5 times higher than recently detected at the Yellowtone or Santorini
calderas and indicates unrest that could produce a large-volume explosive
eruption of rhyolite. The project seeks to understand the fundamental dynamics
of a rhyolitic magma system prior to eruption and to assess the volcanic hazard
in the Laguna del Maule volcanic field. This will be accomplished by
complementing the existing observations with gravity and CO2 measurements. The
gravity baselines will help determine the subsurface density and mass changes.
The CO2 measurements will constrain the extent and magnitude of magmatic
outgassing that might reflect a very recent addition of new magma into the
shallow crust. Both analysis will be done in collaboration with the Observatorio
VolcanolÃ³gico de los Andes del Sur (OVDAS). Four graduate students from the
University of Wisconsin-Madison will participate in all aspects of this project,
including fieldwork in Chile, and data analysis.

As demonstrated by the ongoing rhyodacite eruption at Cordon Caulle, Chile, that
began in June, 2011, even a minor explosive eruption of rhyolite could trigger
extensive flooding and ash fall, causing considerable damage to infrastructure
and agriculture in both Chile and Argentina. This project will provide important
information about the behavior of the Laguna del Maule volcanic field, improving
the assessment of the volcanic hazard in the region, and ultimately helping to
better understand large active rhyolitic magma systems prior to an eruption (or
super-eruption).

This project is supported by the Geophysics Program, the Petrology and
Geochemistry Program and the Office of International and Integrated Activities.