* 1322504
* Climate-vegetation interactions in a warming world: establishing a long-term collaboration on the Early Permian floras of Patagonia (Argentina)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Alexandru Tomescu, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 08/31/2015
* USD 70,482.00

This project aims to lay the foundation for a long-term collaboration that will
involve scientists and students from the U.S. and Argentina in research and
education activities associated with investigations of fossil floras. The
principal investigator (PI) and two U.S. students will collaborate with
scientists at the Museo Paleontologico Egidio Feruglio (Trelew, Argentina), Drs.
Ruben Cuneo and Ignacio Escapa. These scientists will provide logistic support
and contribute their rich expertise on local geology and fossil floras. The PI
and U.S. students will spend several months in Argentina, working in the lab,
field, and museum collections on Early Permian fossil floras. Activities will
include surveys of plant fossil collections in natural history museums, field
work to collect fossils and paleoecological data (patterns of association and
geographic distribution of taxa), and lab work to describe new taxa. The PI will
also teach a pilot course in Argentina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geologic unit
studied, the Rio Genoa Formation, is important for the diversity, richness, and
quality of plant fossil preservation, as well as for its Early Permian age. This
project will seek to discover and characterize new taxa, and will lead to
enhanced understanding of plant fossil diversity. The Early Permian marks the
beginning of the transition from typical Paleozoic floras to modern floras, and
witnessed the transition from a major glaciation to a warmer
interval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will start an international
partnership in research and education between a non-PhD-granting U.S. university
and a natural history museum in Argentina. The project integrates research with
education activities; it will also produce educational materials in the form of
samples and information to be included in museum exhibits.