* 1322400
* A workshop on issues in Kuki-Chin Linguistics
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* David Peterson, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2014
* USD 19,142.00

Approximately fifty Kuki-Chin languages are spoken in the border region of
Burma, India, and Bangladesh. Recent years have seen an intensification of
research on a small percentage of these languages, which form a part of the
Tibeto-Burman language family; considerable work is still needed to document the
remaining ones. The study of these languages is at a unique juncture. Political
developments in the region have led to conditions where it will be possible, and
even more urgent, to engage in serious documentation work for the understudied
languages of the group. Thoughtful guidance to new fieldworkers in how to
effectively document and describe Kuki-Chin languages would speed up
documentation efforts and produce descriptions that lend themselves to cross-
corpora comparison.

With support from NSF, Dr. Peterson will hold a day-long workshop on issues in
Kuki-Chin linguistics at Dartmouth College, in conjunction with the 46th
International Conference on Sino-Tibetan Languages and Linguistics
(http://sites.dartmouth.edu/icstll46/). Specialists will take stock of their
understanding of the major grammatical systems of these languages and will
discuss standard terminology for coding common Kuki-Chin grammatical phenomena.
The resulting papers and recommendations will be assembled in a volume intended
to serve as a field manual for future investigators of Kuki-Chin languages,
including members of the emerging academic communities in India and Burma.

The devotion of an entire workshop to Kuki-Chin languages will contribute to
societal awareness of them and their speakers. The resulting guide will become
an essential tool for teaching about the study of these languages and will be
useful for the development of orthographies and literacy materials for Kuki-Chin
language communities.