* 1322001
* VOSS Collaborative Research: I Want You to Know Who I Am: Identity Communication and Verification in Virtual Teams
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Sherry Thatcher, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 07/31/2016
* USD 81,225.00

The goal of the proposed research is to understand how individual-level
identities are communicated and verified in virtual teams, in order to develop
technology-design guidelines aimed at improving the identity communication and
verification process. Identity communication is defined as the methods that a
person uses to convey his/her identity (Thatcher, Doucet, & Tuncel, 2001) and
identity verification refers to the process of bringing others to confirm one's
identity (Swann, 1983). The technology that facilitates communication in virtual
teams can distort individual-level identities by heightening (Walther, 2008) or
hiding (Weisband, 2002) them. The technology can thus create a social barrier to
participation in virtual teams, negatively influencing a number of individual
and group outcomes, including overall team success (Gomez, Huici, Seyle, &
Swann, 2009). We adopt a mixed-methods research approach (Venkatesh, Brown, &
Bala, 2013) to develop design guidelines for systems that improve identity
communication and verification in virtual environments. Data will be collected
in three phases, leveraging qualitative and quantitative techniques including
interviews, surveys, and experiments.

The broader impacts of this project are in four key areas. First, our research
will result in specific guidelines for designing information technology to
support effective identity communication and verification in virtual
environments. We will explain how the characteristics of various communication
media influence identity communication and verification. Organizations can use
this information not only during the onset of new virtual teams, but also as
continuous improvement initiatives or when new members join an existing team.
Second, we help organizations understand how to choose among different types and
characteristics of communication technology to most effectively manage identity
communication and verification. By understanding users' individual and task-
related needs, organizations can deploy the best technologies to improve
identity communication and verification given these specific characteristics.
Third, with the increased use of online learning environments, we expect that
the results of this work can be used to enhance both the teaching and learning
experience by providing guidelines to enhance identity communication and
verification in the educational context. For example, a common criticism of
online learning experiences is that students do not feel a connection with their
instructors or other students. Understanding how technology can enhance identity
communication and verification can go a long way in helping us to develop
effective online teaching tools. Fourth, a better understanding of identity
communication and verification in virtual teams will have direct implications
for NSF-sponsored virtual organizations, enhancing the effectiveness of cross-
disciplinary and remote collaborations. Virtual teams offer a cost-effective and
practical way to bring together diverse people from cross-disciplinary fields
regardless of temporal or spatial restrictions; however, even face-to-face
cross-disciplinary teams often experience communication difficulties (Oetzel,
2008), and these difficulties are generally exacerbated in virtual settings. By
pointing the way toward more effective and sustainable virtual organizations,
our research can thus strengthen the cyber-infrastructure for cross-disciplinary
science and engineering research.