* 1322527
* Full-Scale Development: Secrets of the Universe
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2022
* Dale McCreedy, K2 Communications, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 05/31/2022
* USD 3,140,838.00

This research and development project would inform and engage audiences
(especially middle school age girls) about the fundamental research under
investigation at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland.
A research plan and summative evaluation will fill a gap in what is known about
the public's perception and understanding of the LHC/particle physics and
include studies on girl's interest and engagement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables include a 40 minute giant screen film
(3D/2D), full dome planetarium film, an interactive theater lobby exhibit,
website, mobile app, materials and professional development workshops for
educators. The giant screen film will use scientific visualizations and artistic
interpretation to reveal compelling scientific stories recreating conditions
following the Big Bang and the discovery in 2012 of the Higgs boson. CERN is
providing unprecedented access to the collider and particle detectors including
filming inside the 17 mile long underground tunnel while it is closed for
upgrades in 2013-2014. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are 8 partner science museums
(7 with planetariums) that will show the film/exhibit and serve as sites for
research, evaluation, and outreach to underserved audiences ( Adventure Science
Center, Carnegie Science Center, The Franklin Institute, Liberty Science Center,
OMSI, Orlando Science Center, the Smithsonian, and the St. Louis Science
Center). Additional distribution/marketing channels include giant screen
theaters, planetariums, DVD, and social social media. Launch is targeted for
2016.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning outcomes will focus on increasing awareness
and interest in the LHC and increasing young people's engagement and excitement
about the nature of scientific discovery. The research on girl's engagement and
interest in physics will fill a gap in field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
deliverables are projected to reach large audiences through national
distribution of the giant screen film, the planetarium show, the exhibit, 3D/2D
Blu Ray and DVDs, and access on computers, tablets, and other mobile devices.