* 1322543
* A Modular Capability for Community Modeling of Flares, Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) and their Interplanetary Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2020
* Ward Manchester, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 04/30/2020
* USD 2,550,000.00

This grant is for partial support of a project selected and funded under the
2012 NASA-NSF partnership for Space Weather Modeling Collaborations. It is a
collaborative effort between NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) and
University of Michigan. The objective is to develop a new generation of
numerical simulation codes and tools for community-wide investigation of Solar
flares, coronal mass ejections (CME), and solar energetic particles (SEP) to
test theories of solar eruptions against observed events and work towards a
predictive capability. The Modular Solar Eruptions Capability (MSEC) to be
developed will consist of a set of interchangeable modules and libraries,
including an observables and a training library, which will enable the user to
model a complete solar eruption event, from energy build-up by flux emergence to
space weather impact at Earth. The new capability builds on recent advances by
the proposing team in understanding the physics of flares and CMEs and in
modeling space weather. The team has developed some of the leading theories for
solar activity and has delivered some of the most widely used space weather
models that is currently available to the community. Specific defining
objectives for the development of the MSEC include: utilizing a two-temperature
model for the solar plasma and incorporating the necessary physics important for
the energy state of the solar atmosphere; utilizing a new phenomenological model
for the solar wind-based Alfv√©n-wave acceleration and dissipation; exploring the
physical connection between the upper convection zone and the solar corona by
coupling two state-of-the-art models of flux emergence with the global model of
the solar corona, thereby addressing the issue of energy build-up and CME
initiation in a self-consistent manner. The team forms a strong collaboration
between internationally recognized experts in basic solar and heliospheric
theory, in the modeling and data analysis of observed events, and in
computational physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When completed, the MSEC will be
delivered to the Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC) for access by the
scientific community and eventual transition to use for operational space
weather forecasting. The state-of-the-art simulation codes and tools comprising
the final MSEC constitute an innovative and potentially transformative
capability that will be used by the whole community to attack the solar eruption
problem. While the team will pursue an exciting science program that uses the
new models to attack the core science problems in solar eruptions, it is
envisioned that the bulk of the science results ultimately will be obtained by
the outside community. The results of this effort will help advance our
understanding and modeling of solar eruptions, which are high priority national
space weather needs. Educational components of the project include the
participation of postdocs and graduate students. The collaboration builds on and
greatly strengthens a longstanding partnership between the partners. Amongst
others, this will provide the opportunity for students of University of Michigan
to work with leading NASA scientists and have access to the unique resources at
GSFC, a national facility.