* 1322763
* The effect of variable input on children's acquisition of null subjects
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Karen Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2019
* USD 263,299.00

Language is essential to almost every aspect of our lives and it is absolutely
central to learning in school. The goal of first language acquisition research
is to determine how children acquire their native language given the linguistic
input to which they are exposed. Research has shown that children do not just
imitate word-for-word their input; instead, they produce forms not found in
their parents' speech, such as "He eat-ed it" or "I'm hang onto-ing it."
Moreover, the linguistic input to which children are exposed is quite complex,
as utterances do not always match their underlying representation. For example,
in sentences like "Do you want to go?" speakers variably omit the first two
words, producing: "You wanna go?", "wanna go?", depending on social context.
This project examines the impact of this latter sort of variable input on the
acquisition of language in children.

The empirical domain of this project is the acquisition of properties related to
--what has traditionally been called--the Null Subject Parameter in two
varieties of Spanish: Dominican Spanish (DS) and Chilean Spanish (ChS). While
ChS shows properties of a null subject language, DS displays a number of
syntactic properties that are infrequent in other non-Caribbean varieties of
Spanish, including variable usage of overt expletive subjects, higher use of
overt pronominal subjects in contexts of topic continuity, and variable usage of
subject-verb (non)inversion in interrogatives. By comparing acquisition patterns
in children exposed to two varieties of the same language, we can compare
acquisition of specific grammatical structures in the context of two input types
(e.g. consistent input v. variable input) while holding other properties of the
language constant.

This project will collect 120 hours of naturalistic speech between DS caregivers
and their children while they play and read together and 40 hours of Dominican
adult-to-adult speech. Audio-recordings and transcriptions will be archived on
the CHILDES database (http://childes.psy.cmu.edu) for use by future researchers
and will provide much needed data on language development in children acquiring
non-mainstream dialects of Spanish, which is important in the context of
standardized testing, early education, and clinical intervention in the case of
speech disorders. This project will also provide international research
experience to both graduate and undergraduate students, who will collect data in
the Dominican Republic.