* 1322700
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Production and Perception of F0: An Experimental Analysis of Norwegian Tonal Accent
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Niamh Kelly, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 13,028.00

This dissertation examines the interaction among lexical, sentence-level and
pragmatic factors in determining pitch variation in the Trøndelag variety of
Norwegian. Scandinavian languages, including the Trøndelag variety, are
characterized by a lexical pitch accent contrast (accent 1 vs. accent 2). The
accent distinction refers to a specified pitch contour on stressed syllables
which changes the meaning of words. The shape of these contours varies across
dialects. The pitch contours are further affected by pragmatic and prosodic
factors. The goal of this research is to explore the interaction of these
factors in determining pitch variation from the perspective of both production
and perception. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Smiljanic,
Niamh Kelly will carry out a set of production experiments to determine which
acoustic-articulatory cues are systematically produced to distinguish the two
accents in the dialect and how they are modified by sentential intonation and
pragmatic focus. Perception studies will examine which acoustic cues are used by
listeners to distinguish between the lexical pitch contrast and how pitch
variation due to pragmatic and prosodic factors further shapes listeners'
responses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our knowledge of
phonetic features of lexical pitch accent distinctions (production) and of of
phonetic cuing of these distinctions (perception). The findings will provide
insights into phonological questions regarding the nature of the underlying
representation of pitch accent contrasts and of tone bearing units. This award
will enhance the training and research experience of a female graduate student.