* 1322947
* Contexts of Pattern Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Karl Rosengren, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 08/31/2018
* USD 594,449.00

Learning patterns from exposure to examples is a basic cognitive process and an
important focus of early STEM education. It is because we know many patterns
that we can make predictions about new instances: Will a goat bleat? Will it eat
tin cans? Children learn about patterns in many different ways and in many
different contexts (e.g., at home, in school, in museums). The goal of this
project is to understand how different contexts of exposure lead to different
forms of pattern learning. For example, children may learn a single pattern
really well given a clear task and corrective feedback, but learn only that one
pattern. If all a child is asked to do is sort animals into a pile of "bleaters"
and "non-bleaters," he or she will get good at distinguishing goats from sheep,
but will not learn anything more about animals. In more exploratory contexts
(e.g., free-sorting or free-play) children may learn multiple patterns at the
same time, but perhaps not learn any one pattern really well. A child may notice
lots of things about the various animals encountered at a petting zoo, including
"irrelevant patterns" (the goats are mostly brown), but may not notice complex
patterns or become adept at using any particular pattern to make predictions
(e.g., telling the goats from the sheep). The specific idea motivating this
study is a the prediction of a theoretical tradeoff in learning between focus
and flexibility. Empirical research explores this tradeoff and the conditions
that lead to more or less focused and flexible learning.

The central goal of the project is to understand how different contexts dispose
children to different kinds of learning. The project combines laboratory
experiments with exhibit design in the Madison Children's Museum (MCM). The
results will help educators develop complementary experiences, using different
learning contexts to achieve different goals. Sometimes we want to teach
children to be very focused and efficient at responding to a particular pattern:
If they see a whale, they should think "mammal." Other times we want to provide
children with a broad exposure to many different patterns: If asked whether
whales are more similar to cows or to sharks, a student should be able to draw
on different dimensions of comparison. This project will help educators design
instruction that produces both focused and flexible learning. Work at the MCM
will contribute directly to design of exhibits. Results will be shared with
academic audiences, communities of museum professionals, and with the general
public. Communicating research findings with patrons of the museum will help
influence the kinds of informal learning opportunities parents provide to their
young children. Finally, information about how parents and educators can support
pattern learning disseminated through the museum will reach the diverse
community served by MCM.