* 1322172
* The Third International Congress on Sustainability Science and Engineering, Cincinnati, Ohio, August 11-15, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

CBET - 1322172&lt;br/&gt;Yinlun Huang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainability
science and engineering has become a very active area of research in various
disciplines of engineering, natural and social sciences. Sustainability theories
and sustainability assessment, analysis, design and decision making
methodologies as well as tools have been developed, many of which are used to
tackle real-world problems in collaboration with industries. The Third
International Congress on Sustainability Science and Engineering will address
broader issues of sustainability science and engineering, facilitate discussions
on scientific and technological development, and share research and practice
experiences in industrial sustainability, a group of scientists, educators, and
engineers, and governmental officers. The congress will be held in Cincinnati,
Ohio, August 11-15, 2013.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The travel support to the US
academic researchers, educators, and students should help them learn the
cutting-age research in various fields of sustainability, share their experience
with the world-class leaders and other colleagues, and identify international
collaboration opportunities in strengthening sustainable engineering research
and education. Junior faculty members, young researchers, graduate and
undergraduate students, especially those minorities underrepresented in science
and engineering will be strongly encouraged to participate. Student poster paper
competitions will provide an opportunity for them to present their research
activities and receive advice from leading experts from different countries. It
is planned that selected papers will be published in three technical journals.