* 1322532
* Structural Evolution Through the Lifecycle of Hurricane Sandy (2012)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Jenni Evans, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 506,469.00

Hurricane Sandy (2012) wrought devastating impacts on tens of millions of U.S.
citizens. Protection of the lives and property of residents along the path of
such a system is imperative; this requires understanding the physics underlying
the system and being equipped to act on that knowledge. Development of physical
understanding of the evolution of Sandy provides the knowledge to underpin
future forecasts of similar systems and appropriate societal responses to those
events. Analysis of the sensitivity of the observed Sandy lifecycle to the
characteristics of the various contributing systems and environmental factors
helps to constrain and refine this understanding. Methodologies employed here
will be cluster analysis of the ensemble forecasts and related sensitivity
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This research
centers on a detailed analysis of the evolution of Hurricane Sandy (2012)
through its lifecycle and landfall, and on exploiting ensemble forecasts to
explore the realistic range of alternative lifecycles that could have
eventuated. It is hypothesized that Hurricane Sandy underwent a warm seclusion
near landfall, resulting in an atypical distribution of significant weather over
the US northeast. The relative roles of Hurricane Sandy, the blocking high and
upstream trough, the remnant Tropical Storm Tony, as well as surface fluxes and
friction will be examined and the ensemble diagnostics and sensitivity
simulations will be conducted. Point clustering will be used to evaluate the
model skill in simulating the structural evolution of Sandy. Path clustering
provides sub-groups from the ensembles whose evolution is similar over the
entire forecast period. Analyses of alternative storm evolutions within
objectively-derived subgroups of the ensemble members provide insight into the
relative importance of different storm and environment characteristics. These
can be further tested through sensitivity studies using the Weather and Research
Forecasting (WRF) model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Elucidating the processes leading to the evolution of Sandy will have
broad impacts in the theoretical understanding of these systems, in forecasting
sphere, and in societal resilience planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
professional development of students at all levels will have broader impacts.
The PI's role as co-chair of the WMO IWTC-VIII will have broader impacts through
enhanced international forecaster/researcher communications, improving community
understanding of tropical cyclones.