* 1322346
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Language Socialization, Education, and Social Transformation in a Context of Socioeconomic Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2017
* Webb Keane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2017
* USD 9,943.00

This research will investigate the role of children's religious education in the
spread of new norms of Islamic piety. The research is located in a formally
secular state that is currently undergoing a popular religious revival. This
project seeks to understand how reformist Islamic groups use informal
neighborhood Quran schools to mold pious children. These schools are important
venues for proselytizing politically and economically marginalized neighborhoods
long stigmatized for a lack of proper piety. The researcher will examine how the
piety taught in the schools affects everyday interactions among children, their
families, and their neighbors, and contribute to the spread the Islamic Revival
to new communities. This research uses methods in the study of language
socialization to provide new insight on how moral subjects are formed in the
context of everyday social interactions. The focus on the role of neighborhood
schools in moral and religious proselytization will further our understanding of
children as agents of social change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining
children's neighborhood Quran schools, this research addresses key questions in
the anthropology of morality and religion: 1) how do individuals take on
responsibility as moral subjects within a community and 2) how do the norms of a
moral community change? Conducting research not only in the classroom, but also
in the surrounding community, this project will observe how the children both
learn explicit moral discourses and are drawn into the moral practices of
everyday life. This research thus goes beyond the standard frameworks
contrasting religion and secularism, and Islam and the West, to give us greater
insight into the internal dynamics of change among Muslims during a time of
major religious transformations.