* 1322264
* Nanotechnology and Public Health Track at ASME's Nanoengineering in Medicine and Biology 2nd Annual Global Congress to be held February 3-6, 2013 in Boston, MA
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Desiree Plata, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2015
* USD 14,295.00

1322264&lt;br/&gt;Plata&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for support of a
dedicated track on Nanotechnology and Public Health at the ASME Nanoengineering
in Medicine and Biology (NEMB)Annual Global Congress. Funds will be used for
travel to bring speakers and other participants to the meeting who would not
otherwise attend, thereby enlarging and enriching the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NEMB
provides in-depth coverage of recent advances nanomedicine, nanobiology, and
nanotechnology and public health. The event has become a premier conference in
the field of nanomedicine internationally and encompasses a vast range of
multidisciplinary ideas. For students, postdoctoral researchers, and principal
investigators alike, this is an ideal platform for exposure to the state of the
art developments in a broad range of fields. This is uniquely beneficial to the
study of EHS issues related to nanotechnology because it allows EHS-nano
researchers a unique opportunity to see novel developments in fields that have
potential for direct human and elevated ecological exposure (i.e., through
excretion and wastewater discharge). It will allow these researchers to target
the most pressing materials and fill vacancies in the knowledge base that could
allow early prediction and remediation of potential consequences associated with
novel nanotechnologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NEMB also provides an opportunity
for those who are currently the primary practitioners of nanotechnology to
better understand the downstream and potentially unforeseen impacts associated
with their novel technologies. Armed with such knowledge, these architects of
novel nanomedicines may incorporate environmental and public health objectives
into the design of their materials and treatments at an early stage. Such an
exchange of ideas is critically needed in order to enable the environmentally
sustainable development of nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students and post-doctoral researchers will
participate through presentations in technical sessions and discussions. Posters
will be on display throughout the duration of the Congress, allowing students
and postdocs to maximize interactions with senior colleagues. Furthermore, each
session is planned with experts from industry, academia, and government to help
provide future directions and career advice. The session moderators are familiar
with the participants and many audience members and will actively solicit
interaction from students and postdoctoral associates. Lastly, ASME has targeted
the Nanotechnology and Public Health Track for the professional production of a
meeting podcast to be posted on asme.org, intended to target the broader public.
Track organizers have already contributed to an ASME-sponsored public news piece
highlighting the important topics that will be covered in the conference and the
relevance to the public at large. Additionally, track organizers are in the
process of reaching out to local radio producers in Boston to cover the event
and interview speakers for a public media broadcast.