* 1322058
* Carbonate Clumped Isotope Thermometry of the Notch Peak Contact Metamorphic Aureole
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* John Eiler, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2017
* USD 269,956.00

The circulation of water deep in the earth?s crust underlies a variety of highly
significant geological processes, including formation of ore bodies, heat flow
in geothermal fields, and the thermal, mineralogical and chemical evolution of
crustal rocks and magmas. Most crustal water circulation occurs at depths of
less than 10 kilometers because this is the range over which pores and fractures
remain open against the pressure of overlying rocks. One of the great challenges
to our understanding of this phenomenon is that our tools for measuring the
temperatures experienced by rocks in this upper portion of the crust generally
provide only semi-quantitative or relative constraints. And, this ambiguity in
temperature confounds efforts to define the chemistry of waters that have
reacted with rocks. For this reason, our firmest grip on crustal water-rock
reaction is confined to narrow (~1 km) haloes of hot rock immediately
surrounding intruding magmas, where elevated temperatures drive mineralogical
reactions that can be used as rigorous temperature constraints.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will re-examine this problem using a recently
invented method of thermometry that allows for the precise quantitative
measurement of temperatures of water-rock reaction over a wide range of
temperatures common to the upper 10 km of the crust. This method, 'carbonate
clumped isotope thermometry', is based on the grouping together of rare isotopes
of carbon and oxygen into the same molecular groups in minerals such as calcite
and dolomite. Analysis of these rare isotopic molecules is technically
challenging but enabled by recent innovations in mass spectrometry, and has led
to advances in the study of past climates, topography of the earth's surface,
temperatures of faults, geologic histories of petroleum deposits, body
temperatures of dinosaurs and other problems. The method should also define the
isotopic compositions of waters that co-existed with carbonate minerals, letting
one 'map' the circulation of fluid at depth. This project will be the first time
this tool has been applied to a significant problem in the thermal and chemical
evolution of the deep crust. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study area, Notch Peak,
Utah, is exceptionally well exposed and well studied, meaning the results of
this project's measurements can be compared to detailed models of the
distribution of heat and fluids. An expected outcome of this project is that
quantitative, predictive models of temperatures and fluid migration pathways in
this environment will be extended out of the narrow belt of hot rocks that
surrounds the Notch Peak magmatic intrusion and into the broad surrounding
region of more typical crustal rocks. This result could lead to advances in
understanding of ore bodies, oil and gas fields, and hydrothermal energy
resources.