* 1322015
* Collaborative Research: Paleogeographic Record of Contractional to Extensional Tectonics in the Cordilleran Hinterland, Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Michael Smith, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2015
* USD 86,000.00

Orogen topography - elevation and relief - is a critical component in geodynamic
models of the growth, evolution, and collapse of Earth's major mountain belts
such as the Himalayas, Andes, and North American Cordillera. Although estimates
of surface uplift are common, we lack precise records of past orogen topography:
quantified changes in elevations, exhumation patterns, and drainage system
evolution. The Cordilleran hinterland from Nevada to western Utah is interpreted
as a Paleogene orogenic plateau, supported by compressional boundary forces,
with mean elevations of 3-4 kilometers prior to Neogene extensional collapse.
The Paleogene transition to extensional tectonics, however, and the presumed
dynamic crustal response to flat slab removal remain poorly understood,
particularly in portions of the hinterland overprinted by Neogene extension.
Eocene fluvial and lacustrine sedimentary rocks in eastern Nevada - near the
proposed paleo-divide - interbedded with volcanic units, span the time of this
tectonic transition. Preliminary data show that these rocks provide crucial
insights into the tectonic and surface processes during the transition from
flat-slab subduction and contraction to extensional tectonics. This multi-
disciplinary study will reconstruct the topography and morphology of the region,
constrain the timing and magnitude of initial extension from ~50 to 30 million
years ago, and build a tectonic model for the crust-mantle dynamics of the
transition to extension. This includes the following: (1) fluvial and lacustrine
basin sedimentology and stratigraphy to reconstruct drainages and basin
morphology, (2) Argon geochronology of interbedded tuffs to reveal depositional
history, sediment accumulation rates, and changes in deposition style over time;
(3) stable isotope analyses of hydrated volcanic glasses and lacustrine
carbonates to constrain paleoelevations and lake water chemistry over time, (4)
detrital zircon U-Pb geochronology to reconstruct the fluvial drainage network
and identify sediment provenance patterns, and (5) (U-Th)/He double dating of
detrital zircon grains to pinpoint sources of similar crystallization age and
quantify exhumation rates. The integration of multiple disciplines to quantify
geodynamics is at the forefront of tectonics research. The proposed research
will differentiate between proposed mechanisms for basin formation, so as to
create a reproducible tectonic model of the collapse of the Cordilleran
hinterland by tracking deep mantle processes through the surface record,. Our
findings will help quantify the crustal response to heating, destabilization,
and delamination in thrust belt hinterland regions, and have the potential to
document a new mechanism for walled basin formation and basin hydrology on
orogenic plateaus. Our final model of the surface expression of orogenic plateau
collapse will improve our understanding of the crustal and mantle dynamics that
drive the evolution and eventual degradation of regions of high elevation
worldwide.

Approximately 45 million years ago, the state of Nevada resembled the Andes of
western South America, the Earth's second highest mountain range. Since then,
this high area has collapsed and extended into a series of smaller ranges
separated by low elevation basins. During the initial phases of this collapse, a
large lake (or series of smaller lakes) formed in what is now a very dry desert,
similar to Lake Titicaca in Bolivia and Peru. The deposits of this lake and the
rivers that flowed into it contain important clues about the evolution of the
area. This project is an interdisciplinary study of how and why this ancient
mountain range was destroyed, and how this affected the climate and environments
of the region. Knowing past topography and geography is critical to
understanding: (1) the construction, evolution, and collapse of mountains
through plate tectonic movements, (2) the effect of changing topography on
climate, precipitation, and surface/ground water transport, (3) the weathering,
erosion, and shaping of Earth's surface, (4) the relationship between extension
and the occurrence of super-volcanoes, and (5) the formation and development of
economically-important oil, gas, and gold deposits. We will study layered
sedimentary deposits (strata) that accumulated in Nevada during the initial
phase of mountain collapse using several cutting-edge physical and chemical
techniques. In the field, we will measure the thickness and composition of lake
strata, which can tell us whether the lake was deep or shallow and salty or
freshwater. We will also collect multiple volcanic ash beds that accumulated in
the lake, and use crystals within those beds to determine high-precision age
determines by measuring the radioactive decay of potassium within the crystal.
Using water trapped within glass shards in these volcanic ash beds, we will
determine the isotopic composition of ancient precipitation in order to estimate
past elevations of the region. Finally, we will collect sandstone that was
deposited by ancient rivers, and separate zircon crystals from them for a number
of analyses. By measuring the respective amounts of Uranium, Thorium, and Lead
from zircon mineral grains, we will determine the age of individual grain and
when it was eroded from the rock they formed in. Combining all of the techniques
outlined above, we will be able to answer the following questions: (1) What was
the size and extent of this ancient lake and the corresponding drainage system?
(2) What types of rocks were exposed and eroding at the surface 30-50 million
years ago, and how quickly did they erode? (3) What was the past topography and
relief of Nevada? and (4) When and how quickly did Nevada extend into the
isolated desert basins and ranges that exist today?

In addition to the research objectives of this project, the award is
contributing to support of two early career researchers; broadening of
participation of underrepresented groups in an STEM discipline; involvement of
graduate and undergraduates in research; contributions to research
infrastructure; and contributions to geologic mapping and quantification of past
extension, which is critical to understanding mineralization trends across the
region, the formation of gold deposits, and the occurrence of geohazards such as
earthquakes and volcanoes.