* 1322356
* Social networks and climates of conflict
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Elizabeth Paluck, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2017
* USD 322,877.00

Patterns of conflict in middle and high schools have been the topic of an
enormous amount of policy and behavioral intervention, and of political and
social concern, following several suicides and cases of "bullying" in American
schools. How does conflict become normative for a particular neighborhood,
school, or even country, to the extent that it is considered part of the group's
climate or culture? Is it possible to intervene to reduce harassment, bullying,
aggression and other conflict behaviors among these groups? Previous research by
Dr. Elizabeth Levy Paluck (Princeton University) and colleagues used social
network analysis to measure patterns of social interaction among group members
over time to understand (1) whether particular influential group members are
able to alter perceptions of the entire group's social norms about conflict or
bullying in positive ways, and (2) whether shifting perceptions of group norms
can reduce longstanding patterns of conflict within the group's social network.
This work shows that the behavior of certain highly-connected individuals in the
group social network provides a salient cue to members of the social network
about which behaviors are normative (i.e., typical and desirable). Targeting
these individuals' conflict behavior within a social network creates perceptions
of anti-conflict norms among individuals who are exposed to them in the network,
and these shifts in perceived norms are accompanied by actual reductions in
conflict behavior and increases in tolerance and acceptance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research tests the next critical question of
this research program, specifically whether the mutually reinforcing process of
changing norms and behaviors within a social network is responsible for changing
enduring behavioral patterns identified as the group's social climate or
culture. The research will focus specifically on conflict behaviors in middle
school and will follow up on the long term qualitative and behavioral outcomes
of a randomized field experiment in a sample of 58 public middle schools. Half
of the schools were randomly assigned to an anti-conflict intervention that
engages a random subset of all highly connected students in the school's social
network. The pragmatic and policy lessons from psychological theories of social
norms and behavior rest on psychologists' ability to propose hypotheses and to
rigorously test how, across situations and over the long term, a group's social
norms might be shifted away from conflict and new patterns of prosocial
behaviors of tolerance and social acceptance could persist. This research will
provide a novel account of the social mechanisms by which large scale social
dynamics change and reproduce norms, and establish behavioral patterns most
often identified with climates or culture. The outcome of this work could inform
policy and future intervention efforts to reduce harassment, bullying, and other
threatening behavior in schools and other group contexts.