* 1322476
* OCE-RIG:   The chlorophyll 15N proxy for nitrogen cycling and export production: Understanding nitrogen isotope fractionations in chlorophyll biosynthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Meytal Higgins, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2015
* USD 0.00

Overview: In this project, the investigator will use a multidisciplinary
approach to understand nitrogen isotope fractionations associated with
chlorophyll biosynthesis in cyanobacteria and eukaryotic algae. Nitrogen isotope
ratios of chlorophyll degradation products are an important new proxy for
surface water nitrogen that is unaltered by diagenesis. Biomarkers derived from
chlorophyll in sedimentary samples can be well preserved for hundreds of
millions of years, and can therefore act as a tool for understanding ancient
marine nitrogen cycling. Additionally, large taxon-specific differences in
chlorophyll 15N fractionations allow for the use of 15N offsets between
sedimentary chloropigment and bulk nitrogen to reconstruct the contribution of
cyanobacteria and eukaryotic algae to export production. In order to use the
chloropigment 15N proxy, these differences in isotopic fractionation must be
understood. The work uses an isotope box model approach for calculating
enzymatic fractionations at each step along the chlorophyll biosynthetic pathway
in order to determine where important fractionations occur. Purified metabolic
intermediates of chlorophyll biosynthesis will be measured for their isotopic
composition. Metabolomics techniques such as kinetic flux profiling will be used
to measure intermediate pool sizes and fluxes along pathway branch points.
Isotope, concentration, and flux data will be integrated in order to understand
the control of expressed fractionations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: A better understanding of the controls of 15N fractionations in algal and
cyanobacterial chlorophyll will improve the use of a powerful new
paleoceanographic proxy. Beyond the obvious contributions of this work to
understanding marine nitrogen cycling, this approach provides a new framework
for understanding fractionations of organic molecules that are preserved in the
sedimentary record. Isotopic analysis of these molecular fossils has great
utility in paleoceanography because it allows for linking of information on
taxonomic identity of organisms that produce sedimentary organic matter with
information about their metabolism or nutrient substrates. The proposed approach
can be directly applied to other biomarker systems. The novelty in this approach
lies in its combination of analytical techniques from stable isotope
geochemistry and metabolomics, an emerging field in biomedical research that has
tremendous potential in biogeochemical studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Further development of an important new compound-specific isotope proxy
with diverse applications will contribute to our understanding of the modern
marine nitrogen cycle, which is important for predicting and mitigating the
effects of anthropogenic climate change on marine biogeochemistry. This project
will contribute to improving STEM education and increasing the participation of
women in science. The proposed work involves training and mentoring of
undergraduate interns and a female high school student. In conjunction with this
project, the investigator is involved in outreach through ongoing work on
oceanography-based elementary school curriculum design. The investigator is also
actively involved in efforts to increase retention of women in geosciences by
establishing a group for women in her department, and developing a lectureship
series to bring prominent female geoscientists to her department for multi-day
interactive visits that will focus on both scientific research and mentoring.