* 1322063
* Oceanographic Instrumentation - 2013
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2014
* Richard Findley, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 09/30/2014
* USD 15,890.00

The University of Miami requests funding for additional and back-up
instrumentation on the R/V Walton Smith, a 96,? general purpose regional vessel
operated by the University of Miami?s Rosenstiel School of Marine and
Atmospheric Sciences (RSMAS) as part of the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R/V WALTON
SMITH conducts a substantial portion of her operations in the near shore waters
of South Florida and the Gulf of Mexico, providing scientific information
relevant to major environmental initiatives. The operations include oil spill
monitoring, water management changes, municipal waste disposal, and storm water
discharge among others which are deemed critical to the sustainable development
of the South Florida and Gulf economy. In 2012, R/V Walton Smith completed 143
days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 25% of the total sailing
schedule. In 2013, R/V Walton Smith is scheduled for 108 days with NSF days
accounting for 17% of the total sailing
schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic instrumentation requested in this
proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1) 1m MOCNESS Overhaul and Spares
$15,890 &lt;br/&gt;2) POSMV Upgrade $97,089 &lt;br/&gt;3) Nisken Water Sampler
$10,000 &lt;br/&gt;4) Altimeter of use with CTD Systems $3,910 &lt;br/&gt;5)
Integrated Optical Bow Sensor Suite $21,751 &lt;br/&gt;TOTAL $148,640
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under criterion two of the Proposal
Guidelines. They provide infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel
and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic
research projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant
research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-
use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential researchers.