* 1322276
* Evaluating the Impact of Peer Impression on Project Outcomes in Free/Libre, Open Source Software (FLOSS) Projects
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Carver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,998.00

Software development organizations that employ a distributed development model
(i.e. participants are not co-located) are an important class of virtual
organizations, operating as sociotechnical systems that incorporate computer-
mediated communication and collaboration to enable their success. Despite the
availability of various sociotechnical interaction techniques, the literature
suggests that distributed teams require more time and resources than co-located
teams to do the same amount of work. The lack of physical interaction among
members of distributed teams hinders the process of impression formation,
because individuals have difficulty obtaining an accurate view of the expertise
and ability of teammates. Inaccurate perceptions may lead distributed software
developers to improperly disregard teammates' input, ultimately reducing the
productivity of the team as a whole. In this project we will model the process
of peer impression formation in Free/Libre and Open Source Software (FLOSS)
projects, one of the most common types of virtual software development
organizations. The objectives of this project are 1) to build and evaluate an
empirical model describing the impression-formation process, 2) to measure the
accuracy of peer impressions, and 3) to observe how peer impressions affect
project outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to identify and
understand how various types of sociotechnical interactions (e.g. via code
review, bug repositories, and code repositories) influence peer impression
formation in distributed FLOSS projects. We will evaluate how peer impressions
affect collaboration and project outcomes. The results of this work will improve
the software development process for FLOSS projects. Therefore, this research
will have broad impacts on society because of the large number of FLOSS projects
that provide key software for many important tasks. This work will also
contribute to building the first theoretical model of impression formation
processes in FLOSS projects. In addition to their direct applicability in FLOSS
project, these results will be also applicable to other types of distributed
software development, which is largely similar to FLOSS development and has been
adopted worldwide by many commercial organizations.