* 1322320
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The impact of social factors on the syntactic patterns of code-switching among young adults
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Rebekah Post, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2015
* USD 13,388.00

This study examines spoken and written data among young adults in Morocco to
probe the effects of social factors on Moroccan Arabic-French code-switching,
the use of two languages in a single conversation. Due to its colonial history,
French remains an important language in Morocco but its use today in spoken
discourse occurs mainly through code-switching with the vernacular dialect of
Arabic. This study will examine, from a linguistic perspective, how speakers
integrate these two grammatically diverse languages. While Arabic-French code-
switching has been the topic of previous studies, the current project will
quantify the rates of French usage among young adults of varied backgrounds to
determine how social factors correlate with differences in observed code-
switching grammatical patterns. At issue is how bilinguals utilize their
linguistic repertoires in varied media and whether conventionalized forms of
code-switching can be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;40 native speakers of
Moroccan Arabic will participate in two task types: 1) spoken conversational
tasks and 2) text-based chat via internet. In each task type, participants will
be free to discuss any topic(s) of their choice in any language(s) they desire.
The inclusion of both oral and written production of the same individuals allows
for the identification of emerging linguistic conventions in this traditionally
spoken dialect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this study is to quantify the
extent to which French permeates Arabic discourse and whether or not there are
identifiable patterns of French use that correlate with social predictors, such
as gender and class. Such an analysis will allow comparison with future research
in other geographic areas. Additionally, this investigation will contribute to
the study of bilingual language forms more broadly by creating a corpus of
spoken and written mixed Moroccan Arabic-French discourse that will be shared
with other researchers and adding to an understanding of language use in a post-
colonial context.