* 1322088
* RAPID: Communication and Understanding of Hurricane Sandy Storm Surge Forecast and Warning Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Hugh Gladwin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 02/28/2015
* USD 49,273.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) provides funding to put a team of
experienced researchers in the field to collect important time-sensitive data
related to Tropical Storm/Hurricane/Superstorm Sandy. The severe aftermath of
this storm put new urgency on the need for better understanding of and
improvement in forecast and warning communication. The accurate forecast from
the National Hurricane Center provided sufficient warning time for people to
take action. For many, however, realization of the need to act came too late.
This storm transitioned from tropical storm to hurricane to extratropical (ET)
storm as it approached landfall in the New York City area. That transition
resulted in operational changes in responsibilities within the National Weather
Service (NWS) along with possible changes in how media and emergency management
interpreted the storm's hazards. During the Friday to Sunday time before Monday
landfall, when critical decisions had to be made, Sandy was barely a Category 1
hurricane, possibly leading people to think it would not have a dangerous storm
surge. Its major impact was on an area not highly accustomed to planning for
major hurricanes and having experienced one, Irene, with very different
characteristics the year before. These factors may have contributed to response
delay, but research is needed to find out what actually happened in the forecast
communication process and make recommendations for improvement.

Results gathered will contribute to investigating ways for improving storm
forecast communication to promote public safety and reduce hurricane costs. At
least 125 people died (mostly from storm surge), and estimates indicate Sandy is
likely to become one of the most costly weather events on record. Thousands of
businesses, homes, and families were destroyed, many never to recover. If the
increasing ability of the National Hurricane Center to make accurate storm surge
forecasts is to translate into saving lives and lessening the damage and need
for recovery so costly to government, the forecast communication and government
response process must be improved. This need is the rationale to this project's
gathering of time-sensitive information and its analysis.