* 1322061
* I-Corps Site: University of Akron Technology Innovation and Entrepreneurial Preparation Grant
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* George Newkome, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal addresses NSF?s call for universities to nurture students and/or
faculty who are engaged in projects having the potential to be transitioned into
the marketplace. I-Corps Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources,
networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to
transition their ideas, devices, processes or other intellectual activities into
the marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Akron (UA) is developing
a new I-Corps Site, entitled the UA Technology Innovation and Entrepreneurial
Preparation Grant (UA TIE Prep Grant), that will build upon their existing
expertise, while filling a gap that is critical in the commercialization and
translation of university-based research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the UA TIE Prep Grant will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. stimulate the translation of
fundamental university-based research into commercially viable technologies
prepared to progress into the National Science Foundation?s I-Corps Teams
program, SBIR, or other avenues toward commercialization;&lt;br/&gt;2. encourage
faculty, students, and community-based industry personnel to collaborate around
early stage university technologies, and;&lt;br/&gt;3. enhance the
entrepreneurship potential of faculty, students, and community-based industry
partners through hands-on training and experiential learning in innovation and
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UA TIE Prep Grant Program has the
potential to greatly improve commercialization outcomes for UA technologies
which will influence the regional economy and serve as a national model for
entrepreneurship.