* 1322586
* Improving and Assessing Student Learning in an Inverted STEM Classroom Setting
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrew Scott, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 598,522.00

Numerical methods are taught by many engineering disciplines throughout the
nation and therefore more engaging and effective teaching of these methods could
result in better prepared engineering graduates. When teaching numerical methods
it is critical to cover not only theoretical concepts required for algorithm
development and selection but also the precise language of computer programming
required for algorithm implementation. This project is evaluating the efficacy
of using an inverted classroom methodology to teach these diverse concepts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will include on-line materials
that encourage and support use of active in-class pedagogical methods and
assessments of these materials and methods. These results will inform the
education community regarding the efficacy of teaching numerical methods using
an Inverted classroom methodology. The materials will be readily available to
engineering departments nationally and assessment results will help faculty
better understand what aspects of numerical methods can be taught using an
inverted methodology and also will give them the resources needed to teach in
similar ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple universities with diverse student
populations are implementing the methods and materials of this project.
Assessment and evaluation is performed by another university not affiliated with
the implementers; therefore, evaluation is independent of the instructors.
Evaluation of student performance is partially being assessed using a numerical
methods concept inventory which is being developed by the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful results in this research could transform the
way engineering programs teach numerical methods nationally.