* 1322623
* Full-Scale Development: Collaborative Research: NEXT: The Youth Radio Innovation Lab
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Harold Abelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2016
* USD 695,883.00

This full scale/collaborative research project targets underserved youth who
will collaborate with STEM professionals to co-create community-relevant
technology and media content creating a potentially scalable model. App Lab DIY
is a collaboration between Youth Radio, the MIT Media Lab's Center for Mobile
Learning, and the Mozilla Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are multiple
and well integrated project strategies. Youth working with professionals will
design, create, and disseminate original apps that engage users around community
issues (e.g. urban wildlife mapping; Community DNA). They will work directly
with the MIT Media Lab/Mobile Learning Center to improve App Inventor, an open-
source tool. Youth participants will create media content for national on-air
and online outlets including NPR. They will design digital badges to validate
and document what they've learned creating media and apps. Curricular resources
and tools for educators will be created and disseminated to advance STEM
learning among underserved youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables include: 1)
creation of three apps (media-rich, STEM-relevant, community valued) that engage
communities; 2) improvements in App Inventor, MIT's open-source tool that
democratizes app develop for and by all; 3) radio stories that are integrated
with the apps; 4) a multimedia toolkit for informal and formal educators to
adapt in their programs; 5) a pilot badging system to mark mastery of skills
associated with youth-driven media production and technological innovation; and
6) a research study focusing on the use of app development to drive STEM
learning and engagement among underserved youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Original
research will be conducted by an embedded Scholar-in-Residence to inform and
advance the field about driving STEM engagement via media/tech innovation. The
Scholar-in-Residence will use Participant-Action-Research to inform and improve
practice and study the big general questions about how the program works and
why.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation will leverage the instruments and
methods established in Youth Radio's past NSF grants to study the impact on the
youth's skills, knowledge and attitudes. They will also study impacts on two
additional audiences: educators using the multimedia toolkit and users of the
mobile apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximate 1000 Youth Radio students will
participate in the project over the three years through contributions to app
development, radio production, and digital badges creation. The multimedia
toolkit will be nationally disseminated to STEM educators with a large potential
reach.