* 1322558
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Economy and Statecraft in the Save Hills of West Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Andrew Gurstelle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 21,817.00

With National Science Foundation support, Andrew Gurstelle will examine the
effects of pre-colonial political centralization on local economies in the Savè
hills area of the modern day Republic of Bénin. Since at least the late first
millennium AD, West African societies have intensively participated in long-
distance exchange trade networks. These networks linked the region with the rest
of Africa and beyond. Over the past half century, archaeological research has
documented how African elites actively manipulated these networks to support the
creation of powerful states. This research has led to a deep understanding of
the intersection between trade, centralization and political economy.
Comparatively little attention has been given to the local economies of
centralized states - economic practices such as agriculture, craft production,
and labor organization - which formed the basis of economic life and underwrote
participation in long-distance exchange. Even less is known about the economic
activities and organization of polities not engaged in long-distance exchange.
These research questions touch on areas of broad anthropological interest, such
as the deep history of sociopolitical inequalities and the origins of ancient
states. They also provide insight into how political entities function in many
parts of the world today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of Dr.
Carla Sinopoli, Mr. Gurstelle will conduct intensive survey and test excavations
of archaeological sites in the Savè hills area of Bénin. This research targets
sites around Idadu (modern day Savè), the traditional capital of the Shabe
kingdom, to investigate how local economic practices affected and were affected
by processes of state formation. The kingdom likely formed during the early
second millennium, contemporary with other Yoruba states. Unlike other states,
there is no clear evidence that the Shabe kingdom directly participated in
either the trans-Saharan or trans-Atlantic trade networks. The ability of Shabe
elite to centralize their authority and establish a state is not well explained
by models that rely on control over long-distance
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to disseminating the results of this
research through Mr. Gurstelle's dissertation and other scholarly publications,
regular sessions will be organized with the modern communities in the Savè hills
area to foster awareness of the richness of the local archaeological record and
encourage the preservation of archaeological sites. The results of this research
will also be used to train area tour guides to recognize and protect
archaeological sites and incorporate archaeology into their cultural and
ecological tours. Fostering archaeological stewardship is particularly important
as no systematic recording of archaeological sites exists for the area, and the
archaeological landscape is under intense pressure from increasing agricultural
usage. The results of this research will be incorporated into a museum exhibit
on local history that will be exhibited in Savè as well as in southeastern
Michigan for general public audiences.