* 1322081
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the Causes of Highly Explosive Basaltic Eruptions Using the AD 1085 Sunset Crater Eruption and its Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Michael Ort, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2017
* USD 119,999.00

Eruption of low-viscosity, dark magma called basalt dominates volcanism on
Earth, Mars, the Moon, and Venus. Compared to more viscous and more volatile-
rich magmas, basalts are generally considered to have lower explosive potential,
producing mild eruptions affecting relatively small geographical areas. Basaltic
eruptions, however, display large variability and range from quiet lava flows
and mild explosions to less common large explosions forming &gt;30 km-high
plumes that disperse fine ash up to several hundreds of kilometers. The exact
causes of these upper end-member explosions are debated in the literature. The
largest recent eruption of a monogenetic basaltic scoria-cone volcano in the
present-day contiguous USA took place ~900 years ago at Sunset Crater, about 25
km NE of Flagstaff, AZ. The eruption produced lava flows, but most of the
erupted volume was ejected during at least 8 explosive phases that produced
eruption plumes from 7 km to 25 km high and deposited scoria and ash blankets
over the surrounding area. Scoria and ash thicknesses greater than 1 cm cover
approximately 2,300 km2 and impacted prehistoric inhabitants, leading to
population movement and dramatically altered settlement, subsistence, economic,
and ritual systems. The eruption figures in oral traditions of seven tribes in
the area. A similar modern eruption would significantly affect the Southwest US,
causing major disruption to commerce and air traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine the Sunset Crater eruption in order to test hypotheses
explaining the causes of unusually large and violent basaltic eruptions. The
leading hypotheses are a) the magma is especially rich in volatiles, such as
water vapor and carbon dioxide, which provide the energy required to drive
explosive eruptions and b) the magma viscosity abruptly increases in the shallow
sub-surface due to magma outgassing and rapid crystallization, causing the
basalt to hold its gases tightly, only to release them in a violent and
explosive way upon reaching the surface. To help determine the importance of
these processes at Sunset Crater, we will first determine the relative timing of
the lava flow and eruption plume eruptions through stratigraphic correlation of
the deposits. Scoria textures (e.g. bubbles, crystals) will help reveal magma
viscosity and provide information on late-stage eruption processes, whereas
analysis of melt inclusions trapped in crystals that formed at greater depths
will provide information on initial magma volatile contents.