* 1322971
* Collaborative Research: Wikipedia and the Democratization of Academic Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Hannah Brueckner, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 70,000.00

SES-1322934 PI: Julia Adams Yale University

SES-1322971 PI: Hannah Brueckner New York University

Wikipedia was launched in 2001 and has since become the world's single most
important reference tool and information clearinghouse. Unlike traditional
encyclopedias, which are controlled by experts, Wikipedia was supposed to have
democratized knowledge. Yet an emerging body of research indicates that
Wikipedia suffers from systematic gender bias with respect to both contributors
and content. How and why is this bias produced? We focus on identifying the
mechanisms impinging on Wikipedia's representation of several academic
disciplines, drawn from the sciences, social sciences, and the humanities
respectively. Drawing on theoretical insights from the sociology of knowledge,
we are exploring potential gender differences in indicators of academic
notability, the existence of networks that help contributors mobilize resources
for content creation, gate keeping processes that result in challenges to
content associated with women and scholarship, and the unintended consequences
of Wikipedia's policies themselves. Do these and other related processes vary
across academic disciplines? The project deploys both quantitative and
qualitative social science methods as it seeks to illuminate the gender-specific
patterns of representation of scholars and scholarship.

Broader Impacts We are committed to the goal of training new social scientists
amid a landscape of enhanced interdisciplinary understanding. Yet the potential
impact of this project reaches far beyond the academy. Underrepresentation of
female scholars and associated scholarship reduces the quality and completeness
of Wikipedia, imposing significant costs on the millions of readers who rely on
it. Our findings should clarify where in the complex chain of knowledge gender
disparities arise. The findings should also bolster ongoing efforts to address
those disparities, in this case by improving quality and reducing bias on
academic -- and more general -- Wikipedia.