* 1322018
* Geochemical Analysis of Fluid Inclusions in Trace and Minor Mississippi Valley-type Zn-Pb Occurrences in the US Mid-continent:  Implications for Crustal Metal Enrichment Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Raymond Coveney, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2017
* USD 265,556.00

The Mississippi River watershed of the central U.S. hosts numerous deposits of
lead and zinc ranging from the world-class Southeast Missouri and Tri-State
(Oklahoma-Missouri-Kansas) mining districts to widely dispersed non-commercial
traces of mineralization. Collectively these deposits are referred to as
'Mississippi Valley-type' (MVT) and occur as sulfide minerals that were
precipitated in limestone and dolomite host rocks by highly saline groundwater
(about 10 times more saline than seawater) at temperatures between 80 and 150Â°
C. The largest deposits are in the Southeast Missouri district, which currently
account for about 70% of primary lead production and about 6.5% of primary zinc
production in the U.S. The Tri-State district was mined commercially from 1848
to 1970 and during its peak in the early 20th century accounted for as much as
about 60% of primary zinc and 11% of primary lead production in the U.S. Recent
research carried out by the principal investigators and their collaborators has
revealed the chemical composition of the groundwater that precipitated the MVT
ores in the Southeast Missouri and Tri-State districts and other formerly
commercial deposits in northern Arkansas and central Missouri. This research
showed that large MVT ore deposits in the central U.S. formed from groundwater
with high concentrations of lead, high Ca/Na and K/Na ratios, low Ca/Mg ratios,
and that was chemically reducing. The purpose of the present research project is
to determine whether groundwater that formed trace and minor MVT mineralization
had the same composition as the groundwater that formed large ore bodies. This
information would be useful in determining the commercial potential of new MVT
deposit discoveries and in determining the geologic processes responsible for
concentrating metals into large ore bodies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will be carried out by analyzing fluid inclusions, tiny (&lt; 0.1 mm in
diameter) samples of ambient groundwater trapped in the precipitated MVT deposit
minerals. The locations of numerous trace occurrences of MVT mineralization have
been compiled from the published literature and will be visited and sampled by
the principal investigators. Slices of the rock samples will be cut and polished
to 0.05 to 0.1 mm thicknesses to make the fluid inclusions visible by
transmitted light microscopy. Fluid inclusions will first be studied using
microthermometry to determine their bulk salinity from their melting point
depression and their trapping temperature from the point of phase
homogenization. The presence of methane, carbon dioxide, sulfate, and hydrogen
sulfide will be sought in the fluid inclusions using Raman spectroscopy and will
constrain the redox potential of the mineralizing groundwater and depth of
mineral deposit formation. The concentrations of elements like Li, Na, Mg, K,
Ca, Mn, Fe, Cu, Zn, Sr, Ba, and Pb will be determined from laser ablation-
inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) and will be used to see
if groundwater that formed the trace MVT occurrences has the same chemical
signature as groundwater that formed the large MVT ore deposits. More
specifically, the data acquired from this research will allow two fundamental
hypotheses for the origin of MVT deposits to be tested: (1) That anomalously
metal-rich, high Ca/Na and K/Na, and low Ca/Mg fluids are needed to form large
MVT ore deposits, (2) that redox conditions at the trace and minor occurrences
of MVT mineralization were locally too oxidizing to allow much of the sulfur,
whether resident or delivered by invading fluid, to exist as sulfide rather than
sulfate, which would inhibit sulfide mineral precipitation and deposit growth.