* 1322928
* Unsilent partners: Constraining the contribution of methanogen-protist symbioses to total methane production in anoxic marine habitats
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* NONE NONE, Beinart                 Roxanne        A
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2016
* USD 170,000.00

Overview: There is a growing appreciation for the ubiquity of microbial
symbioses on earth, yet in most habitats we have only a basic understanding of
their physiology and ecology. Many eukaryotes have evolved specific associations
with prokaryotes that capitalize on the relative diversity of prokaryotic
metabolisms. In terms of numbers, symbiont populations often rival or exceed
free-living prokaryotes in their environment, therefore, through their
metabolism, symbionts may have a significant effect on their biotic and abiotic
environment. Despite this, there is limited knowledge of the symbiotic function
and metabolic activity of most symbiotic taxa.

Symbioses between anaerobic protists and intracellular, methanogenic archaea
have been found in many anoxic habitats, however the contribution of symbiont-
produced methane (CH4) to the marine CH4 cycle is yet unconstrained. In non-
marine environments, like rice paddies and lakes, they have been found to
significantly contribute to the production of CH4, suggesting that these
symbioses may be important to the biogeochemical cycling of this climate-active
gas. However, though taxa known to host methanogens have been detected in
general surveys of protists in oxygen (O2) -poor and anoxic marine water
columns, to date, they have never been specifically surveyed, and no studies
have quantified their contribution to CH4 production in these habitats.
Additionally, outside of their methanogenic function, nothing is known about the
physiological capacity of their symbionts.

To develop an understanding of the details of these partnerships and to address
the contribution of microbial symbionts to the CH4 cycle, the fellow will
examine the ecology and physiology of methanogen-protist symbioses in Saanich
Inlet (SI), a seasonally anoxic fjord off the coast of British Columbia, Canada
that accumulates CH4 (greater than 1 micrometer) in its deep water from a yet
unconstrained source. With sponsor Dr. Virginia Edgcomb at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), the fellow will combine a) fluorescence-
activated cell sorting based surveys of the abundance and diversity of
methanogen-hosting protists, with assessment of their metabolism through b) the
experimental measurement of CH4 production by natural populations and c)
analysis of total symbiont gene content (i.e., genomics). This robust
combination of observational and experimental approaches will provide valuable
insight into distribution, physiology and activity of these symbioses, allowing
the first estimation of the contribution of protist-associated methanogens to
CH4 production in an anoxic marine water column.

Intellectual merit: Anoxic and low-O2 marine water columns are thought to
contribute 50-60% of the global oceanic emission of CH4, a climate-active gas.
It is typically assumed that the CH4 in these habitats originates from the
underlying sediment, where methanogenesis is known to occur. Water column
production is presumed to be unimportant in these areas, as free-living
methanogens cannot compete successfully with sulfate-reducing bacteria for
common substrates (e.g, Hydrogen) in sulfate-replete seawater. However,
symbiotic methanogens are protected from competition with sulfate-reducing
bacteria since substrates are host provided. Consequently, methanogenesis by the
symbionts of protists in the water column may account for a significant fraction
of the CH4 budget in these areas. Thus, the proposed effort will substantially
advance our understanding of the underlying source of CH4 in O2-deficient and
anoxic marine habitats. Since rising temperatures are predicted to cause the
expansion of oxygen-depleted habitats, better insight into CH4 cycling in these
areas will become increasingly important to our understanding and modeling of
global oceanic CH4 emissions.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of the proposed effort include
disseminating the findings to the scientific and wider community through public
lectures, and supporting participation of underrepresented groups in ocean
sciences research through mentorship of 1-2 undergraduates in the WHOI Summer
Student and Minority Fellowship programs. Additionally, funds from the annual
fellowship allowance have been budgeted to develop an educational unit about
marine symbioses with a local non-profit marine education foundation. This unit
will be presented by the fellow to K-12 students from disadvantaged communities
from the southern New England area.