* 1322774
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Variation in Accessing Bureaucratic State Systems
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Sarah Burgard, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2015
* USD 20,508.00

State bureaucratic systems require that citizens apply to them. Research has
found variation in who accesses benefits and how they do so. Existing research
suggests that the following factors could influence the variation in benefit
claim among workers: 1) variation in satisfying eligibility criteria; 2)
variation in viewing oneself as deserving of assistance; 3) difficulty
navigating state systems; 4) variation in reticence to apply for assistance due
to prior negative experiences with the law; and 5) employer practices. The
current research uses a subsample of respondents drawn from the Michigan
Recession and Recovery Study (a panel survey of a population-representative
random sample drawn from the metro-Detroit region) who were unemployed in summer
2011. The subsample will be stratified to include respondents of diverse
educational levels and ethnicity. Respondents will be interviewed about the
circumstances of their job loss, their strategies for making ends meet, and
their experiences with accessing assistance. This information, combined with
data from the larger panel survey, will allow researchers to determine program
eligibility and reasons for variation in ability to access assistance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of these data will offer preliminary answers to
the question of why some demographic groups of workers access benefit systems at
lower rates than other demographic groups of workers. The research findings will
be communicated with policy makers to inform decisionmaking about the structure
of state bureaucratic programs.