* 1322305
* RUI: VOSS: Computational Tools, Virtual Organizing, and Dynamic Innovation Diffusion
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Kerk Kee, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 324,981.00

The motivating vision behind "computational and data-enabled science and
engineering" (CDS&amp;E) is that the development, implementation, adoption, use
and diffusion of advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI) will revolutionize research
and education in the U.S., enhancing the nation's economic competitiveness and
maintaining the nation's leadership in science and engineering discovery.
However, the implementation and diffusion of CI-enabled science -- and
especially the adoption of advanced CDS&amp;E tools -- is not well understood.
These next-generation technologies are dynamic to an unprecedented degree, in
that they are user-driven, custom-made, produced on demand, and "permanently
beta." Most importantly, they are being put to use while simultaneously being
developed; and all this is occurring within CI-enabled virtual organizations
(VOs), which constantly evolve along with the technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the rise and fall of new
computational tools within CI-enabled, virtually-organized science and
engineering research. The project employs a grounded-theory approach, to analyze
interview data about the emergence of advanced CDS&amp;E tools, and to construct
a theoretical framework for understanding dynamic innovation development, use,
adoption, implementation, and diffusion within CDS&amp;E VOs. The project's
empirical focus will be the NSF-funded Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE; https://www.xsede.org/), a nationwide network of distributed
high-performance computing resources. Snowball recruitment will be used to
identify domain scientists, computational technologists, and supercomputer
center administrators (across e-science projects, institutions, and disciplines)
who have experience with adopting, developing, and using computational tools
within the XSEDE ecosystem. Interviews will seek to illuminate best practices
and common pitfalls in the emergence of advanced computational tools and in the
deployment of such tools by practicing CDS&amp;E
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this work will help NSF and
other federal agencies to optimize existing and future CI investments. The
research may also have implications for commercial and open-source technologies
that share some of the dynamic, distributed feedback and network properties of
advanced scientific CI -- promising insights that could enhance the development
and diffusion of such technologies well beyond the academic science community.