* 1322218
* VOSS: Collaborative Research: Agency, Structure and Organization: Paths to Participation in Large-Scale Socio-Technical Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 152,692.00

This project advances the study of socio-technical systems and social
participation by investigating how system design, structure and agency are
associated with different paths to participation in technology-mediated social
participation (TMSP) systems. Online systems create organizational structural
constraints and affordances by design, and therefore channel the potential for
human agency -- roles, responsibilities and actions -- in ways that are not
usually possible in the offline world. The project employs a mixed-methods
design to examine collective behavior in different TMSP systems using
longitudinal surveys and behavioral log data. In addition, this research
includes a series of field experiments to test specific relationships between
structural and organizational designs that facilitate collective outcomes and
paths to participation. The project?s intellectual merits include: (i)
developing a rigorous understanding of how social participation changes over
time as a result of systems design, socio-technical structure and human agency;
(ii) extending the long history of social scientific theories and empirical
research on collective behavior, motivation, and community participation in both
laboratory and real world environments; and, (iii) developing specific
recommendations and design guidelines for future TMSP and citizen science
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will foster increased public
participation in TMSP systems, and increased scholarly awareness of technology-
mediated collaborations and citizen science as effective research resources. It
will also encourage cross-disciplinary, cross-campus collaboration, by
connecting scholars from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds, to study and
advance TMSP research. In addition, it will contribute to education, by
providing opportunities for students to reason about, design and implement new
TMSP systems to connect large numbers of distributed volunteers with social
needs.