* 1322950
* OCE-RIG:   Biological activity on particulate organic material in the coastal ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Dana Hunt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2016
* USD 99,999.00

Overview: Marine microbial populations exhibit characteristic distributions both
seasonally and across ocean basins. Using natural spatial and temporal
variability, oceanographers have sought to identify the ecological variables
that drive the abundance and activity of microbial groups. However, in addition
to large scale resource gradients with distance and depth, there are numerous
small scale microenvironments in the ocean where rates and processes are likely
distinct from those in bulk seawater. Using an on-going time series, the
investigator will examine seasonal changes in total and phylotype-specific
biological activity in the particulate and freeliving phases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports an early-career investigator working
at the Pivers Island Coastal Observatory (PICO). The PICO time series has been
sampled weekly (or more frequently) over the last two years to capture physical,
chemical and biological variability in the coastal ocean. This time series
enables the investigator to collaborate with a number of researchers and will
serve as a long-term research focus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
There is a growing interest in considering the contributions of microscale
processes to total biological activity in the marine environment. Using size-
fractionated seawater, this investigator will assess the changing contribution
of particles to biological activity. Experiments will reveal the biogeochemical
importance of particle-attached microbes to bulk biological processes and how
they change over the course of a yearly cycle and in response to environmental
perturbations (e.g. storms). The investigator will also compare the phylogeny
and specific activity of particle-attached and free-living bacteria using 16S
rRNA and rDNA libraries to identify which clades are responsible for these
changes in total activity. In addition to categorizing clades as particle-
attached or free-living, this investigator will examine the time series for
transitions between particles and planktonic lifestyles at both coarse (16S
rDNA) and fine scales (ITS) of phylogenetic resolution. This work will
contribute to a more complete understanding of the role of particulate organic
material as a distinct marine microenvironment and clarify its role in
biogeochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project directly
involves a minority graduate student and several undergraduate students (from
Duke, Marine Science Education Consortium Schools, and the REU program in marine
science) in research activities. This work will also facilitate advancement of
early career faculty in oceanography through development of a Preparing
Oceanography Future Faculty (POFF) program to encourage women and
underrepresented minorities to make the critical jump from graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers to tenure-track faculty. POFF will provide motivated
graduate students with a background in charting their careers to developing
skills important for academic positions. After teaching the course, curricula,
lesson plans and open source readings will be made publically available on a
website to enable faculty to teach similar courses at other oceanography
schools. To expand this outreach beyond academia, graduate students in the
course will gain experience in mentoring by supervising middle school
oceanography students in a science fair project, providing tours of the marine
lab, and taking the eighth graders on a "research" cruise.