* 1322179
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An acoustic analysis of Spanish-K'ichee' (Mayan) bilingual intonation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Almeida Toribio, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2015
* USD 11,456.00

This dissertation project seeks to investigate the production of bilingual
speech forms in the contact situation between Spanish and K'ichee' (Mayan) in
Guatemala, where the languages stand in a situation of unstable diglossia.
Specifically, it examines the phonetic transfer or convergence in the intonation
contours of bilinguals that differ in language proficiency, as they produce
contrastive focus utterances in naturalistic interviews and in controlled
experiments. The principal questions that motivate the work are whether
bilinguals give any prosodic emphasis to a contrastive focus constituent in
K'ichee', and whether they present evidence of transfer from one language to the
other or of convergence of intonation contours. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
dissertation also explores the differences in prosodic focus marking in Spanish-
dominant versus K'ichee'-dominant bilinguals and examines the patterns of
interaction between these bilinguals' dominant languages. In pursuing these
research aims, multiple tasks are employed to elicit contrastive focus
productions from bilinguals from two dialect regions: Cantel, which is close to
the Spanish-speaking urban center of Quetzaltenango, and Nahualá, which is
further removed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present study presents one of the
first acoustic analyses of K'ichee' and Guatemalan Spanish and it contributes
more generally to the literature on bilingual and contact Spanish intonation. In
addition, it brings needed attention to an underrepresented indigenous
population and its endangered language. Finally, in providing insight into the
communicative norms and needs of this bilingual population, it may aid in the
design and implementation of educational programs tailored to communities of
Spanish-Mayan bilinguals throughout Guatemala.