* 1322556
* Collaborative Research: Navigating from Vision to Change with Bio-MAPS
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Michelle Smith, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 02/28/2019
* USD 219,966.00

This project takes major steps towards concretely defining core concepts and
competencies outlined in the NSF-AAAS report, Vision and Change, and provides
tools to allow programmatic assessment in undergraduate biology education. The
intellectual merit of this project derives from the development, validation, and
field-testing of tools called Bio-MAPS (Biology-Measuring Achievement and
Progression in Science). Specifically, four Bio-MAPS assessments are being
produced: molecular and cellular biology, physiology and neuroscience, ecology
and evolution, and an overall comprehensive measure. The research team is
working with biology faculty at diverse institutions that span the breadth of
higher education to develop a framework that outlines expectations for what
students should know and be able to do at different collegiate levels.

Data from Bio-MAPS are expected to provide dramatic broader impacts and catalyze
curricular reform by: 1) diagnosing areas in which students struggle despite
instruction, 2) allowing two-year community colleges to evaluate how well they
are preparing students for transfer to four-year institutions, 3) inspiring and
directing faculty and institutional conversations about enacting change at the
programmatic level, 4) helping administrators focus limited resources on aspects
of the curricula needing revision, and 5) challenging faculty to re-design
courses to scaffold student learning. Biology departments can also use Bio-MAPS
assessments to demonstrate evidence of student learning for accreditation
processes.

Many agencies now require evidence of student learning and data on how well
programs meet the needs of diverse student populations. This focus on tangible
learning outcomes requires that institutions have a means of quantitatively
measuring student progression through a curriculum. Bio-MAPS can provide a means
of measuring student progress through a curriculum. Other science disciplines
may be interested in developing similar assessments for their students.

This project is being funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.