* 1322934
* Collaborative Research: Wikipedia and the Democratization of Academic Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Julia Adams, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 132,000.00

SES-1322934 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Julia Adams &lt;br/&gt;Yale University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1322971 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Hannah Brueckner &lt;br/&gt;New
York University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wikipedia was launched in 2001 and has
since become the world's single most important reference tool and information
clearinghouse. Unlike traditional encyclopedias, which are controlled by
experts, Wikipedia was supposed to have democratized knowledge. Yet an emerging
body of research indicates that Wikipedia suffers from systematic gender bias
with respect to both contributors and content. How and why is this bias
produced? This project focuses on identifying the mechanisms impinging on
Wikipedia's representation of several academic disciplines, drawn from the
sciences, social sciences, and the humanities respectively. Drawing on
theoretical insights from the sociology of knowledge, the investigators are
exploring potential gender differences in indicators of academic notability, the
existence of networks that help contributors mobilize resources for content
creation, gate keeping processes that result in challenges to content associated
with women and scholarship, and the unintended consequences of Wikipedia's
policies themselves. Do these and other related processes vary across academic
disciplines? The project deploys both quantitative and qualitative social
science methods as it seeks to illuminate the gender-specific patterns of
representation of scholars and scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are committed to the goal of training new
social scientists amid a landscape of enhanced interdisciplinary understanding.
Yet the potential impact of this project reaches far beyond the academy. Under-
representation of female scholars and associated scholarship reduces the quality
and completeness of Wikipedia, imposing significant costs on the millions of
readers who rely on it. The findings from this research should clarify where in
the complex chain of knowledge gender disparities arise. The findings should
also bolster ongoing efforts to address those disparities, in this case by
improving quality and reducing bias on academic -- and more general --
Wikipedia.