* 1322848
* Collaborative Research: Authentic Project-based Research in College Sciences Curricula: Assessing the Impacts on Students and Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Derek Wood, Seattle Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2017
* USD 527,746.00

This collaboration among Seattle Pacific University, Augustana College, the
University of Arizona, and Hiram College will formally evaluate the impact of
authentic project-based research in core sciences curricula. In a previous CCLI
project, the PI team constructed the Genomics Education National Initiative
(GENI portal), a web-based project delivery system that provides remote access
to authentic research. GENI supports classroom implementation of this research
by providing protocols, training materials, expert advice, a networking
community, and physical resources. The PI team is using this resource to
integrate authentic project-based research into the curricula of five
participating institutions (those listed above and the University of Wisconsin
Madison). The PI team is also inviting current and future users of the program
to participate in this assessment. The project is focusing on the evaluation of
student learning, engagement, scientific literacy, problem-solving, and
retention in the sciences and will study factors that influence faculty
integration of authentic research into courses. In addition, they are evaluating
the utility of the GENI portal curricula delivery
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the proposed project lies
in the systematic implementation and assessment of authentic project-based
research in science curricula. These results will add to the limited research
base on the effectiveness of integrating authentic research in major and non-
major components of core science curricula across multiple disciplines and
institutions. Through the use of mixed research methods, including controlled
studies and qualitative approaches, data are being collected regarding the
impact of authentic project-based research on student learning, attitudes,
science career involvement and retention, problem solving, and collaboration. A
focus on process and context variables is providing critical information
regarding integration of authentic research into core science curricula
including benefits and challenges for faculty and students, the role of an
electronic delivery and project management system, and their use in multiple
settings and across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of
this proposal reside in the comprehensive application of project-based research
as the foundation of institutional change in undergraduate education. The
combination of the resources provided by the GENI portal and the community it
supports, complemented by in-depth assessment across multiple educational levels
will facilitate integration of research at institutions that were unable to
offer a high-quality research experience to their students and will allow the
integration of research across curricula, making it an outstanding tool for
reaching underserved populations and non-majors. It also provides a way for
instructional faculty to re-integrate with mainstream research communities and
for full-time researchers to disseminate their science to students of all levels
at any institution or location. The data produced will help faculty and
administrators integrate undergraduate research at their institutions.