* 1322406
* CAREER: Analyzing and Exploiting Meta-information for Keyword Search on Semi-structured Data
* CSE,IIS
* 12/25/2012,08/31/2016
* Yi Chen, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 305,001.00

The goal of this research project is to provide high-quality keyword search
results on semi-structured data in XML format. To address the challenge of
handling inherent ambiguity in keyword search, fundamental techniques and an
effective search engine are developed that exploit the meta-information in the
data in order to infer user search intention and to achieve high search quality.
The project includes novel research on the following key areas: (1) Query Result
Generation: identifying relevant nodes in XML data and composing atomic and
intact query results, each of which represents an object of the inferred user
search goal; (2) Query Result Presentation: developing techniques for result
ranking, snippet generation, and result clustering, in order to help users
quickly find the most relevant results; (3) Advanced Queries and Data Models:
supporting expressive search options and handling XML data with rich
constraints; and (4) Efficiency: developing techniques for performance
optimization, including indexes, materialized views, and top-k query processing.
Furthermore, an axiomatic evaluation framework is initiated for formally
reasoning about XML keyword search strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success
of the project will advance the state-of-the-art of keyword search on XML data,
enhance the research and education infrastructure in this area, and have broader
impacts on both general public as well as scientific communities for information
discovery. This research is intergrated with education through curriculum
enhancement, student advising, workshops as well as outreach programs.
Publications, software and course materials that are resulted from this project
will be disseminated via the project website
(http://web.njit.edu/~ychen/xseek.htm).