* 1322512
* Research: Badges for college credit (BCC): Motivating learning in informal science programs through a digital badge system
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Carrie Tzou, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,444,005.00

The Badges for College Credit project designs and researches:

1. a digital badge system that leads to college credit as the context for
investigating how to integrate badges with learning programs, 2. how to assess
learning associated with badges, and 3. how badges facilitate learning pathways
and contribute to science identity formation.

The project is one of the first efforts to develop a system to associate
informal science learning with college credit. The project will partner with
three regional informal science institutions, the Pacific Science Center, the
Future of Flight, and the Seattle of Aquarium, that will facilitate activities
for participants that are linked to informal science learning and earning
badges.

The project uses the iRemix platform, a social learning platform, as a delivery
system to direct participants to materials, resources, and activities that
support the learning goals of the project. Badges earned within the system can
be exported to the Mozilla Open Badges platform. Participants can earn three
types of badges, automatic (based on participation), community (based on
contributions to building the online community), and skill (based on mastery of
science and communication) badges.

Using a learning ecologies framework, the project will investigate multiple
influences on how and why youth participate in science learning and making
decisions. Project research uses a qualitative and quantitative approach,
including observations, interviews, case studies, surveys, and learning
analytics data, and data analytics. Project evaluation will focus on the nature
and function of the collaboration, and on the scale-up aspects of the innovation
and expansion, by: (1) analyzing and documenting effective procedures,and
optimal contexts for the dissemination of the model and (2) by analyzing the
collaboration between informal science organizations and higher education.