* 1322047
* Dating Transpression and Extrusion at Mid-Crustal Depths
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2014,05/31/2016
* David Moecher, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2016
* USD 260,043.00

Theoretical models for transpression and extrusion in continental collisional
zones have evolved markedly since the original model of Sanderson and Marchini
(1984), driven largely by modeling and analysis of real zones of transpression.
A zone of mid-crustal transpression and extrusion exhibiting a range of
structures that record markedly different states of finite strain suggestive of
contraction, wrenching, and extension serves as a natural laboratory to test a
fundamental aspect of transpression and extrusion models: testing via precise
geochronology whether simultaneous vs. sequential deformation occurred across
the system. Mapping and structural analysis at a range of scales demonstrate
that the transpression/extrusion system in the northern Appalachian orogen
contains elements of classical transpression models, elements proposed for more
complex systems of triclinic symmetry, and elements not predicted by models.
Linked kinematics along boundaries and lack of overprinting relationships are
consistent with some elements being components of a simultaneous partitioned
dextral transpression zone, whereas other elements appear to have developed
later in the deformation history or outlasted deformation in the other zones.
Geochronologic methods applied to strategically selected samples will be used to
determine absolute timing of deformation within the transpression/extrusion
system. Pseudosection analysis and conventional mineralogic geothermobarometry
will be completed in order to obtain temperature constraints for interpreting
geochronology and depth constraints for the present level of exposure of the
former mid-crustal setting. Strain and vorticity analysis in each element of the
system will be performed in order to assess contributions of coaxial vs. simple
shear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mountain belts such as the Appalachians are the
expression of colliding continental plates. As a result of the compressional
stresses in collision zones, the crust may be uplifted vertically and/or pushed
aside laterally (extruded). Full understanding of the collision history and
mechanism of mountain belt formation requires (1) examination of structural and
mineralogical features in rocks that are expressed at the map (kilometers to
hundreds of kilometers), outcrop (meters to hundreds of meters), hand sample,
and the microscopic scale; and (2) determination of the absolute age of geologic
events via radiometric dating methods. Our previous research in the northern
Appalachians of central Massachusetts identified features suggestive of oblique
(glancing blow), rather than orthogonal (head-on) collision, which is the
prevailing paradigm. The proposed research will involve field and laboratory
studies by a team of geoscientists, including a faculty member, post-doctoral
research associate, graduate student, and undergraduate student from the
University of Kentucky, working in collaboration with faculty at three other
institutions and a secondary earth science educator from the local school
system, to collect, measure, and interpret the data necessary to distinguish
between the two collision alternatives, and to carry out the geochronology
needed to determine precisely when the deformation of the crust occurred. The
project activities will further the professional development of the junior
geoscientists and the research results will be disseminated at professional
meetings and in peer-reviewed journals.