* 1322155
* Workshop on Youth Violence
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2013,12/31/2013
* Brad Bushman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 12/31/2013
* USD 41,257.00

"This is our first task - caring for our children. It's our first job. If we
don't get that right, we don't get anything right. That's how, as a society, we
will be judged." - President Barack Obama at the prayer vigil in Newtown,
December 16, 2012

On December 14th, 2012 Adam Lanza, age 20, first killed his mother in their
home, and then went to an elementary school in Newtown, Connecticut and began
shooting, killing 20 children and 6 school employees, and injuring 2 other
school employees before killing himself. Lanza joins a small, but growing list
of rampage shooters who have attacked schools, movie theaters, shopping malls,
and other public venues. Despite the rarity of these events, the scale of the
loss when it happens is so devastating and apparently random, that the public
and the nation's legislators are seeking answers to questions about causes and
potential prevention measures. When rampage shootings occur, people want to know
"the" cause. But violent criminal behavior is very complex and is determined by
multiple factors. The Administration and Congress are responding with proposals
for designed to speak to the need for change. President Obama has asked Vice
President Biden to coordinate federal efforts and Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D-W.Va.)
has introduced legislation for a National Academies study on the impact of
violent video imagery on children. Rep. Frank Wolf (R-Va), who has sponsored
past research efforts on this matter, has asked the National Science Foundation
(NSF) to find out what researchers know and don't know about the connection
between exposure to media violence and youth violence and other factors that
contribute to these devastating events. Professor Brad Bushman - an expert on
exposure to violent media - and Dean Katherine Newman - an expert in rampage
shooting - have called upon a committee of nine other participants with relevant
expertise (e.g., communication, law, sociology, computer science, adolescent
development, natural language analysis, gun policy, data analysis) to address
this urgent and important topic. We will also identify gaps in the scientific
literature by identifying what we have yet to learn, but can learn, from social
science research.