* 1322859
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   SEA-LEVEL RISE AND SALT-MARSH RESPONSE: A PALEO PERSPECTIVE
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Morris, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2017
* USD 62,876.00

Accurate projections of future relative sea-level (RSL) rise are crucial for
effective management of coastal populations, infrastructure, and ecosystems
including salt marshes. Sea-level reconstructions from the last 4000 years
provide a context for understanding modern and projected rates of sea-level rise
because Earth's climate system is relatively unchanged. We will develop two new
proxy RSL reconstructions from North Carolina to identify positive and negative
departures from the perceived stability of sea level during the last 4000 years
and support development of new predictive models in which the sea level-climate
relationship can vary through time. The reconstructions will test the widely
held assumption that sea-level rise from melting of large ice sheets was
negligible during the last 2000 years and will help constrain rates of vertical
land level movement. Data generated for the reconstructions will be used to
further develop a model of salt-marsh response to sea-level rise that will
provide a valuable service and tool to the coastal management community for
informing policy decisions.

While there are compilations of global and regional proxy temperature data for
the late Holocene, little is known about sea-level variability during this
period and the response of sea level to known climate deviations such as the
Medieval Climate Anomaly, Little Ice Age, and 20th century warming is unknown.
Using foraminifera preserved in North Carolina salt-marsh sediments, we will
produce the first continuous, high resolution (decadal and decimeter) RSL
reconstruction spanning the last ~4000 years. The sea-level reconstructions will
calibrate new predictive models of sea-level rise to improve the accuracy and
regional validity of projections. The new record will extend existing
reconstructions to test the following hypotheses that are vital for
understanding the climate sea-level relationship: (1) regional RSL was stable
before AD 1000; and (2) the contribution from melting of large ice sheets sea-
level rise ended 2000 years ago. Reconstructions derived from salt marsh
sediment also provide a paleo perspective for predicting the ecological effects
of future sea-level rise. The proxy sea-level record will validate, for the
first time, the Marsh Equilibrium Model (MEM). The MEM describes the regulation
of salt-marsh vegetation by changes in sea level. If sea-level rise is faster
than the rate of salt-marsh sediment accretion, the productivity of salt-marsh
vegetation will decline, resulting in the degradation or loss of these important
coastal ecosystems. The proxy sea level record will test a central premise of
the MEM that (3) Stable sediment organic matter (SOM) concentration varies
inversely with the reconstructed rate of RSL-rise.