* 1322306
* Full-Scale Development: Designing Our World: A Community Envisioning Girls as Engineers
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Lynn Dierking, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,108,572.00

This full-scale project addresses the need for more youth, especially girls, to
pursue an interest in engineering and eventually fill a critical workforce need.
The project leverages museum-based exhibits, girls' activity groups, and social
media to enhance participants' engineering-related interests and identities. The
project includes the following bilingual deliverables: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Creative Solutions programming will engage girls in group oriented engineering
activities at partner community-based organizations, where the activities
highlight altruistic, personally relevant, and social aspects of engineering.
Existing community groups will use the activities in their regular meeting
structure. Visits to the museum exhibits, titled Design Your World will
reinforce messages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Design Your World Exhibits will
serve as a community hub at two ISE institutions (Oregon Museum of Science and
Industry and the Hatfield Marine Science Center). They will leverage existing
NSF-funded Engineer It! (DRL-9803989) exhibits redesigned to attract, engage,
and mobilize a more diverse population by showcasing altruistic, personally
relevant, and social aspects of engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Digital
engagement through targeted use of social media will complement program and
exhibit content and be an online portal for groups engaged in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. A community action group (CAG) will provide
professional development opportunities to stakeholders interested in girls' STEM
identity (e.g. parents, STEM-based business professionals) to promote effective
engineering messaging throughout the community and engage them in supporting
project participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Longitudinal research will
explore how girls construct and negotiate engineering-related identities through
discourse across the project activities and over time.