* 1322134
* EAGER-Coupled Mechanics of Nanoporous Membrane with Functionalized Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Vishnu Baba Sundaresan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 01/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

This EAGER award will investigate coupled processes in an active nanoporous
membrane resulting from cyclic mechanical deformation. Electrostatic and
hydrodynamic interactions in the hyperboloidal nanopore due to variable pore
geometry in the presence of ahydrodynamic pressure gradient will be studied to
explore ion rejection and increased water flux through the membrane due to
mechanical oscillations. Specific quesitons to be addressed include: What is/are
the (i) limiting geometrical, electrostatic and hydrodynamic conditions for ion
rejection and water flux; (ii) fabrication constraints in manufacturing a
hyperboloidal nanopore and (iii) relationship between water flux, ion rejection,
amplitude and the duty cycle of the applied signal. The proposed research will
for the first time investigate the applicability of elastic deformation of
nanopores for an engineering function and mimic the functionality of cell
membrane proteins. The proposed concept, if successful, will lead to a new class
of membranes that can be programmed to separate various ions and species through
controlled operation.

If successful this research work will make significant contributions to the
fields of active materials, membrane mechanics and provide fundamental
understanding of active processes in nanopores. The fundamental understanding of
ion transport processes through an active nanopore will lead to innovative
applications in chemical separations and biomedical applications. The scientific
knowledge gained from this work will be disseminated through presentations in
Materials Research Society meetings and the scientific data will be made
available to the general public through the PI's lab webpage. The research
effort of this award will be further enhanced by engaging undergraduate students
in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering department at The Ohio State University
on developing design rules for a desalination system. Further, relevancy of this
research program to desalination, the ongoing social trend towards environmental
sustainability will motivate undergraduate students to take up advanced
engineering courses and certainly attract them to pursue graduate program in
engineering.