* 1322284
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regional Variation in Implementation of International Standards
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Nitsan Chorev, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2015
* USD 25,157.00

While nation-state research proliferates, sub-national analyses of the adoption
of global rules are still rare. There is still a limited understanding of the
ways in which the layering of multiple norms could produce divergent outcomes.
This research will contribute a much-needed analysis of the differences that may
exist across policy-issues within one sector. This research investigates the
implementation of two international rules that regulate when imports can enter
markets, attending to the significance of differences in the rules and in the
variation in national priorities. Preliminary research reveals significant
cross-national variation within one region in the response to international
rules that harmonize regulation. Moreover, there is also within-country
variation as countries comply with one international rule but resist the other.
This dissertation asks why countries respond differently to international
standards but also why states comply with some international rules while
resisting others. The project addresses these questions by comparing the
implementation process of rules since the late 1990s and providing a detailed
historical account of regulation in since the 1960s.

This research will also explain how middle-income countries balance national
well-being priorities and industrial development outcomes in the context of
international harmonization projects. This could prove immensely useful when
exploring alternative possibilities for diversifying provision of market goods.