* 1322084
* Evolution of Cordilleran Lithosphere:   Transition From Mesozoic Shortening to Cenozoic Extension, East-Central Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Elizabeth Miller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 92,238.00

The geologic history of the western U. S. Cordilleran is complex and an
increasing number of questions have been raised about its deep crustal
architecture. The most debated question is how its geology was shaped during the
transition from plate convergence and crustal shortening in the Mesozoic to
divergence and extension in the Cenozoic. Across today's Basin and Range
Province, this transition period is characterized by shallow-slab subduction and
the shut-off of arc magmatism ~ 70-50 m.y. ago followed by one of the biggest
volcanic eruption events in its history, ~ 45-20 m.y. ago, setting the stage for
Miocene Basin and Range faulting. This research focuses on placing better
absolute ages on events occurring during this transition period across the
central part of the Basin and Range province (east-central Nevada and adjacent
Utah) in order to address current controversies about this history and produce a
more holistic whole-crust model for this time-span. A multidisciplinary and
comprehensive approach will mesh: 1. A pioneering effort to detail the U-Pb
radiometric ages, trace element and isotopic geochemistry of
xenocrystic/inherited zircon populations in magmatic rocks that span the
transition from shortening to extension, revealing the temperature-time history
of the deep crust 2. Structural/ microstructural studies coupled with petrology,
geochronology and thermochronology of key rock transects that link inferred deep
levels of the crust to near surface levels in the Snake Range metamorphic core
complex- a locality where deformation and cooling histories figure prominently
in the debate between very thick versus thinner crust and its role in crustal
flow and collapse during the transition period. 3. The time-space evolution of
sedimentary basins whose history provides a robust, definitive set of
constraints for evolving landforms, their relation to volcanic eruptins, and the
onset of fault uplift of the deeper rocks of core complexes. This comprehensive
approach will allow us to better link deep lithospheric/crustal processes such
as magmatism and deformation/flow to surface processes and thus provide data to
test a range of ideas and hypotheses about the lithospheric evolution of the
Great Basin as it transitioned from shortening to extension. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Our geologic knowledge of the Cordillera and Rocky Mountains of the
western U.S. forms the foundation for understanding its broad spectrum of
natural resources, yet there are many aspects of the history of this mountain
belt that are still highly debated and controversial. One of these is our
conceptual understanding of fault systems formed during stretching or extension
of continental crust (such as is happening today across the Basin and Range
province). Despite the importance of such fault systems to the exploration of
natural resources such as groundwater and hydrocarbons in continental and
offshore basins, there is no consensus on how their geometries evolve through
time. We also don't fully understand how surface-breaking extensional faults are
linked to processes in the deep earth such as magmatic activity, heating and
solid-state ductile flow of the crust, despite the importance of these questions
to mineral resource exploration, hydrothermal energy sources, earthquake and
volcanic hazards. Our research goals are to provide a more comprehensive data
set that provides radiometric dating of events from the deep crust to surface
breaking faults, volcanic eruption and sedimentary basins in order to understand
the time-constrained links between deep earth processes and surface events
during a time span where the Cordillera transitioned from plate tectonic
convergence and shortening to divergence and extension from ~ 80 Ma to 20 Ma
ago. This project will provide partial support for field and laboratory work of
3 Ph.D. and one M.S. student(s) contributing to professional training of future
earth scientists. The project provides leverage to obtain funding for
undergraduate research from Stanford. Compilation of geologic map data at
1:62,500 spanning the Great Basin National Park to the Kern Mountains will be
made available to the general public. This map will stimulate new research and
benefit teaching of geology field classes and field trips in this region.