* 1322350
* ICOB:Collaborative Research:RUI: Generating complexity: integrating experimental and computer modeling approaches to link genes and cell behavior in arthropod segmentation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Terri Williams, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2017
* USD 488,877.00

A central question in biology is how complex forms have evolved. One common way
for animals to become complex is through being built of repeated parts, like
body segments, that can be changed independently. The largest group of segmented
animals is the arthropods. Most arthropods make their segments by adding them
from a posterior region called the "growth zone". A common set of genes has
recently been hypothesized to control the growth zone in diverse arthropods.
However, the cell processes that elongate the growth zone are elusive. Without
understanding the cell processes that normally elongate the growth zone, it is
impossible to explain the role of genes in controlling segmentation. This work
will synthesize two approaches to understanding growth zone elongation and
segmentation. First, direct measures of cell processes such as cell division,
cell shape, cell motility and gene function will be made in three arthropod
species, a crustacean and two insects. Then, these data will be fed into
computational models of segment formation. Lab results will keep the computer
models realistic while computer models will allow rapid exploration of
relationships between genes and cell processes and thus inform new lab work.
This project will be the first to bring computational modeling to a fine-grain
analysis of arthropod sequential segmentation. The results will be important for
studies of development and for synthetic biology. The proposed work is an
international collaboration between 3 research labs with both unique and
overlapping expertise. Undergraduates, graduate students, and post-docs will
participate in multi-disciplinary training that synthesizes laboratory and
computational approaches, fostering an integration of quantitative and
experimental skills early in their careers. Importantly, students will also have
the opportunity for international exchange between Israeli and US labs, through
summer exchanges between the labs, and "live" exchange of ideas during regular
web-based meetings. The outcomes of this work will also be shared with the
public through outreach events in K-12 classes, local science centers, museums
and public lectures such as the popular "Science Caf√©s".