* 1322796
* ICOB: Dissection of MicroRNA160-controlled Auxin Signalling Network
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Dazhong Zhao, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Normal ovule (a female reproductive structure for producing seed) and fruit
development are essential for good crop yield and quality. MicroRNAs (miRNAs),
which are small (~21 nucleotides) non-coding RNAs, act as critical regulators to
ensure precise control of many biological processes. Auxin, a prominent plant
hormone, is crucial for ovule and fruit development. The auxin signal is
translated into a robust pattern of gene expression by auxin-mediated release of
AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF) gene regulators, while miRNAs negatively regulate
expressions of ARFs. Previous studies showed that miR160 and its target ARF
genes play vital roles in ovule and early fruit development. However, how miR160
participates in the auxin signaling network remains unknown. Using integrated
molecular genetic, cell biology, and systems biology approaches, the main goal
of this research is to investigate the molecular mechanism by which miR160 and
its target ARF genes coordinate to fine-tune auxin signaling to regulate ovule
development in the model species Arabidopsis and early fruit development in the
tomato. This project will not only provide new insight into the function of
miRNA in auxin-mediated developmental processes, but also lead to important
applications for improving yield and quality of tomato and many other
agriculturally valuable crops. The generated data sets and materials will be
made available through The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR,
http://www.arabidopsis.org), the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo), and the Tomato Genetics Resource Center
(http://tgrc.ucdavis.edu) for research and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
internationally collaborative project will have multiple educational impacts. It
will provide advanced training for a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate
student. In addition, the project will promote science education and enable
valuable hands-on research experiences in both the US and Israel by developing
lab modules and educating undergraduate students as early as in their freshman
year, including particularly students from underrepresented groups. Finally,
plant biology workshops will be hosted for high school students.