* 1322093
* The von Liebig Center as an iCorp Site: established POC catalyzing even earlier university discoveries
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Sujit Dey, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 05/31/2019
* USD 359,999.00

This proposal addresses NSF?s call for universities to nurture students and/or
faculty who are engaged in projects having the potential to be transitioned into
the marketplace. I-Corps Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources,
networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to
transition their ideas, devices, processes or other intellectual activities into
the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team
applicants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project, the von Liebig Center at UC
San Diego (vLC) will become an NSF I-Corps Site to further catalyze the
commercialization of university discoveries by extending its services to an
untapped population of graduate students, researchers and faculty early-stage
discoveries with the expectations that vLC will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Build a
larger and more robust pipeline of viable student team projects that can be
translated into the marketplace from earlier stages of research
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;- Increase awareness and participation in technology
commercialization among the broader UCSD research and student community, in
particular among females and underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;- Provide
real world experiential learning to the student teams participating in the
process while facilitating access to the region?s innovation ecosystem and
entrepreneurial support network. &lt;br/&gt;- Expand the suite of offerings that
the von Liebig Center can provide to students and faculty for its services to
the earlier stages of technology translation. &lt;br/&gt;- Collaborate on ?best-
practices? by becoming a member of an I-Corps Site network that shares insights
with a wide community of similar centers in the Nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals will be accomplished through entrepreneurship
curricula, identification, selection, and intervention activities, mentoring,
and assignment of resources for early stage development - all of which
contribute to the academic research translation process through the creation of
an integrated, experiential, educational program that focuses on the training of
academic innovators while they are still engaged in the early stages of the
discovery process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vLC has solid processes in place
for recruiting, vetting, and supporting teams through their I-Corps Site. They
have many noteworthy examples of startups they have supported through their
existing center and strong connections with the community, business and
industry, and the state of California. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vLC I-Corps SIte will strengthen and broaden
the pipeline of innovations from the university while promoting entrepreneurial
thinking and activities to thrive in the academic environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By encouraging student and faculty/researcher
participation actively translating research to early stage development, new
products or services will be launched resulting in the creation of high value
jobs and economic growth in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entrepreneurial
students from underrepresented groups will have a support network inside the
university that will give them the confidence needed to thrive and participate
in the process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes will be widely disseminated by
becoming a member of the NSF I-Corps Site network, thus catalyzing innovation in
technology discoveries. The most important impact of this proposed approach is
building entrepreneurial principles, early-stage commercialization pipelines,
and early-stage incubation schemas. These practices, when proven successful in
this approach, can be integrated or replicated to other universities around the
country.