* 1322228
* WORKSHOP: Appellate Court Decisions and Potential Transformations in Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Susan Turner, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2015
* USD 49,831.00

This workshop will contribute to analysis of how appellate court decisions
contribute to changes in public policy. Most research concerning that issue has
noted that courts are most likely to change public policy when they have other
groups and powerful institutions allied with them. This project will bring
multiple scholars together to consider state-level change, and allow an
evaluation of how such change is implemented in a major complex policy field
with multiple organizations that would resist change. It will be important to
track how organizations mobilize for change, and how they respond to its
potential, and whether and how politically powerful organizations mobilize for
implementation. Furthermore, it will allow evaluation of policy change via the
courts and potential diffusion across states. The project will link with
literature in criminology as well as literature on courts and social change; in
state courts, the most relevant literature has concerned school finance reform,
making the project potentially broadly important in multiple
subfields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the training of
scholars in law and social sciences. It will also inform policymakers concerning
court decisions and public policy. The project will draw together scholars
closely connected to public policymakers and scholars, therefore making the
realization of potential broader impacts highly likely. The policy issue is
extremely important to multiple states, so the policy impact is likely to be
broad.