* 1322568
* Collaborative Research: Accounting for the Emergence, Persistence, and Media Coverage of Social Action Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* John McCarthy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 168,273.00

SES-1321802 Patrick Rafail Tulane University

SES-1322568 John McCarthy University of Southern California

In this project we aim to complete the collection of a six year time series of
social action mobilization occurring between 2009 and 2014. Building on the
results from previous research, we propose to address three important
theoretical questions: The first aims to understand what social structural
variation (e.g. income inequality, rates of unemployment) across U.S. states and
local communities increases the likelihood that social action will occur and
recur. The second asks what community contexts facilitate the founding of social
action organization as well as the factors influencing the organizational
linkages and survival of these groups over time. Third, we ask which factors
influence the intensity, tone, and content of newspaper coverage of such groups.

To address these questions, we will assemble a database of social action events
as well as organizational foundings, other local activities such as meetings or
demonstrations, and organization survival by combining multiple sources of data
including internet listings, systematic searches of 432 local newspapers, and
content coding of newspaper stories of covered events. We will then
geographically situate each event and organization, which will be linked to a
larger database of social structural indicators, information on election cycle
outcomes, and newspaper characteristics. Statistical approaches to modeling the
processes will include hierarchical regression, survival analysis, web scraping,
text mining, and natural language processing.

Broader Impact The proposed project has enormous potential for having broader
impact in several ways. First, it will provide a comprehensive, systematic
analysis of social action groups. Second, we will create a public use data set
to allow diverse additional investigations of the causes and consequences of
social action group mobilization from a wide variety of perspectives beyond our
own. And, finally, we will be able to chronicle these social movements from
infancy into maturity as well as signs of their decline.