* 1322514
* Collaborative Research: Cross-Cultural Comparison of Conceptions of Property
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Kristina Olson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 184,500.00

This project will analyze popular understanding of intellectual property rights,
test how intellectual property rights should work in various situations,
investigate what people understand to be the purpose of intellectual property
law, and study the role of culture in this understanding. In doing so in cross-
national comparative experiments, this project will move analysis of cultural
understandings of law forward, for experiments have not yet been widely used to
illuminate cultural understandings of law. Furthermore, the broader impacts of
the research are significant. Intellectual property disputes are everywhere
these days. Intellectual property law, including patent and copyright law, is
built on the premise that offering people intellectual property rights will
encourage potential inventors and authors to engage in more creative activity
and innovation than they otherwise would. Intellectual property law can only
work if potential inventors and authors know of the legal advantages in patents,
if there are not side benefits to holding patents that can discourage
innovation, and if intellectual property rights are generally self-enforcing.
People cannot be incentivized to innovate if they are not aware of the
incentives, and in many cases the law can only work for creators if there is
widespread voluntary compliance. These studies will provide insight into the
ability of intellectual property law to function as intended, how people think
about the ownership of intangible (versus tangible) property, and the ability of
intellectual property law to affect human understanding and behavior. This new
knowledge should shed light on how to modify the intellectual property system to
better incentivize innovation and generate widespread user observance, as well
as how to more effectively negotiate and implement intellectual property
treaties with countries that have different intellectual property
understandings.