* 1322032
* A Field Study of the Liquid Line of Descent of Hydrous Alkaline-rich Magmas at Elevated Pressures (0.5-1.0 GPa): The Dariv Alkaline Intrusive Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Oliver Jagoutz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2017
* USD 299,992.00

Understanding the origin of the highly diverse nature of felsic magmas, erupted
as rhyolite or emplaced as large upper-crustal batholiths, is crucial to the
investigation of the mechanisms that generate the silica-enriched continental
crust. General consensus exists that strongly so-called peraluminous granites
are derived, at least to some significant extent, from muscovite- and biotite-
dehydration melting of metasedimentary protholiths. The origin of so-called
meta-aluminous granites, however, is less certain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to investigate the hydrous liquid line of descent (LLD) of an
alkaline magma and the relative roles of hydrous fractional crystallization
versus partial melting in the formation of meta-aluminous alkaline granites
through a field-based study. While alkaline granites are volumetrically less
significant than calk-alkaline granites, their petrogenesis is of particular
importance as they are often associated with economically significant
mineralization. We will study a newly discovered exposures in the Dariv arc
complex (Altai region of western Mongolia). The project will investigate a
layered sequence ranging from phologopite-dominated ultramafic/mafic to
intermediate (quartz-) monzonite and (quartz-) syenites rocks is spatially
associated with large alkali-feldspar granite bodies. A similarly complete
alkaline plutonic sequence has, to our knowledge, never been described in the
geological literature before. In particular, the ultramafic rock assemblages
exposed in Mongolia are currently only described as xenoliths from alkaline
basaltic magmas. The complete exposures from ultramafic to felsic rocks provide
an unrivaled opportunity to investigate crystal fractionation as a possible
mechanism of alkali-feldspar granite formation.