* 1322855
* Full-Scale Development: National Center for Blind Youth in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Christine Reich, National Federation of the Blind
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,549,488.00

This project seeks financial support to build a national model for introducing
and educating blind youth via informal venues such as museums and science
centers. This will encompass STEM subjects writ large. Further, parents of blind
children, teachers, and ISE venue personnel will be incorporated into the
educational process enhancing the holistic approach. Additionally, there is an
element of efficacy development in this endeavor for the
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in grades 3-6 and high school students
are the main target audiences. The former are targeted as this is the time when
they often succumb to the challenges and fade away from an interest in STEM. The
high school students will have a dual role in that they will be tutors for the
younger group and will take special education courses to prepare them for
postsecondary education in STEM topics. Six venues spanning the nation have been
chosen to provide a broad spectrum of perspective and broadening impacts for the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will yield an
education model for similar endeavors in other parts of the country. It will
provide guidance for ISE venues not yet prepared to accommodate blind people and
youth. It will give new perspective to parents and teachers on how to provide
education in STEM subjects to blind students. The team of this endeavor includes
the PI, who is blind, from the National Federation of the Blind; the co-PI from
the Museum of Science in Boston; Leigh Abts from the University of Maryland;
Jeff Killebrew from the New Mexico School for the Blind; Laura Bostick former
NASA engineer; Hoby Wedler, Ph.D. candidate in chemistry; Richie Flores, Mentor
for the students; Eric Guillary, Mentorfor the students; Tiffany Wild from Ohio
State University is the research lead; and Joe Heimlich will do the project
evaluation.