* 1322118
* EAGER: Discovery of an Extracellular Mediator of Glucose Restriction in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Charles Brenner, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit: All organisms tune their gene expression and phenotypic
programs to current conditions. Budding yeast, which has long been cultivated
for making bread, wine and beer, is adapted to high concentrations of simple
carbohydrates, such as glucose. Growth at lower glucose levels extends the
number of times that a yeast mother cell can produced daughter cells
(replicative longevity). Associated with lower glucose, there are a variety of
known gene expression and epigenetic changes and a known set of enzymes, which
are required for the lifespan extension due to glucose restriction. Among these
enzymes are Sir2, a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent histone
deacetylase, and enzymes that perform NAD salvage biosynthesis. Earlier
investigators in this field hypothesized that lower glucose would alter the
levels of intracellular NAD metabolites in a manner that would tune Sir2
activity. However, recent work has indicated that, while increasing
intracellular NAD can extend yeast lifespan, glucose restriction does not
substantively alter the levels of intracellular NAD metabolites. Rather, the
extracellular metabolome of glucose restricted yeast cells is required for
lifespan extension and an extracellular fraction has been obtained, which
contains a metabolite 300-fold induced by glucose restriction. The goal of this
EAGER proposal is to use a combination of mass spectrometry (MS) and nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to identify the molecule and initiate
characterization of its mechanism of action. Given that yeast cells live as
communities, the research has the potential to reveal new insights about how a
diffusible factor that extends lifespan might act to extend the lifespan of a
community and not simply for the benefit of the metabolite-exporting cell.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will contribute to training
of a graduate student and a postdoctoral associate, who will directly carry out
the research and also participate in outreach a local high school.