* 1322797
* CAREER:  Optimal Design of Experiments for Generalized Linear Models
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Min Yang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2015
* USD 224,541.00

In this work, the PI is to develop a novel approach for identifying optimal and
efficient designs under Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) including the
fundamental logistic, probit and loglinear models and some other nonlinear
models. Specifically, this project intends to achieve the following three
objectives: (i) Identify optimal designs for GLMs under non-homogeneous
subjects. In this study, optimal designs are derived for models in which the
subjects are divided into two or more groups using one or more factors, allowing
the intercept or slope to vary from one group to another. Random subject effects
can also be allowed for differences among subjects within groups. (ii) Identify
optimal designs for GLMs with multiple covariates. There are very few optimality
results for GLMs with more than one covariate. The PI will study optimal designs
for GLMs when multiple covariates exist. These models can also account for
subject heterogeneity. (iii) Identify optimal designs for some other nonlinear
models. In nonlinear models, most optimal results were derived under
D-optimality for all parameters. The PI will investigate a general approach to
identify optimal designs for nonlinear models with three or more parameters
under commonly used optimality criteria when all or some of the parameters are
of interest. The proposed research will have a tremendous impact because it will
fill several gaps in the literature: the models in the proposed research
accommodate heterogeneity among subjects and multiple covariates; general
solutions for optimal designs of nonlinear models with three parameters will be
provided. The technique in the proposed research is innovative in that it yields
very general results that go beyond solving problems on a case-by-case basis. It
helps to identify the support of locally optimal designs for many of the
commonly studied models and can be applied for all the common optimality
criteria based on information matrices. It works both with a constrained and
unconstrained design region. Furthermore, it can be applied to multistage
experiments, where an initial experiment may be used to provide a better idea of
the unknown parameters.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;GLMs and other nonlinear models
have been used in a wide range of social and natural science fields, such as
biological sciences, pharmaceutical research, agricultural science, economics,
marketing, etc. The results of this study will have a deep impact on the
application of GLMs in these fields. For example, when the findings are applied
to the design of clinical trials during new drug discovery and development, they
will significantly reduce the time, money, and number of patients needed in
these trials. In fact, this research can help the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to improve its guidelines for clinical trials. To effectively
disseminate the results of this research, the PI will develop a user-friendly
software package targeting non-expert users. To successfully integrate research
and education, the PI will develop advanced experimental design courses at the
University of Missouri-Columbia incorporating findings of this project. Graduate
students will be trained to study optimal designs in the new fields, under the
PI?s guidance. Finally, the proposed research has the potential to stimulate new
research and to provide tools for identifying optimal designs under GLMs or
nonlinear models used in other areas, such as longitudinal data analysis and
survival analysis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;