* 1322035
* Collaborative Research:  Elucidating the Geologic Record of Late Paleozoic Subduction Initiation Along the Southwestern Margin of Laurentia, Southern California and Sonora, Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Nancy Riggs, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2018
* USD 114,061.00

The principle aim of this project is to document the timing and response of the
southwestern Laurentian margin to the initiation of subduction during late
Paleozoic time. Although the recycling of lithosphere at subduction zones is a
fundamental part of plate tectonic theory, the manner by which subduction zones
initiate is a poorly constrained process, largely because there are few modern
examples and ancient examples are largely not recognized or well preserved.
Unique sequences of sedimentary and volcanic rocks exposed in southern
California (El Paso Mountains region) and northern Mexico (Carborca Block) will
be investigated in order to better understand how subduction inception is
recorded in stratigraphic successions and how the paleogeography of continental
margins evolves in response to the onset of plate convergence. We propose that
continental margin successions recording subduction initiation will have
predictable deepening and shallowing trends and distinct changes in sand
composition and detrital zircon provenance through time reflecting the changing
paleogeography of source regions. An additional geochemical and geochronologic
investigation of volcanic sequences and coeval intrusions will be used to
constrain the timing and petrogenesis of magmatic products, which we suggest
will record conditions unique to cold, nascent continental arc settings. Results
of this project may contribute significantly to global models of the birth and
development of subduction zones. This project is a multi-disciplinary and
collaborative effort between researchers at California State University -
Northridge and Northern Arizona University, which are both minority-serving
institutions. In addition to the science goals of the project, this research
will provide training and mentorship for masters level and undergraduate
students and promote the involvement of underrepresented groups in STEM
research. Sample collections and study results will be used for the development
of resources for teaching, community outreach, and further research.