* 1322302
* ICOB: Investigation of AMPA-type glutamate receptor interaction with the accessory SynDIG protein family
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Elva Diaz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2016
* USD 317,762.00

Cell-to-cell communication in the nervous system is mediated by small chemicals
called neurotransmitters that are released from one cell and bind to receptor
proteins present on the membrane of the adjacent cell in a process called
synaptic neurotransmission. The amino-acid neurotransmitter glutamate and its
conjugate glutamate receptors are responsible for the majority of the excitatory
neurotransmission in the mammalian brain. Glutamate receptors are protein
complexes of four subunits that assemble in various combinations, creating
membrane-embedded ion-channels of different types and properties. In recent
years, it has become increasingly evident that glutamate receptors are acted on
by various auxiliary factors that regulate channel properties and localization
at synapses. Therefore, elucidating the structure and function of glutamate
receptors in general, and how these receptors are modulated by association with
accessory proteins in particular, is central to understanding the basic
principles of brain physiology. This grant will concentrate on the interaction
of the AMPA-type glutamate receptors with the SynDIG protein family. A
combination of molecular biology, biochemistry and electrophysiology experiments
will be undertaken to test the hypothesis that SynDIG proteins influence the
delivery of AMPA-type glutamate receptors to the cell surface of the
postsynaptic membrane as well as alter the properties of ion flow through the
glutamate receptor channel critical for synaptic neurotransmission.

The broader impacts of the proposed studies include integration of the research
and education activities of the PI, specifically in the context of broadening
the participation of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups
(primarily Hispanic/Latino) pursuing postgraduate degrees in science.
Undergraduate participation will be directed by the PI in conjunction with
graduate students in the laboratory, thereby integrating research, teaching, and
scientific community outreach activities for students pursuing graduate studies
in the laboratory. Additionally undergraduate and graduate students will
participate in international exchanges as part of the collaboration with the
Israeli PI for this project which is jointly supported by NSF and United States-
Israel Binational Science Foundation.