* 1322086
* Production and Diffusion of Cosmogenic Noble Gases: Using Open-system Behavior to Study Surface Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2019
* Gregory Balco, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2019
* USD 309,967.00

This project aims to develop and test a new geochemical method for quantifying
the temperatures and exposure histories of rocks and sediments exposed at the
Earth's surface during the past few million years. The technique is based on the
measurement of trace isotopes of the noble gases helium and neon that are
produced in rock and mineral grains by cosmic-ray bombardment at the Earth's
surface. These concentrations reflect both the length of time the rocks have
been exposed at the surface and, because the rate of diffusive loss of these
gases depends on temperature, the temperature they experienced during exposure.
First, we will use controlled laboratory experiments on both natural and
artificially-produced samples of the common minerals quartz and feldspar to
establish the mechanism, rate, and temperature dependence of helium and neon
diffusion in these minerals. These results will, in principle, allow us to
predict concentrations of these gases in natural geological samples whose
exposure and temperature histories are already known from other evidence. Thus,
the second part of this project will be to test and validate our laboratory
results and theoretical framework by comparing predicted with actual
concentrations in natural rock samples.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is
important because reconstructing the past temperatures and surface exposure
histories of surface materials is valuable for a broad range of scientific
research. First, measuring exposure durations of surface rocks is important in
understanding geologic processes that act to form and change Earth's surface,
including surface erosion, sediment transport, and earthquake-related surface
deformation. Second, measuring past temperatures is important for understanding
Earth's natural climate variability during the last few million years. For
example, such information is important to establish how past changes in
environmental conditions influenced biota at various regions across the globe,
and how past climate changes were potentially controlled by natural phenomena
such as the gradual development of mountain ranges. However, our ability to
quantify past temperatures is currently limited to a small number of geochemical
techniques. If this new method is successfully developed and tested, it will
provide an independent test of existing methods, and potentially benefit a broad
range of research sub disciplines including quantitative geomorphology,
landscape evolution studies, late Cenozoic climate changes, glacier and ice
sheet change, and, potentially, paleo-elevation of actively uplifting
landscapes. This basic geochemistry research will potentially enable a wide
array of earth science researchers to address both longstanding and completely
new questions, thus benefiting the broader science community. In addition, this
project will support a graduate student at UC Berkeley, thus contributing to
Earth science education and the development of human resources for geochemistry
and broader science research.