* 1322808
* ICOB: Intercellular Communication Underlying Biofilm Development in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Susan Golden, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* rollie clem
* 08/31/2017
* USD 501,801.00

Cyanobacteria are often associated with microbial assemblages called biofilms
that can cause fouling of industrial surfaces, but can also be beneficial, e.g.,
in water purification processes. Despite the environmental prevalence and
economic consequences of cyanobacterial biofilms, the molecular mechanisms that
underlie the formation of these structures have received little attention. The
current proposal uses molecular genetics and sophisticated molecular and
chemical techniques to understand the regulation of biofilm formation in the
model cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus. Recent data suggest that the
project will characterize a secreted inhibitor of biofilm formation, identify
mechanisms of sensing the inhibitor, and determine the pathways for producing a
biofilm in S. elongatus. Understanding this natural biofilm-inhibition system
will be useful in designing strategies to minimize damage from detrimental
biofilms and to elicit the formation of beneficial cyanobacterial biofilms. The
project will train students from US and Israeli labs in microbiology, deep
sequencing, and cutting-edge imaging technologies. The project will generate
genetic tools and strains that will be made available to the research community,
and any useful intellectual property that emerges from the work will be
disclosed for commercialization. As part of the ICOB program it will also
establish international research collaborations with Israel.