* 1322657
* 2013 Undergraduate Design Project Competition in Rehabilitation and Assistive Devices and Travel Support for Attendees with a Disability, June 26-29, 2013, in Sunriver, Oregon
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Lorin Maletsky, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2015
* USD 25,500.00

PI: Maletsky, Lorin Proposal Number: 1322657

The Bioengineering Division (BED) of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers hosts the annual Summer Bioengineering Conference (SBC). The 2013 SBC,
to be held June 26-29, 2013 at the Sunriver Resort in Sunriver, Oregon, will be
the 15th installment of this conference. This request to NSF is to provide
support for the 2013 Undergraduate Design Project Competition in Rehabilitation
and Assistive Devices and travel support for participants and attendees with
disabilities. The primary objectives of the competition are to expose more
students to rehabilitation needs and support projects in this area as well as to
help develop future researchers and engineers in this area. All technical
presentations will be two-page extended abstracts and compiled in a CD format,
distributed to all registrants. The primary purpose of this conference is to
promote state-of-the-art research, collaboration, and scientific discourse in
the broad field of bioengineering with a focus on cutting edge biomechanics
encompassing molecular to tissue and organism-level approaches. This conference
highlights and encourages student participation to advance the education and
career aspirations of these future leaders of bioengineering. To make the
conference more accessible for people with disabilities, we are also offering a
travel award for these individuals and will make appropriate accommodations at
the conference as needed.

Intellectual Merit: The design projects are rigorously reviewed using a series
of criteria and projects need to be sufficiently developed to be considered in
one of the top six finalists. For the finalist presentations at the conference,
each team will present their design to the audience and must be able to answer
questions. The finalist team members who attend the conference will also be able
to participate in an extremely high quality scientific and intellectually
stimulating interdisciplinary meeting. It is the premiere meeting for
bioengineering with a focus on biomechanical engineering. The main topics to be
highlighted at the conference include biosolid mechanics, bio-fluid mechanics,
cellular and molecular mechanics, functional tissue engineering, biomedical
device design and rehabilitation, bio-heat and mass transfer, and bioengineering
education. In particular, this year we have chosen as our theme, Translational
Research. Our selections of the plenary speaker, workshops, and highlighted
sessions will serve to inform, educate and inspire our attendees about the
importance of and pathways for translating their technologies. The winners of
the Lissner and Mow Medals and the Fung Young Investigator Award will make
scientific presentations.

Broader Impact: The rehabilitation design competition will bring students from
across the country to a meeting who might otherwise not have an opportunity to
attend an international research conference. In addition to the direct impact
this conference will have on the mainstream bioengineering community, it serves
an important cross-fertilization role. We will have in attendance bioengineers,
engineers from other disciplines, cell and molecular biologists, biochemists,
biophysicists, and other scientists participating in the meeting. In that
manner, this conference will have a much broader impact than if it were to be
attended by just the biomechanics community. Most importantly, we expect that
more than 50% of the attendees will be students and postdoctoral fellows. This
will provide a broad impact for the current times as well as for the future, as
these students will benefit by participation in the meeting and through the
material presented by the plenary speakers, workshops, and challenges. Through
the CD containing technical proceedings and conference web site, information
presented at the meeting will be available to multiple societies and to the
public at large.