* 1322828
* Collaborative: Full-Scale Development: Living Liquid: Creating Interactive Visualization Tools to Explore Ocean Datasets
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Joyce Ma, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,269,475.00

This project will pioneer a critical new genre of science exhibit: interactive
visualizations that engage visitors in the process of scientific inquiry. The
capability to create advanced visualizations of large scale data sets in an
interactive platform was developed in a prior pathways project. The interactive
platform will be installed in a museum/science center setting in this full scale
development project and will be assessed to determine how visitors utilize the
interactive advanced visualizations of large data sets to explore for
themselves, scientific issues involving the world's oceans.

The display, called Living Liquid, will develop visualizations from three large
data sets provided by science partners in the project involving ocean ecology,
with programming of the data developed in the pathways demonstration project.
The visualizations of this data will be viewed by visitors to the Exploratorium
in San Francisco on an interactive display table. The data display allows users
to see data elements displayed in the geographic location from which they were
found. Unlike other efforts to create visual displays for the public focused on
a one-way display or that require guided mediation, users of the Living Liquid
platform can direct the investigation of the data themselves. Unlike a screen at
home or a tablet, the display format is intended to promote interaction and
dialogue among the groups that form around the display as a self-supporting form
of investigation. The strength of table design is in the physical and digital
interfaces built into the display that make the exploration of data appealing,
intuitive and meaningful, to evoke questions and comparisons and make patterns
in the data discoverable by the users.

The three areas chosen for the display table from science partners in the
project include: "Plankton Patterns," an adaptation of the MIT Darwin Project
simulation, which is used by scientists around the world to study what types of
plankton live in the oceans and why they are there. On the Viz Table, this
simulation will be adapted so visitors can explore the diversity and number of
plankton through real glass lenses, a unique feature of this visualization
effort. "Genetic Rhythms" is based on data from the Center for Microbial
Oceanography Research and Education (C-MORE) which studies what genes
microscopic ocean creatures turn off and on under different environmental
conditions. On the Viz Table, visitors will be able to explore the activity of
different genes as the ocean conditions change throughout a day. "Ocean Tracks"
uses data from the TOPP project at Stanford University, which is studying the
migratory paths of large marine creatures in relation to environmental
conditions. This visualization will allow visitors to follow the paths of marine
creatures such as sharks, turtles, or salmon and how they correlate to
conditions such as temperature gradients or ocean currents. The data displays
are separate from each other because, how data is collected and studied is
different for each science partner.

The project will assess how the public interacts with the large data sets
through the specially designed visualizations and the extent to which the
visualization enhances the understanding of the data. It will also assess how
viewers use the data through the interactive functions on the visualization,
controlling their own explorations of real scientific data to understand and
explore what the data tells them about issues of ocean ecology. The project
includes scientist-led public programs using the visualizations to explore
science topics and issues identified by the data through the visualization. It
also includes a research study on how informal learners can use data
visualizations to support self-directed or group inquiry and learning.

The project provides opportunities for professional development for science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) professionals in how to use
advanced visualization capabilities to communicate research methods and findings
to the public and in their own work. One of the challenges in the emerging use
of large data sets is bringing together computer scientists, cognitive
scientists, and graphic designers with disciplinary experts to understand how to
create and interpret visualizations of large data repositories. Major insights
on the use of color, perception or effective interaction do not seem to extend
beyond a given field. Consequently there is a need to provide opportunities for
STEM professionals to learn about effective visualization techniques and user-
testing and evaluation. This project provides the opportunity for cross-
disciplinary professionals to share knowledge and get training while focused on
a goal of creating visualization for the public.