* 1322089
* Volcanic Hazard Assessment in the Southwestern US Based on High-precision Ar/Ar Geochronology of Late Quaternary Eruptive Centers
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Matthew Zimmerer, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2016
* USD 197,771.00

The goal of the proposed research is to assess the volcanic hazards in the
southwestern US by establishing the periodicity and temporal-spatial patterns of
late Quaternary (i.e., &lt; 500,000 yrs) volcanism in the region. One of the
fundamental components of volcanic hazard assessment is determining the timing
and location of previous eruptions. The location of young eruptive centers in
the southwestern US is well established. However, the existing geochronology for
these volcanoes is not sufficiently precise or complete for an accurate hazard
assessment. Ultra-high precision Ar/Ar ages will be generated for Quaternary
volcanic rocks using state of the art mass spectrometers. Ages will be used to
calculate eruption recurrence and repose intervals, and magma supply rates. A
comprehensive age-based assessment of volcanic hazards will be generated for the
region. Information regarding volcanic hazards for the southwestern US will be
made available to government agencies and the general public through a variety
of outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme to the proposed
research is using geochronology to develop a comprehensive understanding of
volcanic hazards in the southwestern US. Recent acquisition and development of
two low-volume, high-sensitivity, multicollector ARGUS VI mass spectrometers at
the New Mexico Geochronology Research Laboratory routinely yield ages that are
about an order of magnitude more precise than previous noble gas mass
spectrometers. With these analytical improvements, the temporal-spatial patterns
of late Quaternary volcanic systems can be characterized at a level that was
previously unobtainable. Initial efforts will focus on the numerous basaltic
centers and sparse silicic domes in the Rio Grande Rift and Jemez Lineament
within New Mexico. Some of these centers, especially those &lt; 50 ka, have been
dated by other methods providing a means to assess the accuracy of our ages. In
addition to assessing volcanic hazards, the ultra-high precision ages will
likely be useful for understanding the evolution of the Rio Grande Rift, crust-
mantle dynamics, and landscape evolution of the southwestern US.