* 1322540
* U.S. - China Planning Visits: Forecasting the Potential Impacts of Invasive Species in Aquatic Ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Hongyan Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2015
* USD 27,743.00

The US has a number of aquatic invasive species from Asia and the threat of
future invasions from the continent of Asia is on the rise due to increasing
traffic amongst the two continents. Likewise, North American species are
currently invading waters in Asia. The overall goal of the project is to
initiate and sustain a long-term collaboration with researchers in China to
understand ecosystem resiliency and sustainability so as to prevent and/or
minimize the negative impacts of invasive species on native aquatic fauna,
preserving aquatic ecosystems services. Specific research objectives are to 1)
develop ecosystem models to quantify invasive species impacts on Great Lakes and
Chinese lake and reservoir ecosystems; 2) exchange information on invasive
species; 3) develop a full proposal to the NSF Environmental Sustainability
program on the independent and synergistic effects of invasive species, climate
change and eutrophication on aquatic ecosystem resiliency and sustainability;
and 4) train a US postdoctoral fellow and Chinese students to conduct ecosystem
modeling, write grant proposals, establish collaborations. To complete our
project, US researchers will travel for two weeks to China twice over the course
of a year. During these trips, the US and Chinese teams will hold meetings and
presentations on ecosystem modeling, invasive species, and ecosystem resiliency.
Researchers and students will participate in monthly conference calls to report
progress and discuss proposal development.&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration will
help shape the way scientists study invasive species, including Asian carps,
toward a proactive and holistic research approach that utilizes expert knowledge
from researchers in the country of origin. It also will mutually benefit
researchers in both the US and China who are studying invasive species by
providing access to well-developed knowledge bases in these countries. As a
result, researchers in both countries can build better ecosystem models to
address research questions, provide more reliable predictions to policy-makers,
and ultimately improve management of invasive species. &lt;br/&gt;This
collaboration will benefit broadly three aspects of scientific study: research,
education, and outreach. This collaboration is expected to create a pathway for
future collaborations involving researchers and students from multiple
disciplines on issues of invasive species of concern in both countries.
Educationally, this initial grant and the follow-on proposal will provide
educational and research opportunities for students from both China and the US.
Outreach activities include attendance at scientific seminars and meetings and
publications in scientific journals to disseminate critical information to
managers, the public and other researchers on invasive species ecosystem
impacts.