* 1322684
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Supporting Student Intrinsic Motivation in STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Stolk, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 479,951.00

Building on prior work in motivation, this project is collecting and analyzing
quantitative and qualitative data to improve the capability to characterize and
explain key characteristics of student motivation in diverse undergraduate
courses required for engineering education. This project is engaging instructors
in the process of interpreting student motivation data, coupling these research
data to motivation theory and course design, and developing course revisions
aimed at enhancing STEM students' intrinsic
drive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This research rests on
prior research that shows that instructors can directly influence student
motivation, particularly intrinsic motivation, through their course design
decisions. To capitalize on the potential of this relationship, instructors need
both a more nuanced understanding of the types of student motivations for
learning and access to clearer methods for translating theory and empirical data
to course-level insights. This project is measuring individual student responses
to diverse STEM environments, pedagogies, and assignments. The temporal
evolution of these responses is a focal point in the development of transferable
research and generalizable theories for STEM student motivational
drive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of motivation data in more nuanced ways
examines general trends in motivation by course activity, year of study, and
gender. Motivation is dynamic and susceptible to frequent and sometimes rapid
change. The analysis uses group-based clustering techniques to discover the
strength, persistence, and distribution of different types of motivational
responses. It employs qualitative analyses to explain the relationships between
motivation and the learning environment and elucidate gendered differences in
motivation. Using both variable- and cluster-based analyses in multiple course
analyses has promise in developing better understanding of the impact of
instructional design on effective practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The National Academy of Engineering exhorts us to prepare STEM
graduates with "the tools needed for the world as it will be, not as it is
today." Among these tools are creativity, critical thinking, resiliency,
flexibility, and self-regulation. Educational research suggests that improved
understanding of learner motivation is important to facilitate a systemic shift
toward these high-level outcomes. However, a large gap remains between the
research-based understanding of student motivation, and the application of those
research insights to day-to-day classroom practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
output from this project will have an immediate impact on over 20 STEM
instructors at the 8 participating institutions, by highlighting activities that
prompt different motivational responses and motivational shifts, explaining
motivation-environment interactions, and by enabling instructors to use research
data to make informed and strategic choices to better encourage self-determined
behaviors. The project expands the pool of STEM faculty who can make informed,
data-driven decisions by engaging early-career faculty and those with limited
prior involvement in STEM educational reform.