* 1322725
* Full-scale Development: FOSSIL--Fostering Opportunities for Synergistic STEM with Informal Learners
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Bruce MacFadden, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,127,912.00

This project from the University of Florida proposes to derive and develop a
network and community of practice (CoP) among amateur and professional
paleontologists across the country. Should this project be successful, it would
put together 40 professional Paleontologist with 23 amateur Paleontology clubs
across the country. The advantage of this organization would be to facilitate
sharing of specimens (digitally on the web), educating each other, and most
important, making the public outreach from each club more effective. While each
club has specimens, this network would provide access to over 100 million
digitized samples. The web-base for this collection will be managed at the
University of Florida under the direction of the PI. The research portion of
this project will determine what the essential elements necessary are for
effective learning between professionals and amateurs and how the CoP enhances
amateur learning and outreach efficacy.

The project plan includes a centralized organization to initially form the
community of practice, call general meetings, publish newsletters and organized
a large meeting at the University of Florida in the coming year. Further, the
project team will conduct evaluation on how the project is helping members
develop and how the organization can be improved.

Educating individuals in the field of paleontology is generally a positive
experience. This project will facilitate knowledge building among the individual
members of the clubs, which will enhance their perspective and enable them to
reach out to members of their communities. The project will be evaluated at
every level to ensure that the existing clubs are incorporated into the project
and new clubs are welcomed and engaged as well.