* 1322544
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Women's Child Support Claims and Household Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Brady G'sell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 17,999.00

University of Michigan doctoral candidate Brady G'sell, under the supervision of
Dr. Adam Ashforth, will examine the role of women's child support claims in
remaking household dynamics and how child support policy shapes women's
political identities. In South Africa, nearly 5% of the country's national
budget funds a child support grant which has become the central poverty
alleviation tool. This proposal follows women in the city of Durban as they seek
support in various forms from not only the state grant, but also churches,
family members, NGOs, and fathers. These sources of support demand that women
embody different personae (e.g., the good citizen, the caring mother) to justify
their entitlement. This research asks how these diverse self presentations shape
women's relationships with support sources and how the received resources affect
relationships within the household. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 12 months of
field research, G'sell will utilize a variety of qualitative methods. This will
involve (1) participant observation and analysis of women's support seeking
interactions; (2) interviews with women, extended family, fathers, and staff at
NGOs, government offices, and other institutions that offer women support; and
(3) content analysis of a selective sample of popular print media, legislative
debates around child support policy, and child support court cases since 1960 to
track salient themes and their longitudinal resonances in national
imagination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By locating this study in South Africa, this
research offers a unique insight into broader social issues in a global context
where state assistance plays an increasingly critical role. It considers how the
grant figures as one strategy among many for procuring child support, placing it
in a larger network of familial, institutional, and community relations. This
research will reveal the unintended consequences of state policy on family
relationships, household structure, and marriage practices and will encourage
such considerations in policy design and implementation. The research
contributes to the training of a doctoral student in anthropology.