* 1322871
* Pathways: Forest Science Dialogues
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/2014,11/30/2017
* David Sleeper, Hubbard Brook Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 11/30/2017
* USD 265,072.00

This Pathways project, led by Hubbard Brook Research Foundation (HBRF), develops
and pilots a model to foster engagement and learning among diverse stakeholders
related to timely ecosystem, social, economic, and policy issues in rural
regions of New England's Northern Forest. As such, this project seeks to serve
as a model for how other rural areas across the US that have pressing concerns
that relate to science, technology, mathematics, and engineering (STEM) may
partner with scientists, community members, and local organizations to better
understand and become involved in regional issues. Research carried out for more
than 50 years at the 7,800-acre Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest?among the
longest-running ecosystem studies in the world?has significant implications for
decision making at local as well as national levels on topics including climate
change, environmental stresses on tree physiology, biomass energy, and invasive
pests and pathogens.

By employing a Pubic Engagement with Science approach, the project goals focus
on learning and equitable participation by both public audiences (local
communities and organizations) and professional audiences (scientists who want
to engage in informal science learning). In this case, "equitable" means valuing
the experiences and knowledge that diverse people have. "Learning" is designed
to occur for all participants, such that everyone has a deeper, broader, and
more nuanced understanding of STEM, the regional issues, and opportunities for
the future.

HBRF has designed a three-part model that includes multi-stakeholder dialogue
events, workshops and dialogues with scientists working in the region, and
regional capacity building for supporting outcomes of the dialogues and
workshops.

The project evaluation aligns closely with the Public Engagement with Science
approach and project goals. As such, over the course of project activities, the
evaluation measures both the public's learning and capacity to engage with other
stakeholder around regional issues as well as those of the scientists. In
addition, the evaluation will document the strategies and capacities of the HBRF
model to broaden and sustain productive interactions among diverse regional
stakeholders.

Dissemination of this pilot project's findings include a case study reflecting
on the process, lessons learned, and potential best practices related to the PES
model as well as presentations by project leadership at community, scientific,
and educational meetings. The pilot would then provide a foundation for an on-
going, expanded effort for HBRF in the Northern Forest and/or an expanded effort
in the region around a set off issues. In either case, the full-scale project
would build from the refined model as well as the capacity built through the
pilot.