* 1322214
* VOSS: Collaborative Research: Is Larger Smarter?  Investigating the Effect of Group Size on Collective Intelligence
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Christopher Chabris, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2017
* USD 3,600.00

From Wikipedia to Linux to scientific and business work-groups all over the
world, both online and off-line groups are becoming a pervasive part of modern
life. It is becoming increasingly important, therefore, to understand how to
improve the performance of these groups. The work proposed here will use a new
measure of generalized group effectiveness -- called "collective intelligence"
-- to help do this.

Building on previous work by the investigators, the project will first develop
an online test for collective intelligence. Then it will compare the results of
online and face-to-face groups taking this new test with previous results for
groups taking an offline version of the test. This will help clarify the degree
to which online and off-line groups differ in their general effectiveness on a
wide range of different tasks. Next the project will use this test to
systematically measure the collective intelligence of online groups that range
in size from 2 to 20 people. This will lay the foundation for exploring whether
larger online groups can take advantage of the increased resources that more
people bring, without suffering as much from the process losses that usually
accompany increased group size in face-to-face groups. Finally, the project will
systematically measure the collective intelligence of online groups with varying
proportions of women. In doing so, the project will also test one particularly
promising explanation for a gender effect on group performance: that groups with
more women are less interpersonally competitive, and that this lower intra-group
competitiveness leads to higher collective intelligence.

While there have been decades of research on factors that affect the performance
of groups, almost all these studies have each focused on a single task. Thus,
strictly speaking, the lessons to be learned from this previous work are limited
to the specific tasks studied. The work proposed here uses the perspective of
collective intelligence to investigate, not just the ability of a group to
perform a single task, but the group?s general ability to perform a wide range
of tasks. Since many real-world groups must cope with a wide range of problems,
just such a perspective may be needed to systematically predict their
performance. In addition, the approach developed here can provide a significant
economy of effort in evaluating potential ways of improving online group
effectiveness. Instead of testing interventions on many different specific
tasks, researchers will be able to test the interventions once with this general
measure, and then have some basis for predicting the effects of the intervention
on many other tasks. By making an online test of collective intelligence
available to other researchers, the project will help advance scientific
practice in this area. More generally, by providing a firmer scientific
foundation for measuring and improving the performance of groups, the project
may help our society address many of its most important problems more
effectively. For instance, with the right kinds of collaboration tools, online
groups may be able to be much more effective than face-to-face groups, taking
advantage of the simultaneous efforts of far more people without the
coordination losses that usually occur in larger groups. And understanding the
dynamics of gender diversity may help us to improve the collaboration of the
groups in which both men and women work, by giving everyone?s best ideas a
better chance to be heard. And perhaps, someday, this will help create groups
that are more collectively intelligent than any groups have ever been before.