* 1322553
* Collaborative Research: Parental influence on risky behavior and decision-making in adolescent girls
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Bruce Ellis, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Tamera Schneider
* 08/31/2016
* USD 227,350.00

Adolescence is a time in which many engage in risky decision-making, as
evidenced by increased rates of car accidents, crime, binge drinking and other
negative health behaviors. It is therefore critical to understand the life
experiences and pathways that influence these risky behaviors in adolescents.
The social context (e.g., parents, peers) may be a critical component for
understanding adolescent decision-making and risk-taking behaviors. For example,
several previous studies have shown that paternal absence or disengagement can
be risk factors for risky behaviors and decision-making in daughters. Although
research has established this phenomenon, the causal nature of this relationship
has not been determined. Additionally, it is unclear what proximal psychological
changes occur in response to paternal absence or disengagement that promote
these negative outcomes. Dr. Bruce Ellis (University of Arizona), Dr. Sarah Hill
(Texas Christian University), and their colleagues will combine a powerful
natural experiment with five rigorous laboratory experiments to examine the role
of paternal engagement in regulating daughters' attitudes and decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through integration of theory and methods from
evolutionary, developmental, and social psychology, the proposed research will
test for causation and mechanism. Such knowledge is potentially transformative
because it could help move the field toward a more comprehensive understanding
of the developmental contexts and intervening mechanisms through which risky
behaviors and decision-making occur. This interdisciplinary approach will foster
synergistic, integrative connections between different research domains.
Additionally, the proposed research will involve training for undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral researchers.