* 1322335
* Enhancing Engineering Innovation through Physical Representation: Identifying the Cognitive Enhancements Provided by Representation and Creating Novel Design Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Julie Linsey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2014
* USD 157,623.00

The research objective of this project is to support and enhance engineering
innovation through identifying the cognitive benefits of physical
representations (such as prototypes) in the design process. The research on idea
generation with physical models and on the use of prototypes in the design
process is very limited. The benefits and limitations of physical
representations to support the early phases of design will be identified. Two
key hypotheses will be evaluated. The first is that physical models cause design
fixation. The second is that physical models assist in overcoming inaccuracies
in designers' mental models resulting in a larger number of functional, feasible
ideas. These key research questions will be investigated through a combination
of qualitative and quantitative studies of undergraduate mechanical and
practicing engineers. Answering the key research question will provide a basis
for design methods development for industry and engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will improve the methods and
tools available to engineers thus increasing their ability to solve critical
design problems. The results of this research will enhance the understanding of
how physical representation effect engineering cognition, provide guidelines for
their use within idea generation and develop novel design approaches to support
innovation. Results of the research will provide new design principles and
methods of use in industry and education. Novel design methods based on the
fundamental cognitive and design principles defined in this project will be
directly integrated into undergraduate and graduate design classes. The new
methods for innovation will be applied in developing sustainable, appropriate
technology while working with a community service group and workshops on
teaching innovation in engineering education are planned. In addition, class
modules for enhancing student innovation skills will be created.