* 1322600
* Transforming Students' Partnerships with Scientists through Cogenerative Dialogues
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Elena Izquierdo, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,533,423.00

The University of Texas at El Paso will conduct a research project that
implements and documents the impact of co-generative dialogues on youth learning
and youth-scientist interactions as part of a STEM research program. Co-
generative dialogues seek to specifically assist with communication and
understanding among collaborators. Over four years, 108 11th grade youth from a
predominantly (90%) Hispanic high school will conduct STEM research with six
scientists (three chemists, two engineers, and one geologist) and graduate
students as part of year-long afterschool and Saturday programing, followed by
an intensive month-long, self-directed research project in the summer. Half of
the youth each year will be randomly assigned to co-generative dialogue
treatment; the other half will participate in the program without the
intervention. The scientists and three STEM graduate students will participate
in both experimental and control groups, with different youth. Youth will
receive high school credit to encourage participation and retention.

The PI team hypothesizes that co-generative dialogues will result in improved
learning, communication, and research experiences for both youth and scientists.
Educational researchers, including three education graduate students, will
conduct co-generative dialogues, observations, interviews, and surveys using
validated instruments to address the following research goals: 1. To investigate
the impact of the treatment (co-generative dialogues) on youth knowledge,
attitudes, perceptions of their experience, and their relationships with the
scientists. 2. To investigate the impact of the treatment on scientists and
graduate students. 3. To identify critical components of the treatment that
affect youth-scientist interactions.

It is anticipated that, in addition to providing in-depth STEM research
experiences for 108 youth from underrepresented groups at a critical time in
their lives, the project will result in widely applicable understandings of how
pedagogical approaches affect both youth learning and scientist experiences. The
project also seeks to bridge learning environments: informal, formal, university
and digital.