* 1322940
* Computational Temporal Interpersonal Emotion Systems (CompTIES)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Matthias Mehl, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 399,246.00

Emotions contribute to essentially every human behavior. We decide what to do
based partly on our emotions, we learn from our emotional experiences, and we
interact successfully with other people by recognizing their emotions. If we
could predict emotional responses accurately, it would have implications for a
broad array of domains, ranging across (but not limited to) close relationships,
education, parenting, business management, consumer behavior, work performance,
health behaviors, conflict resolution, and negotiations. Unfortunately, so far
we cannot predict emotions accurately, mostly because they emerge in complex
ways across time and involve multiple changes across short time spans, including
subjective experience (e.g., feeling angry), behavior (e.g., frowning, hitting
someone), and physiology (e.g., blood pressure, heart rate). In addition, most
strong emotions occur during social interactions, making it necessary to
simultaneously predict the emotions of all the people involved. Dr. Emily Butler
(University of Arizona) and her colleagues refer to these multi-person emotion
systems as "Temporal Interpersonal Emotion Systems (TIES)."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social psychologists have developed sophisticated theories
about how TIES operate, but using those theories to predict actual behavior has
been thwarted by a lack of mathematical modeling expertise. This research brings
together expertise in TIES and Bayesian modeling, which is a powerful
mathematical approach for predicting the behavior of complex systems. For
example, Bayesian modeling has been used successfully for problems as diverse as
weather prediction, controlling missiles, and detecting credit card fraud, but
has rarely been applied to human emotional processes. Bayesian methods and
existing data from three prior studies will be used to predict health behaviors
and outcomes (e.g., weight gain, cancer recovery) from interpersonal emotional
processes in the context of adult romantic relationships. To ensure broad
impact, the iPlant collaborative, a large NSF funded project to create shared
computational infrastructure for 2020 science, will provide computational
capability in the form of web services, whereby researchers choose TIES models,
submit data, fit models using software running on a super-computer, and retrieve
results over the web. By providing support to other research groups to make
their models available through iPlant, a wide range of powerful TIES models will
become available, broader web dissemination will be achieved, and it will become
easier to compare models and methods. The results of this work will inform
family-level health-promotion interventions. More broadly, the larger goal is to
foster cumulative research that supports pragmatic applications. Information
about TIES is important for developing parenting classes, family counseling
programs, interventions for health behaviors, managerial and negotiation
training, reducing bullying in schools, and promoting constructive international
relations. Together these efforts will provide the broad scientific base needed
for transforming theoretical knowledge of TIES into pragmatic applications.