* 1322129
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Investigation of the Legal Doctrine of Self-Determination in the Context of Decolonization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Gary Wilder, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 25,335.00

City University of New York-Graduate Center doctoral student Mark Drury, with
the guidance of Dr. Gary Wilder, will research the process and effects of
applying - or attempting to apply - the legal doctrine of self-determination in
the context of decolonization. This proposal examines UN-led efforts during the
1990s to hold a referendum on self-determination in the Non-Self-Governing
Territory of Western Sahara. By focusing on the formation and workings of the UN
mission's Identification Commission, this research will consider the
significance of self-determination from the perspective of both UN planners and
those who participated in the registration process, including: "identification"
sheikhs tasked with authorizing or denying the oral testimony of prospective
voters, government-appointed observers, and prospective voters themselves.
Drury's research will contribute to understandings of how international legal
concepts rely upon anthropological forms of knowledge in order to be applied in
particular contexts. In addition, his attention to the failure of this
particular attempt to apply self-determination will investigate the role of
international law in resolving or sustaining political conflict. Where most
studies focus on the limitations to international law as a problem of
sovereignty and jurisdiction, this research will focus on the possibilities of,
and limitations to, the legal concepts themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drury
will undertake 12 months of fieldwork, splitting time between New York,
Laâyoune, Western Sahara, and a Polisario-run refugee camp in Algerian
territory. He will collect data through (1) interviews with former personnel
involved in MINURSO, UN's mission to Western Sahara, and its Identification
Commission; (2) archival research of UN documents regarding the referendum
planning process; (3) semi-structured interviews and oral histories from
participants from all levels of the Identification Commission process; and (4)
ethnographic observations from participant observation in private and public
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this research will be relevant to
political scientists and historians interested in the dynamics of
decolonization, as well as to practitioners and scholars of political conflict
and conflict resolution mechanisms. The research contributes to the training of
a graduate student in anthropology.