* 1322017
* Continued development and application of 40Ar/39Ar dating for archaeometric research
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2018
* USD 196,022.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Alan Deino and Paul Renne will
initiate a three-year effort to upgrade the 40Ar/39Ar dating facilities at the
Berkeley Geochronology Center in Berkeley, California. The 40Ar/39Ar dating
method has the broadest temporal range of applicability in archeological and
paleoanthropological contexts, and is well established as a highly accurate and
precise dating tool that has contributed widely to the study of hominid and
hominoid evolution. The planned upgrades will ensure that the Archaeometric
community has access to a laboratory exercising the best possible practices in
this advanced and powerful dating technique, in order to attain the highest
possible levels of precision, accuracy and throughput. The improvements will be
in the areas of sample processing and extraction methods for removing argon from
samples during analysis. Such advances will permit accurate analysis of
difficult materials such as those that are low in potassium, very young, very
small, or in the areas of mitigation of certain types of natural geological
contamination, thus expanding the scope of problems that can be
solved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to address these goals over the next three
years, expenditures will be focused primarily in three areas: 1) Outfitting of a
dedicated laboratory for 40Ar/39Ar sample preparation. The anticipated benefits
to Archaeometry are in the area of clean and efficient processing of volume-
limited or otherwise difficult samples in a controlled environment with minimal
possibility of sample contamination, 2) Construction of a CO2 scanning laser
system for better heating control for sample degassing, with the anticipated
benefit of improved age resolution and greater accuracy in dating young, small,
or low-K samples by enhancing sensitivity and uniformity in the heating process,
and 3) NSF funding will also help BGC conduct routine maintenance and the
purchase of consumables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this study are
anticipated in three areas: (1) Interdisciplinary stimulus. The research studies
enabled by this grant are intrinsically interdisciplinary and foster improved
interaction between geological, archaeological, and paleoanthropological
scientists; (2) Public outreach. The archaeometric age data produced by BGC are
frequently published in high-profile journals that are covered by lay news
media, hence receiving broad public dissemination in newspapers, magazines,
radio, television, and increasingly, the web; (3) Training early career
scientists. Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, many of whom will
continue archaeometric research in the future, will receive direct training in
the use of the dating facilities, poised to represent the next generation of
40Ar/39Ar geochronologists. Many other graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows will receive archaeometric data in direct support of their field
studies.