* 1322002
* Determining the Duration of the Ediacaran Shuram C-isotope Excursion using Rock Magnetic Cyclostratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Kenneth Kodama, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2018
* USD 243,764.00

Determining the Duration of the Ediacaran Shuram C-isotope Excursion using Rock
Magnetic Cyclostratigraphy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kenneth P. Kodama, Lehigh
University, EAR-1322002&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award is
designated as an OIIA/ISE Global Venture Fund Award and is being co-funded by
NSF's OIIA International Science and Engineering Section. This project will
develop high-resolution time sequences, or chronostratigraphies, for the
sedimentary rocks that carry a record of the Ediacaran (~555 Ma) Shuram negative
carbon isotope excursion at two distant localities, one in South China and the
other in South Australia. The chronostratigraphies will be determined by a new
technique, rock magnetic cyclostratigraphy, which can detect global climate
cycles that are driven by variations in the magnitude and direction of Earth's
axial tilt and the ellipticity of Earth's orbit around the Sun. The
astronomically-forced global climate cycles have been very regular throughout
Earth history, so they provide a high-resolution metronome to develop time
sequences for sedimentary rocks. The rock magnetic chronostratigraphies should
provide up to 15,000 year resolution for the duration of the Shuram carbon
isotope excursion recorded by the Doushantuo Formation in South China and by the
Wonoka Formation in South Australia, both marine, silt-carbonate sedimentary
rocks. Magnetizations applied in the laboratory to samples collected at close
stratigraphic spacing (10-30 cm) will measure variations in the concentration of
depositional magnetic minerals in the rocks. PIs previous work shows that the
magnetic mineral concentration variations can record astronomically-forced
global climate cycles. Oriented samples will also be collected from the Wonoka
and Doushantuo rocks for standard paleomagnetic analysis to detect polarity
reversals of the Earth's magnetic field. The reversal stratigraphy developed
will help constrain the duration of the rock magnetically detected cycles to
ensure they are astronomically-forced climate cycles. Comparing the rock
magnetic cyclostratigraphies from two widely separated localities will provide a
strong test of the primary nature of the Shuram carbon isotope excursion. Post-
depositional alteration of the rocks is one explanation for the Shuram
excursion. Identical high-resolution durations for the excursion in Australia
and China would support a primary origin and would bolster the interpretation
that the Shuram excursion is a singular event in Earth history and resulted from
the oxidation of the world ocean just before life exploded into multi-cellular
diversity. The development of the rock magnetic cyclostratigraphy technique for
Ediacaran rocks that will result from this project will afford higher resolution
relative time assignment for these ancient rocks than afforded by current
geochronological techniques.