* 1322256
* The Construction of an Historic South American Composite State
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Tom Dillehay, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 167,706.00

The term "state" or "polity," in light of earlier scholarship that generally
emphasized stasis and its reference to a specific and particularly intricate
"type" of complex society, continues to warrant critical disclosure in
archaeology. Despite these advances in understanding early state development,
little is still known about how and why specific semi-autonomous to autonomous
territories were incorporated and organizationally integrated by higher forms of
authority to solve collective problems. One such little known polity is the
composite state, defined for the Medieval period in Europe. The composite state
was locally centralized but regionally non-centralized and comprised of multiple
complementary domains, each with their own leader and with overlapping and often
distinct roles in service of a single political system. It was a partitioning
political structure that was heterogeneously mixed and non-centralized, yet
formed a single compound unit ruled by the consensus of group leadership, as the
term suggests. This type of differentiated yet integrated political organization
is considered to be the most conceptually identifiable analogy to the Araucanian
polity or "Estado" (state) that formed in the middle 16th century to resist the
intrusion of the Spanish into south-central Chile. The intent of the Estado was
to "compose" four different contiguous domains into a regional structure to
represent a non-centralized government, each with a specialized role and
internally centralized leadership on the local-level. Implementing the composite
pattern treated the individual or compositions as a uniform anti-colonial front
to the Spanish empire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This NSF funded research attempts
to achieve a more focused comparative archaeological and historical
understanding (1) of the formation of and differentiated roles within a
composite-like Araucanian proto-state in the early colonial period of the
southern Andes and (2) of the socio-cultural and historical conditions that
shaped the archaeological record of this formation and differentiation. The
focus is on the archaeology of the key area in one of the four domains, Pai Cavi
in Tucapel, during the early part (A.D. 1550-1650) of the Arauco War
(1552-1894), when this domain's specific role was to provide food for a second
domain whose primary role was to defend the frontier against the Spanish. The
specific aim is to archaeologically test hypotheses related to how the political
organization and role of Pai Cavi and the inferred structures and meanings of
its mound, residential, public, subsistence, and administrative spaces
functioned&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an important case study
for the transition from a lower-level complex society to a proto-or near-state
polity of the Araucanian people of Chile. Sites in the study area provide an
unparalleled sequence to evaluate the late pre-Hispanic and early Colonial
transition to intensive cultivation and how local agricultural technologies were
newly created or expanded to include raised field agriculture associated with
wetland management technologies. This project also will refine the chronology of
large-scale agricultural production and mound-building in this little known
portion of South America and associate different mound forms with different
societal functions and meanings, within the wider context of a differentiated
polity. It also contributes to understanding one of the most successful
indigenous groups that resisted Colonial European intervention in the Americas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will strengthen international collaboration
and provide diverse economic and training opportunities for local indigenous
communities, the Proncipal Investigator's U.S. and Chilean-based institutions,
and international students. It is composed of a collaborative team that will
integrate archaeology, historical anthropology, and ecology, and create research
collaborations and opportunities for in-country governmental and non-
governmental institutions, mainly local Mapuche communities. These findings also
have implications for contemporary questions of long-term change in coupled
human-natural systems, conservation, sustainable development, biodiversity, and
ecological integrity in the region.