* 1322161
* International Courts, Advocacy Groups and Governance
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Rachel Cichowski, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 272,703.00

In the last fifty years, international courts have incrementally grown in number
and in power, changing the environment and institutions for engagement in
international relations. These judicial organizations have both empowered and
constrained governments to act in ways consistent with interpretations of
supranational rights instruments. This project examines whether international
courts provide an avenue for enhancing or undermining, societal access and
participation in governance. This study analyzes litigation before a
supranatiomal court to examine three key questions: (1) To what extent are
interest and advocacy groups, from businesses to public interest activists,
accessing international judicial institutions? (2) What are the main factors
explaining changes in the degree and forms of this participation across time?
(3) How and why does involvement in litigation affect governance? The project
entails an innovative cross-field research design that draws unique theoretical
and methodological links, adapting concepts concerning mobilization to the
transnational and international level. The research also advances a more complex
understanding of international law and politics, where societal groups, domestic
governments and international organizations play an important role in giving
meaning to the law and at times transforming laws and policies. The project will
produce, analyze and disseminate the first database on interest and advocacy
group involvement in international litigation, including both patterns of
participation and effects on domestic and international laws.

The research benefits society as elite decision-makers within domestic and
international institutions are increasingly challenged and pressured to make
governance processes more accountable, transparent and accessible. The findings
of this project will enable public officials, societal groups and scholars alike
to systematically evaluate legal processes with the eye to reform and
development of good governance. By making the data widely available, the project
will contribute broadly to training students and scholars in governance through
judicial institutions.