* 1322579
* Dendroarchaeology of the Gallina
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Ronald Towner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 145,258.00

With support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Ronald H. Towner and
students from the University of Arizona will conduct two seasons of research on
the Gallina culture of northern New Mexico. The prehistoric Gallina have long
been an enigma. Similar in many ways to other prehistoric Anasazi groups, the
Gallina have been defined as a phase, and later, a separate culture. What is
known is that the Gallina lived during a time of social and environmental
changes that occurred across a broad area, but many questions about the Gallina
remain unanswered in part because the Gallina chronologies have not been fully
developed. Basic questions regarding Gallina population dynamics, settlement
patterns, social organization, and adaptation to environmental change simply
cannot be adequately addressed with the current chronological data. This project
will remedy this situation for a key portion of the Gallina area. It will also
contribute to our understanding of the effects of migration - not on migrants or
host communities - but on communities along-the-path of migration
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly enhance
understanding of the Gallina in specific and attainable ways. First, researchers
will analyze more than two thousand tree-ring samples excavated from major
Gallina sites in the 1970s, that were never submitted for analysis. These
samples have now been transferred to the Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research (LTRR)
at the University of Arizona, where they will be analyzed and permanently
curated As part of the tree-ring analysis, the team will develop internal site
chronologies that will contribute to understanding Gallina social organization
and demographics; they will also significantly enlarge the number of Christian-
calendar dates and place the Gallina more firmly in time and space. Only one
area map exists from earlier work, and it is woefully inadequate. The
investigators will use modern Geographic Positioning Systems technology to map
the previously excavated sites, and correlate them with the original field maps
produced in the 1970s. Producing digital maps will significantly enhance current
and future research efforts by providing detailed provenience information at the
site, structure, and room level. Existing tree-ring reconstructions of
precipitation will be used to elucidate aspects of precipitation variability
during the Gallina occupation and relate that variability to Gallina social and
demographic change. Finally, all previous and newly generated tree-ring dates
from Gallina sites will be synthesized and all of data, except sensitive site
locations, will be published on a website hosted by the LTRR.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project will reach beyond the
Gallina. The research will make important contributions toward understanding how
and under what conditions various forms of social organization developed in the
prehispanic Southwest. Models of such social formation processes will contribute
to a broader understanding of human social organization during periods of
demographic, climatic, and political stress. This project will result in
significant advances in understanding Gallina cultural dynamics and social
organization; it will illuminate important aspects of Gallina population
dynamics, enhance anthropological theories of mixed-economy social organization,
and augment our understanding of the impacts of migration on "intermediate"
communities. The project will also contribute toward student training and
development by employing both graduate and undergraduate students who will be
involved in all phases of the project. It will also demonstrate the utility of
existing collections that have been ignored for decades.