* 1322965
* The Influences of Place in the Community Reintegration of Former Prisoners
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrea Leverentz, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 305,441.00

The goal of this project is to understand how the process of desistance from
crime is shaped by neighborhood context and residential change. First, in terms
of context, evidence suggests that the removal and return of prisoners to and
from communities undermines neighborhood stability, creates a demand on
resources, contributes to fear of crime and negative affect towards the
community, and contributes to ex-prisoner recidivism. In addition, communities
may vary in the level of stigma they exhibit towards former prisoners. Second,
residential change is a potentially key turning point in the life course of
desisting offenders. Yet given economic and social constraints, former prisoners
are unlikely to move to communities with adequate resources and they often move
to areas with large numbers of former prisoners. While community context and
residential change are linked to reoffending and desistance, the mechanisms of
these effects are less well understood.

This project will utilize in depth interviews and participant observation to
explore the mechanisms underlying neighborhood influences on former prisoner
desistance. Data come from two sources: 1) Participant observation and
interviews with residents and community leaders in three neighborhoods that are
strategically chosen to represent variation in former prisoner concentration. 2)
Repeated interviews with recently released prisoners; respondents will be
interviewed once shortly before their release from prison and four times in the
community. Male and female respondents will be recruited, with special attention
to those who will be released to the three target communities. In addition, the
research team will attempt to recruit a mix of those who are moving to a new
neighborhood and those returning to a previous neighborhood.

Together, these data will provide valuable information to better understand the
impact of community context and residential change on former prisoner
desistance, how communities view and respond to returning prisoners, and how
former prisoners understand and experience their neighborhood context. Findings
may inform criminal justice policies and programs, such as those around release
and parole supervision, to decrease recidivism and support desistance efforts.