* 1322805
* Collaborative Research:   Hydrodynamic controls on microbial community dynamics and carbon cycling in coalbeds
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jennifer McIntosh, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,001.00

Natural gas is becoming increasingly important as a transitional fuel, less
carbon-intensive and polluting than coal, to meet growing energy demands
worldwide. Approximately 20% of natural gas resources are generated by microbes
that degrade organic matter in geologic formations, such as coal seams, and
produce methane. Recent laboratory and field studies have shown that these
microorganisms can be stimulated to generate new gas resources. However, little
is known about how microbes naturally convert organic matter into methane, the
rates new methane can be generated, and the rate limiting steps. In addition,
large quantities of groundwater are extracted from coal seams to produce natural
gas, which may alter the in situ environmental conditions with unknown
consequences for the microbial communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
aims to determine the structure and function of microbial communities in coal
seams under different hydrologic and geochemical conditions, and how they may
change with groundwater pumping and dewatering of coal beds. Specifically, we
will investigate the spatial, depth and temporal variability of microbial
communities in coals; how this distribution is controlled by aqueous
environmental conditions and recharge rates that may be reflected in water and
gas isotopic signatures; how microbial communities may respond to perturbations,
such as groundwater extraction; and how observations of in situ microbial
activity can be incorporated into a predictive model of coal bioconversion to
methane. The study is focused in the Powder River Basin in Wyoming/Montana, one
of the first large basins to undergo intensive development of microbial coalbed
methane (CBM), and an important model for future CBM development in other
basins. Results from this study will be made available to the public via the
NSF-funded CUAHSI Hydroserver and Montana Bureau of Mines and Geology Ground
Water Information Center. New data will be incorporated into the web-based
Biofilms: the Hypertextbook. And, a video on the research will be on display at
the University of Arizona Flandrau Science Center and Biosphere2.