* 1322077
* Crystal-Liquid Dynamics of a Supereruption: The Youngest Toba Tuff and its Aftermath, Sumatra, Indonesia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Mary Reid, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2019
* USD 229,336.00

The waxing and waning of eruptive activity at giant volcanic systems like the
Toba Caldera Complex of Sumatra, Indonesia or at Yellowstone Caldera, USA, raise
fundamental questions about the tempo and physical evolution of these systems,
and about the phenomena that could trigger the next eruption. This project
targets the highly explosive 75 ka Youngest Toba Tuff (YTT) - at &gt;2800 km3 of
magma, the largest eruption experienced by the human race - and the subsequent,
more quiescent eruptions that could signal renewal of the sub-volcanic system,
or its death throes. Crystals contained within volcanic rocks like the YTT are
effective recorders of the origin, assembly, and thermal history of the magmatic
systems responsible for them. For the YTT, the crystal record is extraordinarily
complicated, and existing results are fragmental and sometimes contradictory.
Estimates for the interval of near-eruption crystallization, for example, range
from a few hundred years to several tens of thousands of years, with drastically
different implications for the magnitude and duration of volcanic unrest. This
study aims to reconcile the various disparities in crystal-scale records using
samples and analyses strategically selected to complement, extend, and more
carefully examine previous work. Investigations will focus on long term changes
in crystal growth environments, mineral affinities between the YTT and post-YTT
eruptions, and the residence time of crystals at liquid-dominated rather than
solid-dominated conditions including the duration of system (re)activation from
the conditions and duration of near-eruption mineral growth. This study will
test the hypothesis that different portions of the YTT and post-YTT eruptions
selectively sample distinct portions of the magmatic system in space and time,
including a liquid-dominated cap reservoir, remobilized crystal-rich domains
(mush), and the background of magmatic inputs into the system, and examine
whether a resident silicic reservoir is developing or dying beneath the Toba
Caldera Complex. The PI and Dr. Craig Chesner (EIU), the leading expert on the
Toba Caldera Complex system, will collaborate on this project, train graduate
students at NAU in conjunction with a new Ph.D. program emphasis in Earth and
Planetary Systems, and mentor undergraduates at NAU and
EIU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Toba Caldera Complex is a natural laboratory in
which to investigate how highly explosive silicic systems are generated;
numerous investigations have also speculated about its impact on major climatic
and anthropologic events. The chemical dynamics of magma assembly, the origin of
compositional zonation in large volume eruptions, and the timescales of mineral
growth, storage, and mush reactivation in high- and low-volume eruptions emitted
from the same magmatic system are the main foci of this study. Systematic
characterization of representative samples (via serial sectioning of pumices,
petrographic studies, and SEM and CL imaging) and strategic in situ chemical and
isotopic mineral analyses (via electron and ion microprobe analyses of selected
trace elements and 238U-232Th-230Th-207Pb- 206Pb) in the minerals quartz,
allanite, and zircon are being undertaken, with complementary analyses of other
minerals. A comprehensive approach is needed to distinguish cognate minerals
from minerals accidentally incorporated during or before eruption, and to
examine the fidelity - to each other and to magmatic conditions - of
increasingly-used temperature and chemical proxies. Delimiting the duration of
magma remobilization and the frequency of post-caldera magmatism will also
contribute to understanding magmatic signals in the lead-up to eruptions, and
the potential for future volcanic hazards associated with the Toba Caldera
Complex.