* 1322895
* Conference on Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Robert Hilborn, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/2015
* USD 97,513.00

This project provides partial support for a conference on Introductory Physics
for the Life Sciences (IPLS) to be held in late 2013 or early in 2014. The
conference lasts two days and engages about 200 faculty members, most in
physics, including physics education research, along with biologists, biology
education researchers, basic science medical school faculty, and other health-
related faculty. The conference is expected to result in a report to the
undergraduate STEM community about how physics is responding to the calls for
innovation in undergraduate life science education as articulated in the recent
American Association for the Advancement of Science report on Vision and Change
in Undergraduate Biology Education, the report on the Scientific Foundations for
Future Physicians produced by a joint Howard Hughes Medical Institute-
Association of American Medical Colleges committee, and the Preview Guide to
MCAT2015, the revised Medical College Admission Test. In addition the report
provides guidelines for IPLS courses that serve a wide spectrum of life science
students including those aiming for health-related careers, for basic biological
sciences research careers (as articulated in the BIO2010 report from the
National Research Council), for future K-12 life science teachers, and for those
in fields such as ecology and environmental science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merit of the project lies in its comprehensive discussion of what
physics should be taught to undergraduate life science students and how it
should be taught based on what is known from physics education research and
biology education research. The project is led by a team with considerable
experience in physics education for the life sciences. That team is aided by a
conference planning group that includes physicists, biologists representing the
breadth of contemporary biology, and disciplinary education
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of the project include a
set of guidelines that lead to the enhancement of the introductory physics
courses for the life sciences taken by about 200,000 students per year and the
materials, both text and online, and laboratory experiments used by those
students. Special efforts are being made to involve all types of higher
education institutions and to ensure the participation of faculty from minority-
serving institutions by using personal recruitment and by providing some travel
subsidies.