* 1322082
* Light Element Incorporation in Nominally Anhydrous Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* George Rossman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2019
* USD 343,154.00

Water is essential not only to life, but also to geological processes such as
volcanic eruption, magma melting and rising, and rock deformation. In the
geological world, a major reservoir of water is tied up in solid rock deep in
the Earth where it is chemically bound to the minerals. In these minerals, water
is present both as the H2O molecule, and also as its precursor, the hydrogen
atom bound to oxygen atoms in the form of hydroxide groups. Although the
concentrations are relatively low, usually less than a few hundred parts per
million, the volume of this rock is great. A large proportion of this water is
incorporated into minerals we normally think of as anhydrous. These nominally
anhydrous minerals include feldspars, quartz, olivine, garnets, and pyroxenes.
For a couple decades, the Caltech lab has developed the first generation of
analytical standards for determining the 'water' content of nominally anhydrous
minerals using a variety of analytical tools. These standards have seen wide
distribution across the United States and abroad. The standards were originally
developed for use with infrared spectroscopy, but now, another analytical
technique known as secondary ion mass spectrometry offers comparable or better
sensitivity on smaller areas. The new method is not self-calibrating and has
relied, in part, on the standards previously developed for infrared
spectroscopy. In some ways, the first generation of standards is proving less
than optimal in view of the improved spatial sensitivity offered by the new
methods. The proposed study will re-evaluate existing standards and develop new,
second generation ones to optimize the new-found analytical capabilities. Part
of this work will involve an extensive characterization of feldspars, one of the
few major rock-forming minerals that still need to be investigated using the
mass spectrometry methods. This effort is particularly topical due to interest
from the community in measuring H in feldspars from both terrestrial and
extraterrestrial samples. It will also study fluorine ion incorporation in
minerals with the goal of improving calibration protocols while systematically
studying samples derived from the Earth's mantle were indications of a coupling
between hydrogen and fluorine have been previously suggested.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies are critical to the ultimate fundamental
question of where the important volatile components such as water reside in the
earth and how they influence the properties of rocks and minerals. They address
the questions of which phases contain trace 'water' and at what concentrations.
They also contribute to understanding the spatial distribution of these
volatiles throughout our planet. The analytical standards are also used to
address questions about the existence of critical volatiles elsewhere in the
solar system such as the moon. The presence or absence of small amounts of
'water' in nominally anhydrous synthetic minerals and related synthetic solids
of technological importance plays an important role in operational success of
devices such as supports for high power electronic circuits, electro-optic
crystals used in data communication and fiber optics, and timing circuits used
in computers, watches and telecommunication devices. This research will broaden
the communities understanding of the important role that trace amounts of
hydrogen and fluorine play in such minerals and materials, and will benefit the
international community through the development of new standards and assessment
of calibration protocols for these elements. This work also provides
opportunities for direct participation in the research process by students
training to be professional scientists and engineers.