* 1322232
* Conference:  2013 Environmental Nanotechnology GRC, Stove, VT, June 2 - 7, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Paul Westerhoff, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 10/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

1322232&lt;br/&gt;Westerhoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to fund the 2013
Gordon Research Conference on Environmental Nanotechnology. The current
conference will attempt to move the environmental nanotechnology community
towards the future in which sustainable design of nanomaterials for agriculture,
human health/medicine and water can be informed by/from recent breakthroughs in
understanding the fate and toxicity of engineered nanomaterials within organisms
and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2013 Gordon Research Conference on Environmental
Nanotechnology will bring together prominent investigators who are at the
forefront of their research fields and will provide unique opportunities for
early career investigators, postdoctoral and graduate students to present their
work in poster formats. The conference will draw attention to the need to
proactively manage the emergence of nanotechnology into society so as to avert
such problems that arose with earlier research such as those involving DDT,
leaded gasoline, PCBs, CRCs and numerous other substances and to discuss
opportunities for using nanotechnology to benefit society while protecting the
environment in the areas of air, water, soil treatment plus energy and
agriculture production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sessions include the following:
Evolution of nanoscale structures in the environment; Predicting transport and
transformation towards sustainable design; Natural and Engineered Nanomaterials:
from manufacturing to fate in the environment; Lifecycle implications of
nanomaterials; Food technology impacts on humans and the environment ;
Nanotechnology uses and solutions for food, agriculture, water and energy;
Advancing agricultural and farming breakthroughs with nanotechnology ; Tiny
solutions to global water challenges; Implications of nanomaterials on human
health and ecosystem; Ecological and Biological responses: Nano talks back;
Fantastic voyages of nanopharmaceuticals within biological systems;
Manufacturing the future: Economy versus ecology. This GRC will help move the
dialog forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2013 Gordon Conference on Environmental
Nanotechnology will be held at Stoweflake Resort and Conference Center, Stove,
VT from June 2 through 7, 2013.
(http://www.grc.org/programs.aspx?year=2013&amp;program=environano
)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of this conference lies in the establishment of a community of engineers and
scientists interested in the applications and implications of nanotechnology. It
is anticipated that 200 scientists, engineers, and toxicologists will
participate in the conference. This relatively small group of participants will
be ideal to promote vigorous discussion and close interchange of ideas that is
the hallmark of Gordon Research Conferences. The conference also will involve
participants who are junior scholars (undergraduates, doctoral students and
postdoctoral). In addition, scientists from groups traditionally under
represented will participate. Participants of the Environmental Nanotechnology
Research Conference will come from not only the US but around the globe. The
steering committee is committed to having diversity (ethnicity, gender, age,
employment) among the participants.