* 1322304
* VOSS: Micro-Analytics of Collaboration in Distributed Work: What Makes Collaboration Work
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Judith Olson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 396,950.00

This project is a four-phase examination of the micro-processes of collaborative
creation of documents to identify what processes and tool features make the
products of collaboration good and to determine what new tool features might
contribute to more successful collaborations. The study includes an exploratory
phase analyzing and visualizing trace of activity around the collaborative
creation of existing documents, a systematic study of teams of students using
distributed word processing tools to create text documents, an experimental
study contrasting the use of synchronous and asynchronous systems and an
extension of the study to non-textual documents, all with the goal of
determining which features of collaboration processes (e.g., the distribution of
roles or the handoff pattern among collaborators) correlate with quality of the
resulting documents (e.g., lack inconsistencies, unnecessary repetition or
conflicting sections). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is important because
distributed work has become ubiquitous in industry as well as in the sciences
but current theories of collaborative work were generated when technology-
supported distributed work was less common and before the development of widely-
adopted collaboration tools. This study will grow these theories to include the
collaboration patterns when people use new tools and cope with the challenges of
being distant. Findings will be disseminated in academic publications, in
classes that help people learn to collaborate and through contacts with
industry.