* 1322275
* VOSS: Flexible Research Infrastructure: A Comparative Study
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2016
* David Ribes, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 291,174.00

Using ethnographic and archival methods, this study will develop a comparative
case analysis of two successful long-term cyberinfrastructures that have been
supporting scientific research for nearly thirty years, in ecology and medical
science: the Long-term Ecological Research Network (LTER) and the Multi-Center
AIDS Cohort Study (MACS). Archival research will provide a backdrop to current
events that will be investigated ethnographically. The project addresses a
significant gap in comparative studies of infrastructure, refocusing attention
on the implications of the always-changing technologies, sociotechnical-
organization, and institutional environments that make up contemporary research
infrastructures. The central research questions is: How are "old organizations"
renewing themselves to sustain value for "new science"? By investigating the
past and present of cyberinfrastructures that have weathered many
transformations, this research seeks to inform future cyberinfrastructure
development efforts. The findings will identify successful "strategies of the
long-term" -- organizational forms and methods of design with a track-record of
facilitating responsiveness to change. These insights will be a contribution to
the fields of Science and Technology Studies (STS), science policy, organization
science, and the sociotechnical design of research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research is to
understand the challenges that long-term scientific organizations face over
time, and the strategies they employ to manage these challenges. The development
of scientific research infrastructure is central to the NSF?s vision of science;
however there has as yet been little or sporadic empirical attention to the
dynamics of flexible long-term infrastructure in the face of changing social
organization, information technology (IT) and scientific interests. This
research will fill that gap, contributing to new, practical, and boundary-
spanning knowledge about the characteristics of infrastructure in the making and
over the long-term. This project will inform efforts to build more open,
effective, and sustainable cyberinfrastructure in the sciences, leading to
smarter and more sustainable investment and design choices on the part of
cyberinfrastructure project leaders, participants, tool builders, and funders.
This research will also inform science policy and regulatory environments, to
help foster a sustainable and productive research infrastructure across multiple
fields of inquiry.