* 1323192
* Support for US Participants for International Conference on Fluidization
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Daniel Lepek, Cooper Union
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 04/30/2015
* USD 15,000.00

1323192&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lepek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will help
subsidize travel-related expenses to enable U.S. researchers, particularly
early-career researchers such as the PI, to attend and present their research at
the Fluidization XIV conference (Fluidization XIV: From Fundamentals to
Products) in Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands (May 25-30, 2013). This proposal
will support researchers from U.S. institutions that would normally not have the
financial resources necessary to attend this international conference. In
addition, this proposal will help support the travel costs of early-career
researchers and researchers from traditionally underrepresented groups in the
STEM fields that will be recruited to participate in this conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluidization is a very important field of both fundamental
research and broad industrial applications. Currently, knowledge of complex
fluid-particle interactions, particularly when coupled with multiphase transport
phenomena and chemical reactions is still incomplete. This is primarily due to
the challenges associated with coupling the solid properties of particles and
their hydrodynamic behavior within a moving fluid medium. The addition of heat
and mass transfer operations and also chemical reacting systems makes multiphase
systems such as fluidized bed reactors a challenge to successfully design,
scale-up, and operate. Although fluidized bed reactors are fairly common within
the petrochemical industry, they can be found in other industries for a variety
of applications such as coating and the design of new materials. Therefore,
advances in fluidization research are necessary to help develop and ultimately
commercialize new technologies such as CO2 capture (chemical looping), renewable
energy systems, nanostructured materials, and the continuous processing of novel
coated drug delivery systems. This conference will focus on advances in the
field of fluidization research which impact the research and development, as
well as the large-scale manufacturing of advanced materials that are common
across a wide range of chemical process, life science, and food science
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will bring together a wide
range of scientists and engineers across multiple continents that are focused on
fluidization research, which can have a major impact on multiple industries. By
bringing together researchers who share a mutual interest in fluidization, it is
expected that new international partnerships and collaborations will be
established. This will be especially beneficial to the early-career researchers
supported by this proposal that will have the unique opportunity to present
their recent unpublished research findings in front of a congregation of
established international researchers.