* 1323522
* Infrastructure and Training to Bring Next-generation Sequence (NGS) Analysis Into Undergraduate Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* David Micklos, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 537,368.00

This project is developing a sustainable infrastructure and training program to
assist undergraduate faculty in using RNA-Seq technology for research
investigations with their students. The DNA Learning Center staff are developing
appropriate biochemical and bioinformatics materials to be utilized, reviewed,
and revised by a set of faculty who are representative of the audience for the
regional and virtual workshops. These workshops enable 80 faculty, selected on
the basis of proposals for tractable projects examining differential gene
expression or transcriptome sequencing, to develop good data sets and curriculum
plans. Data analysis utilizesboth the student-oriented Green Line of the DNA
Subway (www.dnasubway.org) and the research-grade tools available at the iPlant
Collaborative (www.iplantcollaborative.org), which use high performance
computing resources of NSF's Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (www.xsede.org). The training is designed to transition from in-
person workshops to online webinars and self-paced learning in year three.
Development of a multi-faceted assessment of impacts on students and faculty is
in process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Bringing next-generation
sequencing (NGS) technology and data analysis into the undergraduate classroom
has the potential to transform biology teaching nation-wide. This project
specifically enables one such approach, RNA-seq, which makes possible dynamic
experiments to assess utilization of genomes. The goal is to enable faculty at
small and/or primarily undergraduate institutions - those that do not have
access to a DNA sequencer, a supercomputer, or an experienced bioinformatician -
to generate and/or utilize NGS datasets in the college classroom and to invite
students [to be] co-investigators in the exploration of eukaryotic
genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Attention is being paid to
including faculty from a variety of institutions; about 25% of the faculty are
being recruited from minority-serving institutions. The aim of the proposal is
to further extend the egalitarian nature of genome research. All curriculum
materials are being made freely available; primary sequence data will be
archived in the NCBI-SRA (National Center for Biotechnology Information-Sequence
Read Archive) and in the iPlant Data Store. A dedicated website is being
designed to include faculty support in the form of protocols, how-to videos,
lesson plans, workshops and webinars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.