* 1323340
* Collaborative: TUES: Software Defined Radio Laboratory Platform for Enhancing Undergraduate Communication and Networking Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Yu Liang, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2017
* USD 99,996.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS: &lt;br/&gt;Wright State University
(Lead)&lt;br/&gt;Miami University Oxford Campus&lt;br/&gt;Central State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;This
effort is building on a previous NSF supported CCLI project "Evolvable wireless
laboratory design and implementation for enhancing undergraduate wireless
engineering education", in which the team developed and demonstrated lower cost,
software defined radio (SDR) based laboratories for three undergraduate courses.
The collaborating team is now extending and expanding the software defined radio
based laboratories throughout the communication and networking curriculum at
multiple institutions. The project is developing a suite of experiments and
laboratories for insertion in a sequence of courses (ranging from freshmen year
introductory course - to senior year elective courses and capstone design
projects) that vertically integrates the SDR-based experiment
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three largest sub-disciplines within
electrical and computer engineering (ECE) are computers, communications and
power. Wireless technology requires all three to be addressed in a related
engineering degree program. The recent availability of inexpensive software
radio platforms makes it possible to create a hands-on educational experience
for all ECE undergrads. The team is producing a scalable and transferable model
for redesigning undergraduate electrical engineering and computer science
courses to include lab-based learning opportunities for students in more
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is evaluating and comparing the
teaching effectiveness of the SDR approach to that of traditional hardware
equipment approach. The SDR approach and laboratory suite are being implemented
and institutionalized at the three participating institutions - Wright State
University, Miami University (a mostly undergraduate serving institution), and
Central State University (an HBCU) - to study the potential for enhancing
student learning and adaptation by other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE &lt;br/&gt;The project is
positively impacting STEM education in the state of Ohio. It is also helping
recruit high school students into STEM fields and benefiting a diverse
population of students. The participation of Central State University (a HBCU)
is helping to recruit and train minority students and serving as an example for
other minority institutions in the nation. The cutting-edge technology on which
the proposed course lab development is relatively inexpensive; while the
software used is GNU software radio, which is free and has a large supporting
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project materials and the results of
evaluation &amp; assessment are being broadly disseminated and made freely
available via a course website, publications, and potential books. Results from
the effort are informing the development of a national model for wireless
communication &amp; networking courses. The project is helping to develop and
produce a workforce with the skills necessary to meet the societal demand of the
new wave of wireless IT.