* 1323832
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring Somatic Dimensions of Group Solidarity, Cooperation, and Altruism
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Richard Mcelreath, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2016
* USD 30,794.00

This project investigates the effects of bodily movement within ritual practice
on group identity, solidarity, and cooperation as well as both within group and
between group altruism. Coordinating with formal laboratory behavioral studies
and cultural evolution modeling efforts at University of California, Davis, and
University of British Columbia, it employs a unique fusion of community-based
participatory action research (PAR), behavioral experiments with game theory,
and cognitive anthropology methods. The project takes place among indigenous
groups in the U.S. The communities are in a process of rebuilding community and
seeing a strong resurgence in traditional ritual dance practice explicitly
motivated by identity and solidarity. This creates a rich context for both
socially relevant collaborative research and testing of biocultural evolutionary
theories of ritual. Recent findings from the field of human behavioral ecology
demonstrate how many fundamental human behaviors are adaptions to biological and
economic constraints. While employing the human behavioral ecology model, this
research will examine a seemingly complex set of behaviors surrounding ritual
which until now have relied on abstract methods in anthropology that employ
symbolism as an explanatory variable. By disaggregating ritual into a set of
testable premises this research is a potential model for the way human
behavioral ecology can address other important cultural phenomena that are
typically not testable using controlled experiments.

This project investigates several models of ritual function, concentrating on
two specific models:

1. Synchrony - physical actions that involve synchronized movement will promote
group identification and cooperation and altruism, but only within the group of
practitioners.

2. Calming - physical practices which cultivate a state of calm will reduce
group identification and promote cooperation and altruism in a broader range of
contexts.

This research examines ritual practices that exemplify each of these styles for
their effects on both parochialism and universal altruism through qualitative
interviews, participant observation, and formal experiments. The PAR framework
of the project implies that both method and objective of the project will emerge
out of collaboration between the local community and the researchers. This
research represents a change in approach for cultural anthropology by studying
something experimentally that historically was studied using ethnographic
methods. The project also contributes to the education of a graduate student in
anthropology.