* 1323897
* Doctoral dissertation research: Exploring individual differences in prime-based intraspeaker variation and perceptual adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Kathryn Campbell-Kibler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2015
* USD 12,822.00

An individual person's pronunciation and speech processing are not constant,
changing with contextual factors like who they are (or think they are)
talking/listening to, what the topic is, and even subtle shifts in dialect
expectations based on associative priming. What is not established is whether
and how these contextual factors affect different people, and whether they
affect speech production and perception processes in the same
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, Ms. Abigail Walker will investigate how
identity, linguistic experience and linguistic prestige constrain the effects of
topic of conversation and associative priming on linguistic processing. The
study focuses on the behavior of American and English expatriates, and fans of
English Premier League (EPL) soccer and American football in the U.S. and the
U.K., and measures shifts/ adaptations between Standard American English (SAE)
and Standard British English (SBE). Walker uses experimental techniques (a
naming task and sentence intelligibility in noise) combined with rich interview
data to see how different associative primes of SAE and SBE affect people with
different identity relations to the primes, and different levels of exposure to
the primed dialects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will critically lead to
tighter predictions on when we expect to see intraspeaker shifting, and could
prompt the serious incorporation of identity into cognitive models of speech
processing. Critically, by comparing production and perception shifts within
speakers, Ms. Walker can compare whether identity affects production and
perception in similar ways (i.e., do positive identity relations to a prime
result in both production shifts and perceptual adaptations to that dialect?),
which has implications for the production-perception interface. Funding this
proposal will enhance the training of a promising graduate student.