* 1323058
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Engagement and Science Identity Through Participation--A Meta-Analysis of Citizen Science Outcomes
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Heidi Ballard, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 283,907.00

The Exploring Engagement and Science Identity Through Participation is a
research project that examines the outcomes of various citizen science models
for Public Participation in Scientific Research (PPSR). The investigation
specifically targets citizen science projects that focus on relationships
between science learning and science identity. A mixed-method, meta-analysis
approach will be employed. The two primary goals of the study are to better
understand science learning and science identify within PPSR contexts and to
develop a valid Participant Engagement Metric (PEM) for use within PPSR
contexts. Data will be collected and analyzed from several PPSR projects and
over 4,000 PPSR participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address
several research questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What are the dimensions of
PPSR engagement and how can we measure them across different project models? The
research for this question will include approximately 50 interviews of
participants in six primary projects representing a range of PPSR approaches to
develop and validate a Participant Engagement Metric (PEM) that will be
constructed from the frequency, duration and intensity of involvement in key
activities. The project will use a constant comparative method of data analysis
(processing of data as they are gathered in order to compare them with emerging
categories. The development of the PEM will be one concrete outcome of the
proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Within and among projects, what is
the relationship between participant engagement and individual learning
outcomes? The project will use validated measures of learning outcomes derived
from Learning Science in Informal Environments (NRC, 2009) and developed for the
DEVISE project described below. The six measures include: Behavior &amp;
Stewardship, Skills of Science Inquiry, Knowledge of the Nature of Science,
Interest in Science &amp; the Environment, Efficacy, and Motivation. The
proposed research will look at how engagement affects learning outcomes, as
assessed by these six measures (science interest, efficacy, etc.).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct participant surveys in the six
participating citizen science projects in addition to several other PPSR
projects to test the relationship of the PEM and other measures of activity
involvement to the learning outcomes measured by the survey instruments
developed and validated through a previous project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
data analysis will begin with univariate summary statistics that will provide an
overview of the basic dataset. Inferential statistics including multiple
regression analysis will be used to test the relationships among the independent
variables (type of PPSR project, demographics), PEM as a mediator variable, and
the dependent variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. How does degree and quality of
participation in scientific research develop and/or reinforce individual science
identity? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct a 3-year longitudinal
study using surveys, a series of in-depth interviews, and on-site observations
of 36 participants from the six primary projects to understand the development
of individual science identity within PPSR environments over time. Quantitative
and qualitative data and findings will be ?triangulated? to determine if
convergent, inconsistent or complementary results can be identified.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes a strong dissemination plan, using
these approaches, to present research in journals, disseminate research briefs,
host online forums, and launching various listserves and online forums at the
citizenscience.org website.