* 1323259
* Preparing Students for Writing in Civil Engineering Practice: Research-based Materials Development and Assessment
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Susan Conrad, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 588,267.00

This project is addressing a persistent problem in engineering education: the
mismatch between the writing skills of program graduates and the demands of
writing in the workplace. This project is identifying problems in undergraduate
student writing by analyzing student writing and high quality practitioner
writing. A team of linguists and engineers is then addressing the problems by
developing teaching materials that integrate instruction about effective
organization, grammar, and vocabulary into civil engineering classes. After the
use of the new materials, student writing improvement is being assessed from
multiple perspectives that cover language features, organization, and overall
effectiveness. The project has many innovative features that contribute to its
intellectual merit: the integration of engineering practitioners' perspectives
into classroom teaching materials, the synthesis of writing skills and
engineering content, the use of empirical analysis to identify student writing
weaknesses, and the application of multiple methods to assess the instructional
materials' effectiveness. The project's broader impacts include the
participation of universities with a high percentage of students from groups
that are underrepresented in civil engineering; stronger writing skills can
facilitate their participation in this field. Furthermore, effective
communication has been found to be the single largest variable in infrastructure
project success; poor communication in documents can lead to a waste of time and
taxpayer dollars and even to injuries and death. Thus, the benefits of teaching
civil engineers to write more effectively extend far beyond the profession of
civil engineering itself.