* 1323890
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Corruption and Electoral Accountability in Brazil
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* John Gerring, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2016
* USD 14,871.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses corruption in emerging
democracies, an issue critical to political stability in the world. It develops
and tests a theory to understand what circumstances raise or lower the level of
electoral accountability when candidates are suspected of corruption, focusing
on the case of Brazil. Recent massive demonstrations in major cities against
misuse of public funds illustrate the importance of improved knowledge about the
conditions that mitigate corruption. Brazil is an emerging economic power of
growing international influence and its political performance and stability are
of great interest to the economic interests and national security of the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research lies in
its capacity to use different methodological approaches to test a theory on the
circumstances in which voters are more likely to punish candidates accused of
corruption. Two theoretical arguments are at the foundation of the project.
First, electoral accountability increases when the distance between candidate
ideologies is low. By contrast, when there is greater ideological polarization
there should be lower levels of punishment to candidates accused of corruption,
as voters will be more likely to choose a candidate based on their issue
positions. Second, electoral accountability will be lower when incumbent
candidates accused of corruption can claim credit for delivering material
benefits. These hypotheses are tested with a multi-method design incorporating
election data, online survey experiments, and interviews with candidates for
municipal elections in Brazil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes advantage
of newly available data on candidates' public records of corruption to perform a
large-N observational analysis. The online survey experiments with Brazilian
eligible voters over 18 years old will use a 2 x 2 factorial design to assess
treatment by treatment interactions; one treatment being existence (absence) of
corruption allegations involving the candidate and the other treatment being
high (low) degree of party polarization in the first experiment, and positive
(negative) candidate records of social provision and public works while in
office in the second experiment. The tested recruitment platform develops
representative samples of voters in understudied countries at minimal cost.
Interviews with local elites are used for the purpose of understanding causal
linkages between the interventions and outcomes of theoretical interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are related to the study's potential
contributions to knowledge about democratization and development. The project
contributes to an emerging research agenda on the circumstances in which voters
hold their representatives accountable by focusing on the case of a new
democracy in the developing world. Hence, the study will be of interest not only
for scholars but also for the broader international community, including policy
makers, foreign aid donors, non-governmental organizations and international
organizations.