* 1323283
* Collaborative Research: Google Earth for Onsite and Distance Education (GEODE)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Callan Bentley, Northern Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,779.00

This collaborative project builds on prior work to expand, augment and
disseminate geoscience learning resources based on the affordances of the Google
Earth virtual globe. Components of the project include 1) development of a suite
of globally distributed interactive virtual fields trips which add high-
resolution gigapixel panoramic images, virtual outcrops and specimens, and
automated grading to the Google Earth base, 2) using the Earth Engine API to
integrate large geoscience datasets into the virtual globe, enabling additional
forms of inquiry-based learning and undergraduate research, 3) expanding
toolkits, including mobile apps, to enable a broader range of faculty and
students to contribute crowd-sourced data and educational resources to an online
repository, 4) conducting face-to-face and online faculty professional-
development workshops to promote use, and 5) assessing dissemination efforts and
student learning gains through a combination of surveys, clickstream data and
pre-/post-tests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
lies in its ability to leverage user-friendly, cutting-edge virtual-globe and
gigapixel-imaging technology to engage students in an array of learning
activities and virtual settings. Assessment is combining discrete collection of
data through surveys and pre- and post-tests with more-continuous clickstream
data to provide insights into how students learn in such virtual environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include 1) its
applicability across a wide range of institutions, both as formal course
assignments and for ancillary use in and beyond the undergraduate geoscience
curriculum, 2) extensive faculty professional development using face-to-face,
webinar and group-video-conferencing approaches, 3) materials development
specifically for pre-service science teachers, and 4) provision of access for
mobility-impaired students, as well as those with work or family commitments
which limit participation in actual field trips.