* 1323605
* Collaborative Research: Computing in the Arts - A Community-Building Initiative
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Renee McCauley, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2017
* USD 234,147.00

This project addresses a recognized need of the 21st century technological
society - broadening participation in computing education. The project is
transforming STEM education by building a nationwide community of educators, who
are teaching students to synthesize the creativity and design of art with the
mathematical rigor and formality of computer science, technology, and
engineering.

The Computing in the Arts (CITA) model curriculum consists of 50 hours of
computing courses, arts courses, and synthesis courses. Graduates of CITA are
educated to create, design, and code new creativity tools. From contemporary
music, art and theater production, to new forms of animation and digital media,
to the visual and audio systems of tomorrow's computers, to revolutionary web
applications, CITA prepares students for productive and integrated careers in
the information and arts economies. The CITA model maximizes reuse of existing
courses and faculty expertise, and thus facilitates adaptation. In this
collaborative project the CITA model has already been successfully implemented
at the lead institution, where there are currently 46 majors (a 22% increase),
mainly from an underserved population - students interested in the arts.

This project focuses on dissemination - successes and synthesis with other
complementary approaches with partner institutions to build a strong,
diversified community of educators interested in adopting and further developing
innovative CITA instructional materials. This community is being forged through
three faculty workshops, special sessions at the annual conference for Computer
Science Education, and a website of pedagogical materials. The evaluation plan
involves an independent evaluator, and various quantitative and qualitative
outcomes that assess (a) the formation of a thriving CITA community, (b)
dissemination efforts, and (c) the impact on transforming STEM education.