* 1323649
* OCE-PRF An integrated study of the closure of the Central American Seaway: Exploring paleoceanography as a tool for broadening participation in ocean sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* NONE NONE, Waite                   Amanda         J
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 06/30/2016
* USD 170,000.00

Overview: The closure of the Central American Seaway (CAS) and resulting Isthmus
of Panama have shaped much of our understanding of the adaptation and migration
of species between North and South America, as well as the diversification of
Pacific and Caribbean marine species. Until recently, the CAS was thought to
have closed between approximately 9 and 2 Ma; however, new studies of Panamanian
geology suggest the isthmus was sub-aerially exposed by the Early Miocene
(approximately 23 Ma). As dramatic global change has been ascribed to the
previously accepted timing of this gateway event, the new findings raise many
questions regarding the role the closure may have had on ocean circulation,
climate, and paleoecology. In this project, the fellow will further investigate
the timing and oceanographic impacts of the CAS closure through the development
of neodymium (Nd) isotopic records of Caribbean water mass distribution that
extend well beyond the presumed Late Miocene closure date, and direct comparison
of these data to oceanic model simulations for CAS shoaling. The proposed work
will be conducted in the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of
Florida (UF) with the sponsorship of Ellen E. Martin, PhD.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In order to reconstruct a long-term
history of CAS shoaling, Nd-isotopic analyses will be performed on fossil fish
teeth recovered from Caribbean Ocean Drilling Program Sites 998, 999, and 1000
for samples extending back to approximately 50 Ma. This record will be used to
evaluate the presence of older complete or pulsed closure events predicted by
recent geologic findings from Panama, and provide a baseline of conditions prior
to shoaling. The fellow hypothesizes that earlier shoaling events produced
excursions towards more negative, Atlantic-type, Nd-isotope values that predate
those observed in late Miocene sediments; however, these excursions must be
transient in nature to reconcile the Pacific signatures documented for the
Caribbean between approximately 14 to 10 Ma. The existence of such excursions
would corroborate recent studies showing a much earlier rise of the Isthmus of
Panama and require a re-evaluation of the associated global ocean circulation,
climate, and biogeographic data, while the absence of such excursions would call
into question interpretations of earlier complete sub-aerial exposure of Panama.
Through the integration of newly generated water mass reconstructions,
compilations of marine and terrestrial records from the literature, and modeling
of oceanic circulation in collaboration with colleagues, the long-term
paleoceanographic shoaling history of the CAS will be documented and its
generally accepted associations with global ocean circulation and climate re-
evaluated in light of this new information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project will add an oceanographic component to the ongoing efforts
of a diverse scientific community studying the rise of the Isthmus via the
Panama Canal Project - Partnership for International Research and Education. The
fellow will mentor and collaborate with two female minority graduate students
pursuing complementary marine research on the project in otherwise terrestrially
oriented departments. Two undergraduate students, selected with the goal of
broadening participation, will be mentored and involved in all aspects of the
proposed research; one of these students will also be supervised in the
completion of a related Honors thesis. Additionally, the fellow will design and
implement a hands-on introduction to an ocean science module using a major
Miocene carbonate dissolution event in the Caribbean as an analog for modern
ocean acidification. The module will be integrated into the broader curricula
for the California Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
Teachers Partnership that exposes high school educators, and by extension their
students, to unique international science opportunities in order to advance
discovery and understanding, and promote a community of teaching, training, and
learning. Six teachers from two Santa Cruz school districts with substantial
Hispanic populations will participate, allowing for dissemination of ocean
awareness to thousands of diverse high school students and encouraging STEM
pursuits with a focus on ocean sciences. Finally, broad exposure of the public
to ocean science and paleoceanographic research will be achieved via active
participation in outreach and education initiatives through the UF, Center for
Ocean Sciences Education Excellence (COSEE) Florida, Sea Grant, and the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. This participation will include, though
not be limited to, development of a paleoceanography booth for the annual "Can
you dig it?" event at the Florida Museum of Natural History.