* 1323400
* OCE-RIG:   Role of Air-Sea Coupling on the Madden-Julian Oscillation under Suppressed External Forcing
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Pallav Ray, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 07/31/2016
* USD 98,592.00

Overview: An accurate simulation of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) using
numerical models remains extremely difficult. The problem is further exacerbated
by the fact that there is no accepted theory for the initiation mechanism of the
MJO. However, several hypotheses have been proposed that broadly include local
forcing (i.e., recharge-discharge mechanism) and external influences (i.e.,
combined influences due to circumnavigating waves and extratropics). Relative
influences of these forcings on the MJO and its initiation are being studied
using atmosphere only mesoscale models or atmospheric general circulation models
(AGCMs), which lack air-sea coupling. However, MJO is greatly modulated by the
air-sea interactions in the Indian Ocean where MJO initiation occurs. The
primary objective of this study is to explore the extent to which MJO and its
initiation are affected by the air-sea coupling in the presence and absence of
external influences in different seasons. The key here is to separate the local
and external forcing in a model that cannot be achieved using observations. A
unique general circulation model (GCM)-based framework is constructed to fulfill
the objective. A coupled simulation is compared to an uncoupled simulation of
the GCM to explore the role of air-sea coupling in the presence of all forcings.
Further simulations are conducted where the influences from extratropics and
circumnavigating waves are suppressed in the coupled and uncoupled simulations
to explore the roles of air-sea coupling on the MJO in the absence of external
influences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this study, the
investigator will attempt to address the role of air-sea interactions in the
presence and absence of external influences. Emphasis will also be given to
document the structure, organization, and large-scale context of the MJO at its
initiation in different seasons. Such an effort has primarily been confined for
boreal winter season. This research will improve the understanding of the
aspects of physical processes associated with the MJO, especially the role of
air-sea interaction and interaction between convection and environmental
moisture. This work also targets poorly observed processes relevant to MJO
initiation, namely, large-scale moisture advection and convergence. This study
would further contribute towards detecting the necessary conditions for MJO
initiation and might be greatly useful for operational prediction of the MJO.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The geographical area (tropical Indian
and West Pacific Ocean) that this research is concerned with has a large human
population and it is a region of growing strategic interest for the United
States. Understanding the MJO initiation and its forecasting is highly important
for this part of the world and the MJO's global influence makes it even more
relevant. Note that statistically significant connection between the MJO and
precipitation along the North American west coast has also been found. Outreach
activities for this project will broaden participation of under-represented
groups in the ocean sciences. Two established summer programs (field project and
summer camp) offered by the Department of Marine and Environmental Systems
(DMES) at the Florida Institute of Technology (FIT) will be used as a platform
for engaging, motivating, and educating high-school and undergraduate students
through intensive training and hands-on field activities related to ocean and
atmospheric sciences.