* 1323220
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Post-Conflict Reconstruction in Colombia
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Christina Ewig, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2015
* USD 17,640.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013).

The project addresses post-conflict reconstruction in Colombia, a country
critical to US national security interests. Specifically, the research evaluates
variation in grassroots reconstruction efforts across 78 post-conflict villages
in the rural municipality of San Carlos, Colombia. For nearly a decade, these
villages were caught on the front lines of the civil conflict between the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army
(ELN), and three paramilitary groups. Despite their proximity, villages
experienced different types of armed occupation and violence wielded against
civilians. Since the conflict subsided in this region, villages have also
revealed stark variation in their reconstruction patterns. In some villages,
residents have worked together to de-mine public spaces and rebuild destroyed
infrastructure while other villages have not organized around reconstruction.
This project seeks to delineate the causes of this variation by tracing the
relationship between local conflict dynamics and subsequent local peace-
building.

Intellectual Merit: This project seeks to identify the key factors behind
successful peace-building and hypothesizes that dynamics during conflict are
integral to post-conflict peace-building success or failure. Despite a rich body
of literature on civil wars, social scientific studies have seldom focused on
post-conflict settings. Extant research on post-conflict settings has failed to
consider the theoretical link between conflict dynamics and post-conflict
phenomena and the factors that facilitate peace. By focusing on local
reconstruction activities across villages in Colombia, and implementing a
comparative, theoretically driven study of the relationship between these
outcomes and local conflict dynamics, this project will delineate how conflict
dynamics affect reconstruction efforts through their impact on village
institutional stability and social networks.

The project includes an original database compiled from archival sources and a
resident survey to determine the distinct conflict dynamics in each of the 78
communities. Using the database and survey responses, quantitative analysis will
uncover the relationship between the conflict dynamics and the reconstruction
outcomes such as de-mining activities, exhumation of bodies, and re-integration
of ex-combatants. An in-depth qualitative study of four village cases, using
semi-structured interviews and historical research, will advance the
understanding of reconstruction activities and trace their relationship with
conflict dynamics, such as patterns of violence and forced migration.

Broader Impacts: By identifying the local factors that are critical to post-
conflict reconstruction and stability, this research will help to improve future
peace-building efforts. Numerous international missions have failed to establish
sustainable peace because they have ignored local dynamics, both in transitions
from war and in post-war environments. Understanding the roots of successful
reconstruction is of strategic importance to U.S. economic and security
interests in Colombia, and more broadly. The United States shares a free-trade
agreement with Colombia, and Colombia is a strong partner in South America,
whereas other countries are openly hostile to the United States. Therefore, the
United States would like to ensure Colombia's stability and understand its
internal dynamics. Additionally, political insurgencies and criminal groups have
wielded similar strategies during the Colombian conflict, suggesting that
insights concerning subsequent grassroots reconstruction efforts are applicable
in a variety of conflict settings and countries where stability is important to
U.S. national security. Project results will be shared with both policymakers
and academic audiences and eventually include a book-length manuscript and
several articles. The archival dataset, semi-structured interviews, and surveys
will all be made freely available online.