* 1323146
* Collaborative Research: A Chautauqua Program for the 21st Century
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Stephen Cooper, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 11/30/2016
* USD 145,285.00

In order for our nation to maintain its competitive edge, it is imperative that
we increase the number of qualified STEM professionals and that those who do
graduate from our programs enroll in high-quality courses, taught by engaging
and knowledgeable faculty, about topics relevant in the 21st century. In order
for higher education faculty to maintain their skills in this rapidly changing
world, opportunities for professional development must be abundant, cost
effective, and meaningful. This project represents a first step in achieving a
goal of ubiquitous professional development for faculty who seek to improve
their pedagogical skills or who seek to branch out into a new area of endeavor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chautauqua professional development workshops for
university faculty resulted from a successful program that operated for nearly
two decades. Over the project duration, thousands of faculty received vital
training in up-to-date research topics and educational practices. The Chautauqua
series also played an important role for investigators who sought to broaden the
impact from their funded projects. The original Chautauqua series ceased in 2007
due to various factors. Through this project, a model for a cost effective and
sustainable 21st century version of the Chautauqua program is being developed.
This model takes full advantage of internet-based conferencing and collaborating
technologies, including MOOC-like approaches, to reduce cost and increase
impact. The model for the second generation of Chautauqua short courses to be
developed through this project will serve as a resource for the implementation
of a comprehensive professional development strategy for higher education
faculty into the future. Faculty who are from underrepresented groups or who are
teaching in programs with significant enrollment of underrepresented students
are being targeted for participation, meaning that this project could serve to
broaden participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;