* 1323876
* Participatory Mapping and Landscape among an Indigenous Population
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Michael Heckenberger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 109,819.00

Michael Heckenberger and Stephanie Alemán of the University of Florida will
conduct participatory mapping using differential GPS (dGPS) and GIS of
historical landscapes and collaborative research on local knowledge about areas
of historical occupations and land-use among indigenous communities. The
research will take place among the Amerindian (Lokono) communities in two study
areas in the Berbice and Demerera River areas of Guyana. The research builds on
previous research supported by NSF Archaeology, which initiated participatory
mapping of pre-Columbian and historical archaeological features of the
landscape. These features are well known to local communities and reveal the
rich cultural heritage of these Amerindian communities, including a dynamic
history of interaction with European colonists and imported African peoples.
Several major episodes of pre-Columbian landscape modification have been
defined, including mid-Holocene villages and late Holocene settled
agriculturalists, with earthen agricultural mounds and associated managed
wetlands and forest islands. These occupations at their maximal expression in
pre-contact and earliest colonial occupations represent the maximal expression
of production and settlement networks and are clearly the cultural antecedents
of historical Lokono peoples. Historical sites are known from the early 16th
century and include several major episodes, including divergent trajectories of
missionized Demerera River community and Berbice plantation communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through participatory mapping of these settlements and
focused study with specialists on local histories, general ecology and ethno-
botanical knowledge, the latter portion of this rich history will be explored,
including local knowledge and contemporary land-use of pre-Columbian settlement
sites and production landscapes, notably agricultural areas, managed wetlands
and forest islands. The project expands participatory research on local
knowledge related to the archaeological landscape related to indigenous oral
history, contemporary land-use and ethnobotany. All studies will be conducted
with indigenous para-technicians with the primary objective of creating geo-
spatial data on the Lokono historical landscape from multiple spatio-temporal
scales that will be incorporated in project GIS. The project design and outcomes
will be discussed during initial training workshop and entrance and exit group
forums of research participants and local community leaders, including
interviews to gauge changing perceptions and knowledge domains (knowledge maps).
The project also involves synergistic activities with project co-director George
Simon, a professor at the University of Guyana and Lokono, under the auspices of
the Guyana Ministry of Culture and Walter Roth Museum. Results of the project
will have important implications for indigenous cultural heritage in the region
and sustainable land-use based on historical patterns.