* 1323705
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Study of the Social Ecology of Health Knowledge and Risk
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Jason DeCaro, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 16,827.00

Doctoral student Martina Thomas, supervised by Dr. Jason A. DeCaro, will use
cultural consensus, consonance, and ecocultural theories to investigate the
social ecology of HIV risk knowledge and behavior. Using mixed qualitative and
quantitative ethnographic methods, this project investigates how adolescents'
"multiple worlds," modeled through ecocultural theory, contribute to variation
in HIV risk knowledge and behavior, and what features of these multiple worlds
contribute to poor health outcomes or to greater resiliency. Multiple worlds are
bounded areas, such as families, schools, or neighborhoods, where cultural
meaning and behavior familiar to the insiders of each world can be identified.
The researchers posit that variation in HIV risk knowledge and behavior will be
associated with social integration, social support, HIV risk perception, and the
goals, expectations, and values identified across the multiple worlds occupied
by adolescents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's sample draws from African
American teens living in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, an ideal location for this study.
Alabama has among the lowest rates of condom use among high school students.
African Americans represented 26 percent of the state's population, but 64
percent of reported HIV infections in 2011. Risk is high among girls living
under adverse economic conditions, due to lack of resources, gender inequality,
partner concurrency, and inconsistent condom use. Female youth living in
disadvantaged communities will be observed and interviewed for this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major contribution of the project will be to describe
how socio-cultural influences contribute to HIV risk knowledge and how knowledge
is converted to practice in adolescence. This study will provide insights to
modify HIV/AIDS interventions, by addressing gaps in knowledge of HIV risk and
gaining access to potential cultural brokers that girls view as important
sources of help in reaching their goals. In this way, the project will assist
health and social science researchers in understanding how to reduce risk
behaviors and decrease new HIV infections.