* 1323470
* Enhancing STEM Education with Research-Based Environmental Experiments: A Multi-Institution, Cross-Curricular, and Cross-Disciplinary Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* David Karpovich, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 565,000.00

This project is creating a network of partner institutions to transform
undergraduate chemistry and biology courses by implementing environmental,
research-based experiments both across the disciplines and vertically through
the curricula, such that students consider a variety of viewpoints to address
environmental challenges. The collaboration includes research-intensive Central
Michigan University, the predominantly undergraduate Saginaw Valley State
University, and the community college Delta College, and leverages existing
research partnerships between faculty and regional community partners such as
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and the Bay County Health
Department. Through their research projects, students at the three institutions
contribute to their communities by providing environmental quality data for
local water and soil resources. The goals of the project are to 1) increase
interest and skills of students in chemistry and biology, 2) increase real-world
relevancy in courses, 3) determine the effects of the vertical curricula and
across-discipline design on student outcomes, 4) enhance a two-year community
college program by fostering student interactions with four-year institutions,
5) improve undergraduate environmental, chemical, and toxicology research by
additional instrumentation and training where emphasis will be placed on
teaching students proper sampling methodology and standard analytical
techniques, 6) increase data and environmental information for the surrounding
communities and areas, and 7) provide a transferable model for other
institutions wishing to similarly transform their curricula by creating
collaborative networks of institutions. Project evaluators are examining the
extent to which these goals are achieved, as well as the facilitating and
impeding factors for effective transfer of this model to other institutions.