* 1323881
* The Incorporation of Minorities in Canada and the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Prema Kurien, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 65,811.00

SES-1323881&lt;br/&gt;Prema Kurien&lt;br/&gt;Syracuse
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to incorporation and
social movement theories by examining the reasons for the differential
mobilization of religious minorities in Canada and the United States. Different
religious minority groups may have broadly similar patterns of migration to the
two countries and have close ties with their compatriots across the border, but
yet manifest divergent social profiles within and between Canada and the United
States. Dominant paradigms of social incorporation emphasize the opportunity
structure of the host country or the characteristics of groups in explaining
differences in involvement. However, neither paradigm can satisfactorily explain
both inter-country differences between the mobilization of varying religious
groups in Canada and the United States and the intra-country differences between
the public visibility and activism of the two groups. This research also aims to
uncover the factors that influence the form that mobilization takes, whether it
is "ethnic," "racial," or "religious." It will examine how different opportunity
structures (both national and local) and differences in the characteristics of
the groups shape how they frame their grievances and mobilize. This project will
be conducted in Toronto, Vancouver, New York/New Jersey, and Northern
California, and will include interviews, analyses of information about the
organizations, and media coverage of the groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will reveal the factors shaping the very
different patterns of activism and integration of immigrant groups from
religious minority backgrounds. These groups in the United States and Canada
comprise a large and politically active population that is non-white and largely
non-Christian. An understanding of the political mobilization patterns of these
individuals will help policy makers and members of the wider society to develop
an appreciation for the concerns of many of the new ethnic groups that are
becoming established in North America. It is also important for members of new
ethno-religious groups to understand what types of organizations and activities
are effective in helping them achieve a stake in their countries and shape
policies.