* 1323030
* Pathways: Collaborative Research: iSWOOP--Interpreters and Scientists Working On-Site at Our Parks
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Martha Merson, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 04/30/2018
* USD 205,021.00

National Parks are full of interesting and unusual STEM features which often
intrigue visitors whose questions are answered by park personnel. In addition to
the natural features, there are often researchers in the parks gathering data
and conducting experiments. Park personnel are not apprised of these studies yet
are often questioned about them. This collaborative project's goals are to
derive a mechanism to educate the park personnel so they can respond to the
visitor's inquiries. Collaborators include the National Park Service (NPS),
TERC, Winston-Salem State University, and the park personnel at Carlsbad Caverns
National Park.

The plan is to work through the park interpreters who are employees of NPS and
often are the voice for explaining the park's natural features. For this
project, the interpreters and researchers will collaborate on the explanations
of the science and TERC will work with the interpreters on interacting or
educating the public visitors on the research. This is a pilot study to
determine how best to bridge the scientists and their research to the park
visitors. Evaluation on all elements in this study will be done by Char
Associates and the Institute for Mathematics and Science Education at New Mexico
State University.

The results of this study are to determine the issues in explaining the research
to the park interpreters and thence to the park visitors. If successful, it is
anticipated that a model will be developed in collaboration with the NPS for use
in other National Parks.