* 1323160
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Analysis of Transitional Justice Method and Theory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Jaymelee Kim, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 13,406.00

University of Tennessee doctoral candidate, Jaymelee Kim, under the supervision
of Dr. Tricia Redeker Hepner, will conduct an ethnographic analysis of the use
of transitional justice method and theory. The researcher hypothesizes that
there is a relationship between perceived efficacy of transitional justice
mechanisms and current indigenous rights-related issues. Methods include semi-
structured and informal interviews as well as participation observation.

Research sites include Vancouver, British Columbia; Winnipeg, Manitoba; Toronto,
Ontario; and Red Deer, Alberta. From 1874-1996, indigenous people of Canada
reported suffering from forced assimilation, sexual abuse, and physical abuse in
government and church administrated boarding schools; the Canadian government
began to actively address these concerns in 2006 with the negotiation of the
Indian Residential School Settlement Agreement. The agreement outlines
transitional justice mechanisms typically employed in countries undergoing
political changes in which historically disadvantaged groups gain degrees of
political autonomy. Using transitional justice theory and based on data gathered
from Vancouver, British Columbia and the lower mainland, the research presented
here focuses on the similarities and differences in goals, perceptions of
transitional justice efficacy, and the relationship between past and current
human rights grievances of indigenous people. The findings of this project will
contribute to critical anthropological discussions about the meaning of justice
and reconciliation, specifically in a non-transitioning society that struggles
with a legacy of institutionalized discrimination. The research will illuminate
how human rights discourse is interpreted by government officials, indigenous
peoples, and transitional justice facilitators. Such contextual analyses of
transitional justice processes are especially critical due to their increasing
use in North American contexts (i.e. the Maine Tribal-State Truth and
Reconciliation Commission). This research also funds the education of a female
doctoral student in the sciences.