* 1323974
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Reform of China's Household Registration System
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Melanie Manion, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2015
* USD 17,640.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project asks the question: given the challenges
to providing social welfare, why do some non-democratic local governments expand
welfare provision while others do not? The project will examine how incentives
for national and international economic competitiveness interact with local
political conditions and the resulting impact on social welfare in the world's
largest non-democracy. The research addresses issues that affect domestic
policy-making and the foundations of political stability in
China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to social welfare in China is dependent on
household registration status. For the last fifty years, the household
registration system has divided every city's population into two classes: those
with access and those without. The national government began a national campaign
in 2003 to make the system more equitable, but some local governments, which
fund social welfare, resisted. Local governments prefer not to distribute
welfare to a greater number of the urban population because this allows them to
keep wages low and maintain China's comparative labor advantage. Competition
across Chinese localities for economic investment leads to expansion in social
welfare, potentially increasing wages and urban-rural integration for China's
lowest paid workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reforms to China's welfare system may
dramatically reduce China's low-wage labor pool, increasing the costs of
production, thereby increasing the cost of China's cheap exports. This impacts
U.S. economic interests in two ways. First, the reforms could increase the costs
of China's exports, greatly increasing costs to China's trading partners.
Second, reforms aim to increase China's competitiveness for investment,
suggesting a new and changing environment for American investors. Better
understanding China's domestic politics is important for US security interests
as well. Only in-depth, informed fieldwork will illuminate the true consequences
of reforms for China's global competitiveness. The research design combines
qualitative case studies with statistical analysis of an original, large-N
dataset of all China's municipalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
intellectual merit is linked to three critical areas. First, it expands
understanding of social welfare regimes by exploring a new welfare regime in an
authoritarian setting. Globally, social welfare states are under pressure to
limit welfare benefits so as to advance economic interests; this is even more
likely in developing, authoritarian settings. Second, this research will enhance
understanding of the relationship between labor market manipulation and social
welfare. Finally, this research will expand understanding of the meaning of
citizenship and the rights of citizens in an important developing, authoritarian
country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include several
contributions. Findings from this research will be presented at conferences,
data collected will be made publicly available, and two graduate research
assistants with specialization in legal studies will be trained in qualitative
data collection.