* 1323461
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Access to Transportation and Outcomes for Women on Probation and Parole
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Miriam Northcutt Bohmert, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2014
* USD 23,456.00

This research will explore transportation difficulties among women on probation
and parole. Theory about what works in reducing re-offense rates indicates that
offenders must be carefully screened to identify their needs so they can be
referred to programming that is appropriately matched to them in terms of
intensity (e.g., intensive programming for high-risk offenders) and type (e.g.,
substance abuse treatment for substance abusers). However, to date, correctional
practitioners have not had an instrument to assess transportation deprivation.
Therefore, the project will create a measurement instrument for transportation
deprivation, discover strategies women use to overcome deprivation, and
determine, to what extent lack of transportation is related to re-offending. The
project will analyze survey data, in-depth interview information, and official
records. Survey data will discover women's levels of transportation access and
will be used to generate a measurement instrument. In-depth interview
information will be collected from a subsample of women to explain strategies
women use to overcome low levels of transportation access. Official records will
reveal whether, as a result of transportation deprivation, women violate
supervision rules or are re-arrested or re-convicted within 12 months after
parole or probation supervision begins. Results are expected to lead to better
criminal justice practitioner assessment of clients' transportation needs and
inform needs for additional services (e.g., bus tokens, telephone reporting).
Findings are relevant to non-offender groups who share some of the same needs as
women offenders, such as low-income or multiply disadvantaged individuals, who
must access goods and services, search for jobs, care for others or attend to
physical and mental health needs.