* 1323713
* Full-Scale Development: "Citizen SciGirls" Transmedia and Research to Encourage Girls in STEM
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Karen Peterson, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,774,862.00

This integrated research and implementation project would advance the
understanding of how interconnected transmedia platforms build children's
motivation to take part in Citizen Science and contributes to girl's science
self-identify. This project would deepen the engagement of girl's in Citizen
Science projects by leveraging the success of SciGirls, the transmedia TV and
web series, as well as other NSF investments in citizen science evaluation
methods and instruments.

Project deliverables include 6 Citizen SciGirls TV programs for PBS broadcast
and online streaming; Spanish translations; a mobile citizen science app; a
SciGirls web portal for each featured Citizen Science project; activity guides
and outreach. Project partners include the National Girls Collaborative Project
(4-H, Girls, Inc., and Girl Scouts among others) that will conduct national
outreach, and AAAS that will develop the open source SciGirls app.

The research component will build on the NSF funded DEVISE project adapting the
Citizen Science research instruments for use with younger audiences. Research
questions include: Does audience identification with media characters influence
participation in Citizen Science Projects? Does watching Citizen SciGirls
programs influence development of science identity among girls? What role do
demographic factors (ethnicity /age/gender) have in influencing learning
outcomes and participation in Citizen Science projects? The formative evaluation
will apply iterative small-group studies of the transmedia deliverables in order
to improve the user experience and learning outcomes. The summative evaluation
will focus on in-depth observational, non-experimental studies of selected
groups of girls in afterschool settings.

The reach of the project will be extensive via PBS with a projected broadcast
coverage of 90% of TV households and a million unique online users of the games
and apps. Projected learning outcomes include girl's increased knowledge and
interest in science and the environment, their skills of science inquiry, and
behavior change resulting from participation in Citizen Science projects.