* 1323457
* ASME 2013 2nd Global  Congress on Nanoengineering for Medicine &amp; Biology
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Markus Buehler, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 01/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides support for young researchers to attend the ASME 2013
International Congress on NanoEngineering for Medicine and Biology (NEMB 2013)
in Boston, Feb. 4-6, 2013. The general goal for NEMB 2013 is to bring
together&lt;br/&gt;leading experts in biology, medicine, nanomaterials, and
engineering so as to review experimental methods, synthetic methods, results,
models, computations, analyses and innovative methodologies for quantifying and
treating medical disorders using engineering approaches. These are emerging
areas that are of greatest importance not only for mechanics and materials but
also for engineering and science in general, and for the development of new
technologies in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of engineering
and biology with a strong focus in medicine will be a hallmark of the planned
event. We will actively involve a large community of participants, and provide
an exciting forum to exemplify the intellectual merit of mechanics of
materials&lt;br/&gt;in the solution of pressing problems in biology and
medicine. Specific research areas to be covered include manufacturing and
materials for nanomedicine, biology and nanoengineering, nanotechnology and
public health, bioinspired materials and structures, and the application of
mechanics principles to detect and treat cancer. Key intellectual questions
include multiscale coupling of mechanical systems, linking chemical to continuum
mechanical concepts, or the mechanics of adhesion and in the context of
nanoparticles for cancer treatment, such as cell uptake. These are emerging
areas of mechanics that will receive considerable attention through this event.
This award will specifically enable support for student participants, student
awards (oral and poster presentations), and networking opportunities for young
researchers.