* 1323699
* Collaborative Research: Video Resource for Professional Development of University Physics Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2018
* Stamatis Vokos, Seattle Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 10/31/2018
* USD 437,087.00

Researchers at Seattle Pacific University are creating a Video Resource for
Professional Development of University Physics Educators that is based on
compelling classroom video of best-practices university physics instruction and
are disseminating the Resource for professional development of university
physics educators, including four-year university faculty, two-year-college
faculty, graduate teaching assistants, and undergraduate learning assistants.
This resource creation and dissemination is occurring in tandem with needs
analysis for the various populations, so that as the researchers learn how best
to serve, for example, two-year-college faculty, iterative improvements to the
resource will reflect that understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The video
workshops produced for this project provide structured opportunities for physics
educators to examine critical moments in real university classrooms. The Video
Resource offers users a view of other institutions' transformed courses,
supporting and expanding the home institution's vision of its own instructional
improvement. The project showcases a variety of exemplary instructional formats
including Tutorials in Introductory Physics, Modeling Instruction, Peer
Instruction, and Open Source Tutorials, expanding on the success of a prior
project aimed at undergraduate learning
assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination is a major activity in this
project and is taking place primarily through the American Physical Society, the
American Association of Physics Teachers, and online at the Physics Education
Research User's Guide. This project facilitates the implementation of
instructional strategies that reflect advances in what is known about teaching
and learning, improving physics education for a broad group of undergraduates -
including at two-year colleges, where many underrepresented minorities and women
experience their first physics and science courses and make critical career
choices.