* 1323776
* Techbridge Broad Implementation: An Innovative Model to Inspire Girls in STEM Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Linda Kekelis, Techbridge
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,728,161.00

Techbridge has proposed a broad implementation project that will scale up a
tested multi-faceted model that increases girls' interest in STEM careers. The
objectives of this project are to increase girls' engineering, technology, and
science skills and career interests; build STEM capacity and sustainability
across communities; enhance STEM and career exploration for underrepresented
girls and their families; and advance research on the scale-up, sustainability,
and impact of the model with career exploration. The Techbridge approach is
grounded in Eccles' expectancy value model, and helps bridge critical junctures
as girls transition from elementary to middle school and middle school to high
school, immersing participants in a network of peers and supportive adults.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techbridge targets girls in grades 5-12 with a model that
includes five components: a previously tested and evaluated curriculum, career
exploration, professional development for staff and teachers, family engagement,
and dissemination. The inquiry-based curriculum introduces electrical
engineering and computer science through engaging, hands-on units on Cars and
Engines, Green Design, and Electrical Engineering. The Techbridge model will be
enhanced to include a central repository for curriculum and support materials,
electronic girl-driven career exploration resources, an online learning
community and video tools for staff, and customized family guides. Project
deliverables include the dissemination of the enhanced model to three cities, 24
school sites and teachers, 2,000 girls, and over 600 role models. A
supplementary research component will study the broad implementation of the
Techbridge model by examining the fidelity of implementation and the program's
impact on girls' STEM engagement and learning. The research questions are as
follows: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To what extent and how do new program sites
demonstrate adherence to the Techbridge program model?&lt;br/&gt;2. Do new sites
experience similar or increased participant responsiveness to Techbridge
programming with regard to scientific learning outcomes, career awareness,
attitude and interest in engineering? &lt;br/&gt;3. How are changes experienced
by girls sustained over time, if at all?&lt;br/&gt;4. To what extent and how do
new sites balance instilling the Techbridge essentials, those critical
components Techbridge identifies as essential for success, with the need for
local adaptation and ownership of the program?&lt;br/&gt;5. Given the potential
for customization in local communities, do new sites maintain programmatic
quality of delivery experienced at the original site? If so, what are elements
essential to success regarding quality delivery?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mixed-
methods study will include document analysis, embedded assessments, participant
survey scales, and observations. Qualitative data methods include interviews
with teachers, role models, staff and focus groups with girls. A project
evaluation will also be conducted which investigates project outcomes for
participants (girls, teachers, role models, and families) and fidelity of the
implementation and enhancements at expansion sites, using a quasi-experimental
approach. Career and learning outcomes for girls will be determined using
embedded assessments, portfolios, surveys, school data, and previously validated
instruments such as the Career Interest Questionnaire and the Modified Attitudes
towards Science Inventory. The Managing Complex Change model is used as a
framework for the project evaluation for the purpose of examining factors
related to the effectiveness of scaling. The dissemination of research and
evaluation findings will be achieved through the use of publications, blogs,
social media, and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that this
project will broaden the participation of Hispanic, African-American, and
English language learner girls, build capacity for STEM programming and
sustainability at the dissemination sites, and disseminate findings to over 1
million educators, researchers, and community members. Broader impacts include
contributing to the field's understanding of how virtual role models and field
trips can engage young women, increase corporate advocacy, and engage
participants in research and dissemination efforts.