* 1323820
* OCE-PRF: How larval behavior and microbes govern the assembly of Caribbean coral communities
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* NONE NONE, Marhaver                Kristen        L
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2015
* USD 190,000.00

During dispersal, larvae of many marine species benefit from the richly
detailed, site-specific navigational information provided to them by microbes
(Bacteria and Archaea) in the water column and on surfaces. On the benthos,
microbial communities may stress settling larvae and increase mortality. This
threat is reduced if a species can evolve to detect cues from high-mortality
environments and navigate away from them. Previous work by the PI using a
spawning Caribbean coral species demonstrated that coral reef microbial
communities affect both larval settlement and survival; larvae exposed to water
collected near conspecific adult corals suffered higher mortality and lower
settlement rates. This species may have evolved to detect and avoid the microbes
near conspecific adults, due to the increased risk of mortality from host-
specific pathogens. Could this be a general phenomenon governing the assembly of
coral communities? Under current NSF funding, the PI has also isolated and
identified the first cultured bacteria that induce larval settlement in a
Caribbean coral species.

The proposed project will be conducted at CARMABI Foundation Research Station in
Curacao with sponsoring scientist Dr. Mark Vermeij. The PI will use swimming-
stage coral larvae of multiple species in laboratory and field experiments to
investigate how microbial community heterogeneity on coral reefs provides
information to settling corals.

Intellectual Merit: Coral reefs provide humans with billions of dollars in goods
and services each year through fisheries, tourism, and cultural value, yet they
are massively threatened by human activity. As adult corals die at increasing
rates, the persistence of the world's coral reefs will depend increasingly on
successful recruitment by juvenile corals. This study will therefore advance
knowledge of a crucial behavior in an ecologically significant group of marine
organisms while testing the generality of a novel ecological hypothesis: that
coral larvae have evolved to use microbial communities as navigational
information to detect conspecifics. Products will include new knowledge about
coral recruitment patterns and specific knowledge about bacteria that induce
settlement.

Broader Impacts : Reef health: Settlement-inducing bacterial strains will be
provided to reef restoration groups in the Caribbean, thus increasing the rate
at which they can raise, settle, and outplant juvenile corals to speed the
recovery of degraded reefs.

Training and broadening participation: For students in underrepresented groups
to successfully compete for Ph.D. programs and funding, access to mentorship,
research training, and fieldwork experiences are critical. Yet these
opportunities are often limited to students who can afford to volunteer or pay
out-of-pocket. To address this problem, the project will bring two to three U.S.
undergrad/Master's students from underrepresented groups to the study site in
Curacao each year for their first hands-on training in reef ecology and field
research.

Communication: Research results will be shared across Curacao through public
lectures, news interviews, and via CARMABI's nature education program, which
reaches 14,000 Curacaoan schoolchildren yearly. Beyond Curacao, the PI will
continue to pursue creative communication projects. As a TED Global Fellow, she
will produce an animated segment about biodiversity in collaboration with TED-Ed
and give a TED Talk specifically about promoting diversity in ocean science. TED
is a nonprofit devoted to sharing ideas and bringing people together from
technology, entertainment, and design (www.ted.com).

This postdoctoral fellowship is managed by the Division of Ocean Sciences and
funded by the International Science and Engineering Section of the Office of
International and Integrative Activities.