* 1323743
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstructing Rights: New Transnational Governance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Sally Merry, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2015
* USD 25,100.00

This study will evaluate civil society's role in participatory governance and
its implications for rights claims, strategies, and worldviews as related to the
regulation of agrarian markets and food. The expansion of the global food market
coupled with rising food prices over the past two decades have occasioned claims
concerning how regulation should proceed both domestically and internationally.
Food policy institutions on multiple scales have adopted new institutional
structures to include input from multiple constituencies. In the United States,
municipal, regional, and state governments have developed food policy councils
comprised of the multiple stakeholders of the food system. This emerging form of
"multi-stakeholder" or "new" governance is part of a broader regulatory reform
that has also been adopted by transnational food policy institutions. This study
asks how participation in these new forms of lawmaking leads constituents to
reconfigure and reimagine rights-based claims within new sites of governance and
ultimately transforms the politics of human rights. To answer this question,
this ethnographic project will analyze participation in food policy councils,
domestic and transnational networks, as well as global sites of food policy
regulation through participant observation and social network analysis. It
contributes to scholarship in anthropology and socio-legal studies by
empirically examining the efficacy of new forms of regulation the emergence of a
new transnational legal culture. The project will be important to policymakers
and citizens with interests in governance in multiple sites with many
stakeholders