* 1323469
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Comparative Assessment for Chemistry with or without Standardized Testing
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* April Zenisky, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 386,417.00

In response to an increasing need for faculty members and departments to perform
more thorough assessments of student learning, this project is conducting
research on and developing tools to perform assessments of student learning in
undergraduate chemistry courses. The overarching goal of the project is to
provide chemistry instructors access to data warehouses of student performance
on chemistry test items that can be queried to compare the performance of their
students to the performance of the entire population in the database. This work
is leveraging long-standing capacity in comparative assessment within chemistry
education, as provided through norm-referenced examinations produced by the
American Chemical Society Examinations Institute, with software developers,
whose expertise led to the creation of the Online Web-based Learning (OWL)
system used by 200,000 students of chemistry.

Intellectual Merit: Conducting psychometric research and developing semi-
automated methods for instructors to align test items to a content criterion
template are facilitating significant progress in both chemistry education and
psychometrics. Specific project activities include producing an anchoring
concepts content map (ACCM) for the entire undergraduate chemistry curriculum,
creating a portal that allows chemistry instructors to connect and dynamically
align their own test items to the ACCM and establishing a mechanism for
instructors to compare the performances of their own students on their locally-
written test items with national data sets of student performance. Developing
the requisite software tools advances understanding in several key areas, such
as architecture for test item meta tags, efficiency of test data warehousing,
user-friendly query tools for assessment development and effectual data
organization and visualization in assessment outcomes reports for users.

Broader Impacts: This work is developing practical tools for chemistry
instructors from all institution types to improve their marshaling of evidence
with regard to student learning in chemistry. As the database of student
performance on assessments grows, data will permit for more complete and
meaningful comparisons of the efficacy of curricular and pedagogical reforms.
Outcomes from this project can be used to inform science education research
across all disciplines.