* 1323452
* AAAS Science &amp; Technology Policy Fellowships at NSF, 9/1/2013 - 8/31/2016
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Cynthia Robinson, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Leah Nichols
* 08/31/2018
* USD 14,059,766.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) will continue its collaboration in providing early and
mid-career scientists and engineers with opportunities for professional
development and public service via the AAAS Science and Technology Fellowship
Program. Annually, Fellows are selected competitively and placed in offices
throughout NSF, working on projects of mutual interest to the Fellow and the
host directorate or office. By providing insight into the decision-making
process, and learning about current issues affecting the scientific and
engineering enterprise, Fellows will discover how NSF funds science, while
providing scientific, engineering and educational input on issues relating to
NSF's mission support of basic science and engineering research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fellows will work with staff involved in planning,
development and oversight of agency programs in all fields of fundamental
research. Assignments may involve significant interagency, congressional or
international activity, as well as involvement with the National Science Board,
NSF's policy-setting body. The program includes an orientation on executive
branch and congressional operations, as well as a yearlong seminar program on
matters involving science, technology and public policy.