* 1323225
* Urban Microbial Community Dynamics: A Classroom Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* Theodore Muth, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 593,322.00

The project expands on a TUES 1 supported project, Authentic Research
Experiences in Microbiology (AREM), a classroom laboratory approach, which
showed that students involved in a research-based microbiology laboratory course
(compared to those in a traditional laboratory course) are less likely to fail
the course, show increased confidence in interpreting data, a greater
appreciation for scientific research, and are more likely to advance to
graduate/professional training. AREM has been institutionalized at Brooklyn
College and over 400 students have participated. With this next phase of AREM,
faculty from ten 4-yr colleges and four 2-yr colleges of CUNY have committed to
introducing similar projects into their introductory biology laboratory courses.
The original project engaged undergraduates in studying the urban microbial
community. Basic protocols for determining the types of bacteria present in a
swab sample from an urban site such as a subway station have been established.
Procedures for analysis, including PCR amplification and sequencing of the 16S
rRNA gene, have been established. Funds support faculty training workshops
(including technical support for new faculty and inter-campus communication),
protocol development and data display. Bioinformatics training is being
facilitated by Brad Goodner through the MGAN program, with potential follow-up
using Genome Solver, facilitated by Anne Rosenwald; this strategy leverages
existing resources. A postdoctoral associate with experience in genomics and
bioinformatics is working with students and faculty, developing their
understandings of the advantages and limitations of the processes used and
helping to insure: rigor in gathering and preparing samples and high-quality
analysis of the data generated. An assessment plan has been developed by outside
evaluators to measure the efficacy of the research experiences as a way to
improve critical thinking and problem solving skills is included in the
proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: While there is wide spread
agreement on the importance of engaging undergraduates in research, it is not
easy to identify projects that can be utilized with large numbers of students.
With TUES-I support, the PI has demonstrated that genomic/metagenomic
investigation of the urban microbiome is a research project that can be used
successfully. By recruiting his colleagues at other CUNY campuses to join in,
the PI is in position to transform the biology major system-wide to one that
incorporates research thinking. Similar course adoptions could follow nation-
wide, analogous to the successful dissemination of the HHMI sponsored and
supported Hatfull Phage Hunters project and others of this
type.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The City University of New York
System has a high percentage of students from groups currrently underrepresented
in the STEM workforce that would benefit from participation in this program. The
PIs are actively engaged in dissemination through participation in ASMCUE, CUR,
CUREnet, Genome Solver and GCAT-SEEK. A STEM Support Network is also planned to
include faculty and students to share research and exchange
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded jointly by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
support Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education.