* 1323484
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Unsteady Earth: Predicting Nature's Uncertainties in Post 3.11 Japan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Hugh Raffles, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2015
* USD 8,230.00

This research will investigate earthquake knowledge in one of the most
seismically active areas of the world. But even in a place where tremors are an
everyday occurrence, a recent massive quake came as a stark reminder of the
tremendous capabilities of earthquakes to surprise, to undo previous
assumptions, and to destroy and remake worlds. The failure of seismologists to
predict this large quake has added fuel to long-standing international debates
over the possibilities and limits of seismological knowledge.

Using ethnographic and historical research methods, this study explores the
uncertainty surrounding earthquakes, which has made seismology into a field that
is remarkably, if at times begrudgingly, open to unconventional explanations,
methods, and types of evidence. This project also considers how people
understand earthquakes not only through science, but also through folklore,
history, spirituality, public education, popular culture, and observations of
strange weather and animal behavior. Centrally, the project inquires into how
the physical instability of the earth might compel and reconfigure practices of
observing, sensing, and knowing nature itself. This effort will significantly
contribute to anthropological studies of science, the environment, and human-
nature relations, which rarely attend closely to geophysical activity and how it
permeates everyday life. By drawing attention to earthquake science as a
situational, shifting amalgam of knowledge traditions, rather than a singular,
coherent body of expertise, this project can provide insights that will be
helpful for both preparedness and recovery efforts. Funding this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.