* 1323615
* Full Scale Development:  Global Soundscapes! The Big Data, Big Screens, Open Ears Project
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Daniel Shepardson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,997,085.00

The Global Soundscapes! Big Data, Big Screens, Open Ears Project uses the new
science of soundscape ecology to design a variety of informal science learning
experiences that engage participants through acoustic discovery Soundscape
ecology is an interdisciplinary science that studies how humans relate to place
through sound and how humans influence the environment through the alteration of
natural sound composition.

The project includes:

(1) an interface to the NSF-funded Global Sustainable Soundscapes Network, which
includes 12 universities around the world; (2) sound-based learning experiences
targeting middle-school students (grades 5-8), visually impaired and urban
students, and the general public; and (3) professional development for informal
science educators.

Project educational components include:

- the first interactive, sound-based digital theater experience; - hands-on Your
Ecosystem Listening Labs (YELLS), a 1-2 day program for school classes and out-
of school groups; - a soundscape database that will assist researchers in
developing a soundscape Big Database; and - iListen, a virtual online portal for
learning and discovery about soundscape.

The project team includes Purdue-based researchers involved in soundscape and
other ecological research; Foxfire Interactive, an award-winning educational
media company; science museum partners with digital theaters; the National
Audubon Society and its national network of field stations; the Perkins School
for the Blind; and Multimedia Research (as the external evaluator).