* 1323797
* Using Science Academies (USA) Project
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Edwin Obergfell, Imperial Valley Regional Occupational Program
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 250,000.00

Using STEM America (USA) is a two-year Pathways project designed to examine the
feasibility of using informal STEM learning opportunities to improve science
literacy among English Language Learner (ELL) students in Imperial County,
California. Project partners include the Rueben H. Fleet Science Center and the
University of California, San Diego (UCSD). The project's goals are to support
teachers in the development of informal science education opportunities for
English learners, partner with students in grades 7-12 to create activities and
exhibits, deliver student-produced products to community members, and sustain
and disseminate the activities through the development of web-based teacher
tools. The teachers will work with informal science education experts, STEM
professionals, and undergraduate students to develop and implement the program
lessons with their 7-12 grade students. The activities and exhibits designed for
community audiences will be used in the Imperial Valley Discovery Zone, slated
for completion in fall 2013. Special emphasis will be placed on understanding
English scientific word frames and science content specific vocabulary to help
ELL students express complex scientific concepts in English.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project deliverables in this pilot project include a
comprehensive teacher professional development strategy, student-developed
informal science activities and exhibits, a project website, and multiple
teacher resources (lesson plans, how-to guides, training materials, and social
networking tools). Teachers will receive 45 hours of professional development
during the summer with an additional 20 hours of support provided during the
school year. UCSD's Jacob's School of Engineering will provide training on solar
energy micro-grids using a micro-grid observatory to be located in Imperial
Valley. English language development training will be provided by the University
of California's Professional Development Institute (UCPDI) and address the role
of language objectives in scientific conceptual knowledge and language
development; using science and language to improve classroom
questioning/discussion; and teaching academic language to English learners. The
informal science education component of the training provided by the Fleet
Science Center will address topics such as questioning strategies, scientific
reasoning frameworks, communicating science to public audiences, and learning
"high level" science content using hands-on approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project design builds on research which supports an active learning approach
that mirrors scientific practice and is one of the strengths of informal science
learning environments. The question to be addressed by the USA Project is: "Can
informal STEM activities with embedded English Language development strategies
assist English learner students to increase their English language competency
and their interest in STEM subjects?" The PI seeks to identify the impact that
teachers have on guiding students in inquiry-based informal STEM education,
evaluate the academic outcomes for students, and measure changes in community
interest, understanding, and attitudes towards STEM and STEM occupations. The
USA Project is designed to reach approximately 200 underserved students and will
promote the participation of at least 400 additional students, parents, and
other rural community members. It is anticipated that this project will result
in the development of a model for teacher-led informal STEM education, increased
STEM learning opportunities for the community, and the development of a network
of educational institutions that helps to bridge formal and informal STEM
learning and learning environments.