* 1323101
* Incorporating Modeling into Upper-division Physics Labs
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Noah Finkelstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 599,920.00

There has been considerable research on how students gain conceptual knowledge
in introductory physics courses, including some work in first-year lab courses.
Systematic studies and research-based transformations of upper-division lab
courses were, until recently, nearly non-existent. Although very little physics
education research (PER) has been done on these lab courses, the skills they aim
to teach are cited by faculty as critical for students' success in graduate
school or other research-related endeavors.

The project team's recent work on a small project has begun to address this area
of undergraduate education. The outcomes of that work include research-based
materials, assessments, curricula, teaching guides, and a transformation
process. One major theme has been using modeling to engage students in
quantitative thinking around sophisticated physics ideas in the University of
Colorado's Advanced Lab class.

This project has three interconnected components that build on initial work. The
first component applies and expands the research on integrating modeling in
upper-division lab courses to: finish transforming Colorado's Advanced Lab,
partner with manufacturers of educational equipment, develop a new optics course
for a graduate bridging program along with colleagues at the University of Cape
Town, South Africa, and run a workshop on integrating modeling into labs at
variety of institutions. A second component uses the previously developed lab
course transformation process to completely transform Colorado's upper-division
electronics lab and run an Immersion experience for instructors at other
institutions to incorporate a modeling pedagogical approach into their local
labs. A third component creates research-based materials for single-photon lab
experiments and studies how different learning environments impact students'
conceptual understanding and perspectives on quantum mechanics. The goal is to
have the largest possible impact on the experimental education of undergraduate
physics majors.

Intellectual Merit: This project uses a course transformation methodology that
is strongly grounded in research. It advances PER by significantly extending the
limited base of research on how students acquire experimental research skills,
as well as on how best to achieve wide implementation of research-based
curricula at the upper-division level. The project team brings a successful
history of course transformation, assessment and evaluation of laboratory
courses, and research on sustainable and scalable models of reform.

Broader Impacts: This project directly and positively impacts the education of
hundreds of physics majors across the nation and internationally. Students can
develop scientific process skills that better prepare them for undergraduate and
graduate research experiences or research careers. This project also provides
resources for faculty to appropriately adapt material to their local
environments, improving their own pedagogical expertise. Thus, the materials
will be of direct value, relevance and likely significant interest to colleges
and universities in the nation that offer undergraduate physics programs. In
addition, the techniques may influence advanced lab and research preparation in
other disciplines. Ultimately, this project can significantly contribute to the
national mission to develop outstanding, creative, and productive scientists and
engineers.