* 1323275
* Collaborative: Expanding the Use of Online Remote Electron Microscopy in the Classroom to Transform Undergraduate Geoscience Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Ryan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2018
* USD 161,648.00

This collaborative project is examining the remote operation of analytical
instruments, specifically a scanning-electron microscope and electron microprobe
analyzer housed at Florida International University (FIU), to facilitate
inquiry-based approaches to learning in undergraduate geoscience courses. The
effectiveness of remote instrument use is being assessed across different course
levels and audiences at four diverse institutions: FIU, Valencia Community
College, Florida Gulf Coast University, and the University of South Florida.
Faculty at each institution are adapting instrument use to their courses and
students, and using common methods to assess learning gains and changes in
students' attitudes along a novice-to-expert trajectory. Instrument use and
learning assessment at the four partnering institutions is being supplemented by
national-level outreach to engage further partners, using hands-on workshops and
follow-on individual training and consultation for faculty who commit to pilot
use in their own courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
project lies in its well-formulated plan to leverage fixed-location, high-end
analytical instruments to enable authentic research and inquiry within the
undergraduate curriculum at remote institutions. The embedded educational
research addresses important questions of a) how much and what type(s) of remote
instrument-aided inquiry enable targeted student-learning outcomes, b) what
factors determine effectiveness as institution type, curricular level, and
student audiences vary, and c) what challenges exist for widespread propagation
of the approach and how might these be overcome. Broader impacts of the project
include a) the production of insights and practices that promote remote use of
research-grade analytical instrumentation at multiple levels of the
undergraduate curriculum, providing a model that could be used at other research
centers to enable heretofore inaccessible analytical capabilities at a wide
range of undergraduate institutions, b) engagement of a diverse range of
students (from seniors in majors' classes to first-year non-majors in
introductory classes) and institutions (from research universities to community
colleges) in authentic research, a high-impact practice for retaining students
in STEM disciplines, and c) professional development for faculty at the
partnering institutions and beyond, as well as for a postdoctoral scholar and
graduate student engaged in discipline-based educational research.