* 1323916
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Bureaucratic Decisionmaking Concerning Families and Social Services
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Emily Bosk, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 08/31/2016
* USD 14,912.00

Bureaucratic intermediaries sometimes turn to the state to mobilize legal action
on behalf of other people in a non-criminal context. This asks how and under
what conditions, state workers decide to go to the legal system instead of the
social service system in their casework? Based on in-depth interviews with state
workers in multiple locales, this study examines how workers decide to guide
families through state processes. The research design pays particular attention
to how decisions are made in the context of tools designed to guide action in
casework. &lt;br/&gt;This work brings together the concept of legal mobilization
and concepts concerning the significance of quantification in state
decisionmaking, the process by which numbers come to define outcomes and
determine policy in order to produce new knowledge about socio-legal decision-
making. This research seeks to inform policy and practice and more broadly
examines the policy implications of protocols that rely on actuarial risk models
to standardize complex decisions and their outcomes. Research in this area has
the potential to generate findings that will be of interest to scholars across a
wide range of disciplines by connecting work on law and society, intervention
research, social service systems, and the use of actuarial risk models to one
another. Understanding the meaning-making process for these decisions is
critical for clarifying how important policy debates about the utility of
different approaches to social problems play out on the ground.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because this project will be working with state
decisionmakers, it will inform policy by returning the outcomes of the research
to policymakers and caseworkers. In addition, it will contribute to training in
social science methods for both undergraduates and a graduate student.