* 1323426
* Research on learning and teaching at the physics-engineering interface:  Thermodynamics and electronics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* John Thompson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 599,999.00

The goal of this project is to investigate student learning of physics concepts
and topics that are critical to undergraduate physics and engineering programs
in thermodynamics and electronics (including electric circuits). The populations
under investigation include post-introductory students enrolled in both physics
and engineering courses covering similar topics.

The research is: (1) systematically analyzing both the content in these parallel
courses and content overlap across disciplines; (2) conducting in-depth
investigations of student understanding across the disciplines, both before and
after relevant instruction. The work draws extensively upon existing conceptual
questions from both physics education research (PER) and engineering education
research (EER) and is developing new questions informed by the project's ongoing
findings; and (3) drawing upon research results to guide the modification and
testing of existing instructional materials as well as the development of new
materials for use across disciplines. The aim is to compile research-based and
research-validated materials well suited for cross-disciplinary use.

Intellectual Merit : This project expands the interdisciplinary research on
conceptual understanding of two topics central to engineering and physics
education and for which there is a growing body of literature in PER.
Furthermore, this project extends and enhances the in-depth exploration of the
learning of physics concepts and ideas by students beyond the introductory
level, building upon existing research bases in PER and EER and thereby
enhancing the connections between the two education research fields.

The teaching strategies, instructional sequences, and learning tools emphasized
in each discipline are in many ways discipline-specific; however, the basic
content is similar. Thus, through the comparative work, the project is studying
the relationship between learning outcomes and the discipline-specific nature of
instruction. The findings can be valuable for all disciplines engaged in
thermodynamics and electronics education.

Broader Impacts: The project is interdisciplinary and has the potential to
improve the teaching and learning of both physics and engineering broadly. The
careful documentation of differences in the instructional approaches employed,
and measured differences in learning outcomes, can serve as a valuable resource
for instructors, textbook authors, curriculum developers, education researchers,
and governing bodies in both disciplines. This work serves to cross-fertilize
discipline-specific and institution-specific efforts to improve student learning
and strengthen degree programs. These efforts may also contribute to the
development of a more coherent educational experience for undergraduates. The
modified instructional materials arising from this work do not require the
wholesale adoption of entirely new curricula or pedagogies. They may be flexibly
integrated into courses in both disciplines, thereby supporting incremental
course transformations and minimizing the barriers to instructional improvements
through the adoption of research-validated materials. Finally, this research at
the interface between disciplines may also strengthen both education research
communities and increase the overall impact of such research on STEM
instruction.