* 1323240
* Collaborative: TUES: Software Defined Radio Laboratory Platform for Enhancing Undergraduate Communication and Networking Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Bin Wang, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS: Wright State University (Lead) Miami University
Oxford Campus Central State University

PROJECT DESCRIPTION This effort is building on a previous NSF supported CCLI
project "Evolvable wireless laboratory design and implementation for enhancing
undergraduate wireless engineering education", in which the team developed and
demonstrated lower cost, software defined radio (SDR) based laboratories for
three undergraduate courses. The collaborating team is now extending and
expanding the software defined radio based laboratories throughout the
communication and networking curriculum at multiple institutions. The project is
developing a suite of experiments and laboratories for insertion in a sequence
of courses (ranging from freshmen year introductory course - to senior year
elective courses and capstone design projects) that vertically integrates the
SDR-based experiment approach.

The three largest sub-disciplines within electrical and computer engineering
(ECE) are computers, communications and power. Wireless technology requires all
three to be addressed in a related engineering degree program. The recent
availability of inexpensive software radio platforms makes it possible to create
a hands-on educational experience for all ECE undergrads. The team is producing
a scalable and transferable model for redesigning undergraduate electrical
engineering and computer science courses to include lab-based learning
opportunities for students in more classes.

The project is evaluating and comparing the teaching effectiveness of the SDR
approach to that of traditional hardware equipment approach. The SDR approach
and laboratory suite are being implemented and institutionalized at the three
participating institutions - Wright State University, Miami University (a mostly
undergraduate serving institution), and Central State University (an HBCU) - to
study the potential for enhancing student learning and adaptation by other
institutions.

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE The project is positively impacting STEM education in the
state of Ohio. It is also helping recruit high school students into STEM fields
and benefiting a diverse population of students. The participation of Central
State University (a HBCU) is helping to recruit and train minority students and
serving as an example for other minority institutions in the nation. The
cutting-edge technology on which the proposed course lab development is
relatively inexpensive; while the software used is GNU software radio, which is
free and has a large supporting community.

The project materials and the results of evaluation & assessment are being
broadly disseminated and made freely available via a course website,
publications, and potential books. Results from the effort are informing the
development of a national model for wireless communication & networking courses.
The project is helping to develop and produce a workforce with the skills
necessary to meet the societal demand of the new wave of wireless IT.