* 1323754
* Southwest Native Lands Integrated Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Octaviana Trujillo, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 08/31/2018
* USD 582,059.00

An Arizona Tribal Council member is 3 credits short of graduating from Northern
Arizona University (NAU), and he is not alone. This project teaches math and
science courses to Native American and other social science students who have
high failure rates in foundational college math and lab science courses. Working
in partnership with Coconino Community College and Tohono O'odham Community
College, NAU will test an alternative to traditional teaching methods by
integrating a block of four courses: math, environmental science, Native
cultures, and Indigenous environmental justice. The content of these courses
will be integrated into a series of locally-based, problem-based lesson plans
relevant to the students' communities. For example, students will analyze the
impact of forest fires on land use, watershed and stream restoration within the
context of Native American cultures and economies. Instructors from the three
institutions, local Native elders, and a pedagogical expert will develop
lessons. Based on extensive assessment data, the course will be taught twice,
revised and the results disseminated though conferences, a website, and a series
of academic papers. The intent is to increase the number of college graduates
from a vastly under-represented group, and increase math and science competency
for all non-STEM majors. The broader impacts of the program include developing a
model that can be transferred to secondary and K-12 institutions, and other
under-represented groups, since Native Americans are not the only group that may
benefit from this innovative pedagogy.