* 1323834
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grants: An Anthropological Examination of Algorithmic Recommendation System Design
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* William Maurer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 25,200.00

The Co-PI, Nicholas Seaver, under the supervision of the PI, William Maurer,
will explore the factors that influence the design of algorithmic recommendation
systems. The researcher asks how algorithmic classification is influenced by
sociocultural, legal, and economic contexts, as well as how the cultural
theories of engineers are formed and operationalized in code. This project seeks
to answer these questions through a case study in music recommendation, one of
the more active research and development areas in algorithmic recommender
systems. In particular, it investigates how the designers of recommender systems
mediate between ideas about the formalized, quantitative nature of algorithms
and the subjective, "cultural" nature of preference. As domains once thought to
be ineffably human become more entwined with logics of computation,
anthropologists are uniquely positioned to consider how these tensions are
defined, mediated, and resolved, particularly within expert knowledge
communities which build specific resolutions into widely influential technical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be collected through ethnographic
fieldwork at several academic and industry sites in the US, where techniques for
representing data and producing recommendations are developed and implemented.
This fieldwork includes participant-observation and in-depth, semi-structured
interviews with engineers, researchers, managers and interns involved in the
production of these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research
will contribute to public and academic debates about the functions and effects
of algorithmic filtering, as well as to the anthropological understanding of
computation, work, and classificatory practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project contributes to the training of a graduate student in anthropology. The
findings will inform the design of new algorithmic systems by helping engineers
be cognizant of the cultural paradigms they build into technical
infrastructures.