* 1323671
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Elections, Electoral Fraud and Political Conflicts in Authoritarian Regimes
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Masaaki Higashijima, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2015
* USD 17,624.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013).

The project explores the determinants of electoral manipulation and post-
electoral political conflict in dictatorships, focusing on countries in Central
Asia, an area of the world that has been critical for US national security
interests. Most modern autocracies hold elections even though political
competition is severely limited. While recent research on authoritarian politics
begins to illuminate various functions of authoritarian elections, it is unclear
how dictators decide the degree of electoral fraud to perpetrate and
circumstances producing post-electoral protests and leadership change.

The intellectual merit of the project is associated with its development of
theoretical and analytical approaches to authoritarian elections and their
aftermaths. Modeling both benefits and costs of holding relatively free and fair
elections in dictatorships, the project constructs a theory of authoritarian
elections and derives testable hypotheses to explain variation in electoral
fraud and political conflict in authoritarian regimes. To rigorously test the
theoretical propositions, the project uses a mixed methods approach, including
statistical investigations of cross-national datasets and analyses of interviews
and original quantitative data obtained in the course of fieldwork in Kazakhstan
and Kyrgyzstan.

This study will contribute to studies of authoritarian politics by focusing on
the importance of a dilemma that dictators face at elections: The more fair and
free elections are, the more credible election results become to convey regime
strength. More fair and free elections, however, make it more difficult for
dictators to achieve a landslide victory, which may result in revealing the
weakness of dictators and hence contribute to post-electoral conflict, such as
coups and popular uprisings. Previous studies have not taken into account this
tradeoff between the certainty of winning big and the credibility of election
results, despite the fact that fraud and conflict are thought to be heavily
affected by how strategically dictators deal with this electoral dilemma.
Shedding light on the balance of power between the dictator and elites in
authoritarian rule, this project explores the way in which dictators cope with
this dilemma and consequently when dictators can use authoritarian elections to
achieve regime stability. The theory establishes a paradoxical hypothesis that
stronger dictators rely less on election fraud. The theory also predicts that
when dictators fail to match the level of election fraud with their de facto
power balance with elites, elections trigger political turnover and popular
protests.

The broader impacts are especially connected to the project's contributions to
policy-makers, democratization, and development. Given the increasing phenomenon
of electoral autocracies and prevailing international norms of election
monitoring practices, policymakers might be tempted to conclude that forcing
dictators to introduce free and fair elections via sanctions is an effective
strategy to promote democratization. The project, however, suggests that
realities might be more nuanced. If international policymakers are ignorant of
the balance of power in dictatorship, imposed competitive elections might either
become a source of conflict after elections or legitimate strong, dictatorial
leaders through such "liberalized" elections. The theoretical and empirical
contributions of the project will improve our understanding of authoritarian
politics, thereby helping the United States as well as international
organizations develop more effective strategies to democratize authoritarian
countries without suffering serious violent conflict. More specifically, making
sense of the electoral dilemma and the strategic nature of authoritarian
leaders, we would be able to know the conditions under which international
assistance and sanctions will be more likely to lead to democratic, peaceful
society in developing countries. Knowing such conditions would be obviously
important to the US, which national security and economic interests in the world
are both significantly influenced by the pervasiveness of democracy and
political stability in other countries.