* 1323945
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community and Individual Responses to Ex-Offender Reentry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Jamie Fader, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,340.00

Little is known about the effects of sex-offender legislation on communities and
offenders. This research begins to fill this gap through a street-level
ethnography of the communities and circumstances in which sex offenders live
following release from prison. The co-principal investigator will conduct in-
depth field research in the community over a period of nine months, including
observations and unstructured interviews.

This project will contribute to research on sex offenders and sex offender
legislation by simultaneously examining a community adjusting to the presence of
sex offenders, as well as studying ex-offenders' reentry experiences. Findings
will shed light on sex-offender reentry, experiences of individuals living on
the margins of society, stigmas regarding sex offenders, and discourse about the
role of welfare and the criminal justice system.

The broader impact of the project is enhanced knowledge of how government policy
and other forces affect marginalized populations. This project will be
disseminated as a richly detailed book as well as scholarly articles and
conference presentations. Educational benefits of these products include their
use as teaching tools in sociology, criminal justice, public policy, and
ethnographic methodology. They will also be made available to policy makers and
may enhance discussion about the intersections of criminal justice policy and
social inequality.