* 1323280
* Supporting a Community's Information Education Needs:  Confidence and Empowerment in STEM (SCIENCES) Program
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Alejandro Grajal, Chicago Zoological Society
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,927,002.00

The Chicago Zoological Society (CZS) in collaboration with Eden Place Nature
Center, the Fuller Park Community Corporation, and the University of Illinois at
Chicago (UIC) will implement the SCIENCES Program, Supporting a Community's
Informal Education Needs: Confidence and Empowerment in STEM. The primary goals
of this Full Scale Development project are to broaden access to and
participation in environmental science, strengthen partnerships between CZS,
Eden Place, and UIC, and gain insights into the 'ecosystemic' learning model
which promotes scientific literacy and agency in the community. The project
targets a low-resource community with a minority audience while the secondary
audience is informal science learning organizations and researchers who will
advance research in informal learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical
framework for the project design draws on conservation psychology, informal
science learning, civic ecology education, and urban science education to create
an ecosystematic, geographically centered approach. The deliverables include
research, curriculum, and engaging hands-on programs for youth, families,
adults, and teachers, reaching both in-school and out-of-school audiences, in
addition to the SCIENCES Implementation Network. Three potential curriculum
themes to be explored are water conservation and protection, pollinators for
healthy ecosystems, and community resilience to climate change. The SCIENCES
project offers a comprehensive suite of engaging programs for community
audiences. For example, the year-long Zoo Adventure Passport (ZAP) program for
families includes hands-on experiments and field trips, while project-based
learning experiences enable teens to create wetlands, design interpretive
signage, and develop associated public programming. School-based programs
include professional development for teachers on the Great Lakes ecosystem and
invasive species. Existing programs that have been previously evaluated and
demonstrated to show learning impacts will be adapted and modified to meet the
goals of the ecosystemic learning model by providing multiple learning
opportunities. New learning resources will also be created to support the
content themes and provide continuity. The result will be a comprehensive
approach that ensures deep community engagement by individuals, families, and
organizations, with cohesiveness provided by the overarching content themes
which broaden access to STEM learning resources and leverages
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes both a research and
evaluation plan. The primary research question to be addressed is: How does a
large informal science learning institution work with a community-based
organization to support environmental scientific literacy and agency at all
levels of the community? A sociocultural framework will be used for this mixed-
methods case study research. Study participants include community leaders,
youth, parents, teachers, and staff from Eden Place. The case study sample will
include 20 focal individuals drawn from the participant groups and approximately
300 survey participants. Case study data will be triangulated with evaluation
data and analyzed using a grounded theory approach. By examining changes from
the baseline following the implementation of the community programs, the
findings may provide insight on agency and science literacy among community
members. The comprehensive, mixed-methods evaluation plan employs a quasi-
experimental design and incorporates front-end, formative, and summative
evaluation components. The evaluation questions address the quality of the
processes and products, access to environmental science learning opportunities,
environmental science literacy, sustainability, and barriers to implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An extensive dissemination plan is proposed with a dual
emphasis on meeting stakeholders' needs at multiple levels. The evaluation and
research teams will emphasize publication in peer reviewed journals and
presentations at conferences for informal science education professionals.
Findings will be shared with the Fuller Park community stakeholders using
creative methods such as one-page research briefs written in layperson's
language, videos, and recorded interviews with participants. The local project
Advisory Board will also be actively involved in the dissemination of findings
to community constituents. The SCIENCES National Amplification Network will be
created and work collaboratively with the American Association of Zoos and
Aquariums and the Metropolitan Green Spaces Alliance to disseminate the model.
Collectively, the activities and deliverables outlined in this proposal will
advance the discovery of sustainable models of community-based learning while
the research will advance the understanding of informal learning support for
science literacy and agency.