* 1323033
* TUES: Collaborative Research: A Student-Centered Organic Laboratory Curriculum Featuring Microwave-Assisted Organic Synthesis (MAOS)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Julie Pigza, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 171,000.00

This project is taking advantage of the previously-untapped synergy between
extremely rapid microwave-assisted organic synthesis (MAOS) techniques and new
pedagogical approaches to develop and evaluate a student-centered instructional
approach for the sophomore-level organic laboratory. With the laboratory time
gained through the use of MAOS, students now use a laboratory period for
experimental design, analysis, debriefing, troubleshooting, and optimization,
allowing for inquiry cycles that are both reflective of typical scientific
practice and effective in promoting desirable cognitive outcomes. This approach
has transformed organic laboratory instruction at Allegheny College, St. Mary's
College, and Queensborough Community College, shifting the focus from
verification to experimental design and collaborative construction of knowledge.
Laboratory modules being developed and refined include an array of content
designed for easy adoption and implementation, including student lab companion
materials, pre-lab activities, and case studies; reagent and instrument prep
sheets; instructor's guides; spectra of relevant compounds; and assessment
rubrics. The project team is evaluating student thinking during lab, content
learning, and attitudes toward science associated with the new instructional
approach via analyses of pre- and post-treatment survey responses, classroom
observations, student and faculty interviews, and student laboratory reports.