* 1323210
* Broadening the impact and evaluating the effectiveness of randomization-based curricula for introductory statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2019
* Dennis Pearl, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 01/31/2019
* USD 579,995.00

This PI team is working on two complementary fronts to increase the adoption of
a new randomization-based curricula for introductory statistics that emphasizes:
i) the core logic of inference using randomization-based methods alongside an
intuitive, cyclical, active-learning pedagogy, and ii) the overall process of
statistical investigations, from asking questions and collecting data through
making inferences and drawing conclusions. The first front involves: a)
conducting a series of twelve 1-4 day professional development workshops, and b)
developing and supporting an online learning community to provide on-going
support beyond the workshops. An important aspect of the intellectual merit of
the project lies in the second front which involves the evaluation of widespread
transferability of the model curriculum and research to deepen understanding of
students' attitudes, conceptual understanding, and learning trajectories within
the curriculum. Together with the workshop participants, developers, and other
faculty, the team is gathering a large and diverse set of attitudinal and
conceptual assessment data from over 3000 students at a variety of institutions.
In-depth qualitative and quantitative assessments of students' developmental
learning trajectories on key concepts are being carried out. The project is
exercising broader impacts not only through its planned workshops, but also
through coordination of its efforts through the Consortium for the Advancement
of Undergraduate Statistics Education (CAUSE), which serves as the primary hub
of activity for transformational efforts in statistics education.