* 1323839
* OCE-PRF: Quantifying the ecological role of pre-contact aquaculture in Pacific Northwest indigenous societies
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Marco Hatch, hatch                   Marco
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2016
* USD 190,000.00

Overview: In this project, the fellow seeks to document the cultural and
ecological context of ancient marine resource management systems in Heiltsuk
First Nation traditional territory, on the Central Coast of British Columbia,
Canada. The fellow will quantify the ecological impacts of creating a clam
garden - human-made rock terraces in the intertidal. Research involves
monitoring the physical environment (temperature, salinity, nutrients) and
growth rates of clams within and out of extant clam gardens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will be concurrently hosted by Simon
Fraser University (SFU) with Drs. Anne Salomon and Dana Lepofsky and at the
Northwest Indian College (NWIC) with Dave Oreiro (Director of the National
Indian Center for Marine Environmental Research and Education at Northwest
Indian College). Northwest Indian College will be the primary host organization.
These two organizations both provide unique and necessary resources. SFU is home
to the Hakai network and has carefully cultivated collaborative efforts between
First Nations, archaeologists, and ecologists. NWIC will provide access to new
research facilities, dedicated to culturally relevant marine ecology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Ancient clam gardens have been
identified from Washington to Alaska, spanning multiple cultures and
oceanographic conditions. This research focuses on a geographic region of rich
culture and clam garden density, Bella Bella, British Columbia, Canada. In this
research project, the fellow will assess the ecological impacts of clam gardens
to pursue the following research objectives: (1) test the role of clam gardens
on growth rates of two species both locally and along a latitudinal gradient,
(2) quantify the level of recruitment in and out of clam gardens for the same
two species, and (3) quantify how clam gardens alter physical environmental
variables. Concurrent with this ecological study, collaborators (Dana Lepofsky
(SFU) and Elroy White (Heiltsuk)), will investigate the antiquity and cultural
relevance of clam gardens in the traditional Heiltsuk territory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research involves the participation
of American Indians in marine science and combines traditional ecological
knowledge and Western ways of knowing to broaden participation of American
Indian students at a tribal college. Combining traditional ecological knowledge
and Western ways of knowing, without placing one over the other, is an effective
way to engage American Indian students. The majority of laboratory work will be
carried out at the Northwest Indian College in Bellingham, Washington. This will
allow American Indian students to be directly involved with all stages of
research and form student-driven hypotheses nested within the larger project.
Students will have access to the study material and multiple opportunities to
travel to field sites to gain hands-on experience working with the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This postdoctoral fellowship is supported by the
Division of Ocean Sciences and by the International Science and Engineering
Section of the Office of International and Integrative Activities.