* 1323635
* Collaborative Research: Implementation and Evaluation of a Sustainable Computer-Based Tutoring System for Introductory Linear Circuit Analysis
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Jennifer Ross, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 59,250.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS: Arizona State University (ASU - Lead) University of
Virginia (UVA) University of Notre Dame (ND) University of the Pacific (UOP)
Colorado State University (CSU)

PROJECT DESCRIPTION This project is developing and evaluating a computer-aided
tutoring system to support the teaching of elementary linear circuit analysis.
It is expanding a prototype system to cover topics in a traditional two-semester
linear circuits course. The system can generate circuit problems with random
topologies and element values for DC, steady-state AC, and transient circuits;
allowing students to study concepts related to Fourier analysis, Laplace
transforms, Bode plots, and three-phase circuits. Problem solutions are produced
using a variety of special pedagogical features, including exercises designed to
correct common student misconceptions. The system accepts a rich variety of
inputs such as equations, re-drawn circuit diagrams, waveform sketches, matrix
equations, as well as conventional numerical and multiple-choice answers.

The web-based system is being employed and evaluated in a variety of ways in
linear circuit classes at ASU, UVA, ND, and UOP. Dr. Daniel Robinson (at CSU) is
conducting rigorous evaluation and analysis of the resulting qualitative and
quantitative student learning data collected at these institutions. Through
testing the software system in a variety of public and private schools, the team
is demonstrating that the system can provide rapid feedback to instructors and
enhance student learning - in areas that students have the most difficulty.

BROADER SIGNIFICANCE The project is directly impacting more than 4300 students
and having a significant effect on engineering education, since many engineering
students in various disciplines take circuits courses. It is also expected that
the system will be highly suitable for incorporation into massive open on-line
courses (MOOCs) addressing this subject area. Student engagement is being
increased through the use of interactive exercises that provide rapid feedback
to students at each step of a problem. The team is also developing a tutorial
authoring interface and execution engine that allows tutorial writers (e.g.,
instructors) to design more effective tutoring sequences by using the features
of the circuit generation and solution modules. The approach is adaptable to
other subject areas in electrical engineering, as well as other engineering
disciplines. Some of the simpler tutorials and modules on basic circuit
properties are being made available to high school students and the general
public via a website designed for that purpose.