* 1323149
* Origins, Dynamics, and Consequences of Community Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Kenneth Andrews, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 128,627.00

SES-1323149&lt;br/&gt;Kenneth Andrews&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina-
Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines the dynamics and
consequences of local campaigns to desegregate public accommodations in the U.S.
South from 1960 to 1964. Many Southern cities experienced substantial
desegregation of lunch counters, hotels, theaters and other establishments prior
to the 1964 Civil Rights Act, but many others did not. Why do some social
movements succeed while others fail to bring about community changes? This
enduring puzzle has gained considerable attention in recent years. Some scholars
argue that the characteristics of organizations, leaders, and resources and the
strategies, tactics, and claims that movements use determine its impact. Others
scholars focus on characteristics of the broader community and argue factors
such as powerful allies and weak opposition facilitate movement success.
Meanwhile economic opportunity structure theorists argue that movement impact
depends on whether the costs of protest to businesses outweigh the costs of
conceding. The investigator extends these frameworks by documenting interactions
and sequences within campaigns and the temporal and spatial patterns of impact.
The project will: (1) build a dataset documenting the desegregation campaigns in
approximately 70 Southern cities between 1960 and 1964; and (2) use the dataset
to test and extend prevailing theories of social movement
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research builds on a broader project and prior
NSF support (SES-1060262). The investigator built a dataset on 334 Southern
cities to identify where sustained desegregation campaigns occurred and to
explain the diffusion of protest, the growth of movement organizations, and
lunch counter desegregation campaigns. The NSF Sociology Program is supporting
the first half of this project to code thirty-five cities with desegregation
campaigns. This proposal will complete the larger project by coding thirty-five
additional cities. This additional work will (1) develop a comprehensive
database on all cities that were hubs of civil rights activity; and (2) obtain
data for conducting rigorous tests of competing theories of movement
consequences. By coding secondary historical accounts, the PI is creating
systematic and comparable profiles of campaigns that include measures of
protest, movement organizations and claims, interactions with political
authorities and economic actors, and desegregation
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research findings have the potential to deepen public understanding of the civil
rights movement. The civil rights movement was a key turning point in US
history, but popular understanding hinges on a small number of campaigns. This
study provides a comprehensive database and analysis of these campaigns. To
advance this goal, the project will generate a website to disseminate profiles
of desegregation campaigns useful for schools, libraries, museums, and the
public. In addition, the project will facilitate training and mentorship of
graduate students in historical methods and quantitative data
analysis&lt;br/&gt;.