* 1323060
* Collaborative Research: Neighborhood Knowledge, Selection, and Segregation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kyle Crowder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 13,332.00

SES-1324039 Maria Krysan University of Illinois Chicago

SES-1324024 Michael Bader American University

SES-1323060 Kyle Crowder University of Washington

At its core, this project flows from the idea that in several areas of research
(from racial residential segregation, to the study of neighborhood effects, to
general interests in residential mobility) we know relatively little about how
people end up living where they do. From the standpoint of neighborhood effects
research (that is, understanding how the social context in which you are
embedded shapes your life outcomes) there is the persistent thorny question of
selection: are observed differences in outcomes across neighborhoods due to
differences in neighborhood context, or due to differences in what leads a
person to be in a particular neighborhood in the first place? In the area of
residential segregation, theories of its causes have focused on preferences,
discrimination, and economics but have been largely silent on the residential
search process and how it contributes to segregation. Evident in both areas of
research is that we know relatively little about the process of neighborhood
selection. However, what we do know points to the importance of understanding
people's experiences, knowledge, and perceptions of communities throughout their
metropolitan area. We need to know how people live in cities: which
neighborhoods they access on a regular basis, how they perceive various
neighborhoods in the metropolitan area, where they search for housing when it is
time to move, which areas they know little about and/or avoid, and which factors
determine where they choose to live. Existing data-collection tools are
inadequate for efficiently collecting data on these potentially crucial aspects
of residential selection because they have focused on perceptions of the
neighborhoods in which people do live, and have tracked movements of individuals
across space, but they lack information on perceptions of other potential
residential locations?those not occupied by the respondents. They also do not
answer questions about how those perceptions are shaped by daily experiences,
residential histories, and social networks. The purpose of this project is to
develop an innovative computer-aided survey tool to measure individuals'
perceptions, experiences with, and knowledge of, a large number of communities
and neighborhoods within their larger metropolitan area. The tool, which will
utilize interactive, computer-based mapping features, will be designed for
incorporation into a large-scale survey designed to assess the multifaceted
factors that drive processes of neighborhood choice and maintain residential
segregation by race and ethnicity. This new set of survey tools will permit, for
the first time, the collection of detailed data about how individuals, access,
experience, and perceive large numbers of neighborhoods within their region.
This information, when combined with survey data on individual economic
characteristics, family dynamics, social attitudes, and other factors that shape
residential decision-making will provide the ability to test both traditional
theories of the causes of racial residential segregation and previously
unexplored factors related to knowledge of, experiences in, and perceptions of
communities in the metropolitan area.

Broader Impacts

The social problems at the core of this research proposal?racial inequality in
particular, and the influence of neighborhood conditions on individual outcomes
in general?are of great social significance and concern. Residential segregation
has been shown to have an array of negative consequences for individuals and
communities across a host of outcomes, including health, education, employment,
and exposure to crime. To understand how to address these problems, it is
critical to understand the processes that generate them. Our proposal offers the
development of a set of innovative tools to collect data on previously ignored
facets of these residential selection processes. The topic and project will be
of interest beyond sociology: social scientists across a range of disciplines
are interested in the question of how context, especially neighborhood of
residence, shapes life outcomes. From the standpoint of survey methodology, the
project also promises innovative uses of survey technology in general (use of
laptop/tablet combinations in CAPI), and mapping technology in particular (for
survey measurement, as against the sample management and interviewer assignment
tasks for which it has been used previously).