* 1323728
* OCE-PRF The impact of nitrogen loading and sea level rise on subsurface green house gas cycling and carbon sequestration in coastal salt marsh ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* NONE NONE, Gonneea                 Meagan         E
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 09/30/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Overview: Salt marshes play a significant role in the climate feedback system.
Salt marshes are efficient at carbon burial and emit greenhouse gases. Under
predicted climate change, sea level rise will potentially alter the carbon
burial capacity of these systems. Nutrient loading is an additional external
stressor in these systems which may impact carbon and greenhouse gas cycling. In
this project, the fellow will study the impact of sea level rise and nitrogen
enrichment on subsurface cycling of greenhouse gases and carbon in salt marshes
with Kevin D. Kroeger, PhD at the United States Geological Survey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow plans to install a network of observing wells
within a salt marsh system across nitrogen enrichment and inundation levels, and
collect samples monthly for two years for dissolved carbon and nitrogen. In
addition, she will quantify subsurface production of greenhouse gases in these
salt marsh sediments with an installation of hydrophilic, gas permeable tubing
attached to gas analyzers during the same monthly sampling. Measurements will be
taken of porewater flux both within the salt marsh subsurface and out of the
marsh to determine fluxes of these constituents to receiving estuarine waters
and ultimately the coastal ocean. The study site exists in a sea level rise hot
spot and, therefore, an ideal location to determine how enhanced rates of sea
level rise over the past twenty-five years have changed carbon burial in salt
marshes. Sediment cores will be collected from sites that undergo a range of
nitrogen loadings and seawater inundation levels to synthesize the salt marsh
carbon burial response through time to these two stressors (nutrient enrichment
and sea level rise). Results from this study will further understanding of the
potential climate impacts on the ecosystem services of salt marshes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The earth is faced with a high CO2
future, with potential climate impacts resonating through global coastal
ecosystems via increasing temperatures and rising sea level. Population growth
in coastal regions places added stress on ecosystems via nutrient enrichment.
Salt marshes are regions of high carbon burial, and as such their carbon storage
potential is of interest to both the scientific community and to stakeholders
making decisions about carbon remediation. The direct impact of climate change
on salt marsh ecosystems is unknown, however, potentially significant. In
addition to their ability to store carbon, salt marsh ecosystems also produce
and emit greenhouse gases, such as methane and nitrous oxide. Research results
from this project will help to determine if carbon burial in salt marshes will
be resilient in the face of climate change and if the net impacts of greenhouse
gas emissions will reduce or negate the value of salt marshes as a carbon sink.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is synergistic with a larger
established project evaluating surface greenhouse gas evasion and lateral carbon
fluxes from salt marsh ecosystems across a gradient of nitrogen loading. A key
component of this project is to use collaborative learning to transform the
scientific results into useable products for policy makers and others interested
in the economics of salt marsh ecosystem services. With this framework in place,
the results of this work will be directly linked to coastal policy decisions
regarding salt marshes. In addition, broadening participation educational
opportunities are a significant component of this project. The second field
season will include participation of an undergraduate student from the Woods
Hole Partnership in Education Program. The student will conduct original
research within the framework of this project and attend a national conference
to present the findings of their research. The fellow will also serve as a
lecturer and mentor in the Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve Women
in Science Program throughout the project. This program allows young women in
grades 7-9 to explore science in the context of estuarine research at the
Reserve.