* 1323153
* Class, Network, and Dialect Contact in Raleigh, NC
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Robin Dodsworth, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2018
* USD 250,003.00

Quantitative research about linguistic variation has consistently revealed
linguistic differences between speakers of different socioeconomic classes. For
example, changes "from below" -- those which speakers are not aware of -- are
thought to be led by middle or upper working classes. Yet the social and
linguistic origins of these differences have proven elusive. A promising but
under-utilized area of inquiry about the reasons for class distinctions is the
complex relationship between class and social network. This project uses
interdisciplinary methods to look for network-based explanations for linguistic
differences between social classes, and to explore network methods for the study
of linguistic variation.

In Raleigh, North Carolina, the Southern dialect has been disappearing since the
middle of the 20th century. Sociophonetic analysis of speakers' front vowel
systems reveals that the rapid loss of Southern vowels began at the time of
large-scale migration of white collar Northern speakers to Raleigh. This project
continues an existing corpus of sociolinguistic interviews in the dialect
contact setting of Raleigh, North Carolina. Data collection for the corpus began
in 2008 and has so far resulted in hour-long sociolinguistic interviews with 257
White and African American speakers. The overarching goal in collecting the data
has been to carry out a long-term study of the social dynamics of language
change and dialect contact, with particular attention to the role of
socioeconomic class, social network, and their interaction in producing the
ongoing reversal of the Southern Vowel Shift. The major goals are 1) the
collection of interviews with approximately 50 additional working class
speakers, 2) the continued transcription and automated measurement of vowels in
existing and new sociolinguistic interviews, adding to the 107 speakers for whom
measurements are completed; 3) the collection of additional network data from
some existing speakers; 4) statistical assessment of hypotheses concerning class
and network.

This research project will contribute to the public understanding of ethnic and
regional language diversity in American society. The Raleigh project will be the
basis of an exhibit in the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences which will
introduce museum visitors to acoustic phonetics and dialect geography. Both
undergraduate and graduate students will gain experience and training in data
collection and statistical analysis.