* 1323698
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Complex Dynamics of the Earthquake Recovery of an Ethnic Minority
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Qiaoyun Zhang, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2016
* USD 14,087.00

This research will explore the political, economic and cultural resources,
processes and consequences of state-sponsored, culturally-oriented post-disaster
reconstruction of an ethnic minority. After a devastating earthquake claimed
about 10% of the ethnic population in 2008, many villages not only swiftly
recovered materially, but were made into heritage tourist destinations with
state planning to "restore and develop" their culture. The proposed research
will examine both the state's conception of the ethnic minority through its
policies and projects, and the range of villagers' response to the
reconstruction and negotiation of lives and relationships revealing complexities
and problems of this culturally sensitive recovery project.

The researcher will conduct 10 months of fieldwork. Two more months will be
spent interviewing officials and planners in the capital as well as archival
research into official reconstruction policies and tourism plans. Physical
changes of the villages and statistical data of the reconstruction will be
collected and mapped. Participant observation, interviews, and focus group
discussions will be conducted to understand how villagers differently perceive
and interact with the newly-established living environment and changed
lifestyle. Beliefs, rituals, traditional festivals and official events will be
documented to show the negotiation and representation of emergent and
differential identities. This research is important because it will contribute
to the anthropological study of disaster recovery by examining the interplay of
state-led planning and the core values of an affected ethnic minority. The
knowledge gained will help the research, teaching and awareness of the complex
effects of any recovery project that claims to seek justifiable and sustainable
community development.