* 1323773
* Collaborative Research: Implementation and Evaluation of a Sustainable Computer-Based Tutoring System for Introductory Linear Circuit Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Brian Skromme, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,744.00

PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS: &lt;br/&gt;Arizona State University (ASU -
Lead)&lt;br/&gt;University of Virginia (UVA)&lt;br/&gt;University of Notre Dame
(ND)&lt;br/&gt;University of the Pacific (UOP)&lt;br/&gt;Colorado State
University (CSU)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION
&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing and evaluating a computer-aided tutoring
system to support the teaching of elementary linear circuit analysis. It is
expanding a prototype system to cover topics in a traditional two-semester
linear circuits course. The system can generate circuit problems with random
topologies and element values for DC, steady-state AC, and transient circuits;
allowing students to study concepts related to Fourier analysis, Laplace
transforms, Bode plots, and three-phase circuits. Problem solutions are produced
using a variety of special pedagogical features, including exercises designed to
correct common student misconceptions. The system accepts a rich variety of
inputs such as equations, re-drawn circuit diagrams, waveform sketches, matrix
equations, as well as conventional numerical and multiple-choice answers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The web-based system is being employed and evaluated in a
variety of ways in linear circuit classes at ASU, UVA, ND, and UOP. Dr. Daniel
Robinson (at CSU) is conducting rigorous evaluation and analysis of the
resulting qualitative and quantitative student learning data collected at these
institutions. Through testing the software system in a variety of public and
private schools, the team is demonstrating that the system can provide rapid
feedback to instructors and enhance student learning - in areas that students
have the most difficulty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE
&lt;br/&gt;The project is directly impacting more than 4300 students and having
a significant effect on engineering education, since many engineering students
in various disciplines take circuits courses. It is also expected that the
system will be highly suitable for incorporation into massive open on-line
courses (MOOCs) addressing this subject area. Student engagement is being
increased through the use of interactive exercises that provide rapid feedback
to students at each step of a problem. The team is also developing a tutorial
authoring interface and execution engine that allows tutorial writers (e.g.,
instructors) to design more effective tutoring sequences by using the features
of the circuit generation and solution modules. The approach is adaptable to
other subject areas in electrical engineering, as well as other engineering
disciplines. Some of the simpler tutorials and modules on basic circuit
properties are being made available to high school students and the general
public via a website designed for that purpose.