* 1323787
* Full-Scale Development: Collaborative Research Advancing Informal STEM Learning Through Scientific Alternate Reality Games
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Steven Shumway, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,249,459.00

Full-Scale Development: Collaborative Research Advancing Informal STEM Learning
and Computational Thinking through Scientific Alternate Reality
Games&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brigham Young University and the University of
Maryland, in partnership with the Smithsonian Institution, the Computer History
Museum, and NASA, plus leading game designers, educators, scientists, and
researchers, will conduct research on the design and development of two large-
scale Alternate Reality Games (ARGs) based on deep-time science in astrobiology,
astrophysics, and interplanetary space travel. The project will iteratively
design and test two distinct types of ARGs (closed- and open-ended) to study the
effects of these ARGs on STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ARGs will be
based upon the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), affording learners with
intensive, self-driven, and scaffolded scientific learning and will be aimed at
attracting girls and other groups historically underrepresented in science and
technology. Each ARG will be designed by NASA scientists, educators and
education researchers, and game-based learning experts and will be highly
interactive: engaging learners in collaborative investigations in real and
virtual worlds to collect scientific data, conduct data analysis, and contribute
scientific evidence that will help solve scientific questions within a science-
based narrative derived from real world problems that will develop learners?
computational thinking skills in a collaborative, participatory virtual learning
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining data from web and social media
analytics, player interviews, surveys, and user-generated content, researchers,
and evaluation experts at UXR who will provide an outcomes-based evaluation,
including front-end, formative, remedial, and summative evaluations, will
establish the properties of ARGs that most effectively advance informal STEM
learning outcomes. By comparing open-ended and closed-ended ARGs, the PIs will
be able to assess the relative strengths and weaknesses of two distinct
approaches to Alternate Reality Game design. The project team will test the
hypothesis that open-ended, user-generated content will support inquiry-based
learning, peer-to-peer learning, and life-wide and life-deep learning, while
close-ended, narrative-rich ARGs will support specific transfer of STEM
knowledge, collaboration, and problem solving. To help ensure that the games
appeal to their target audiences, the project team will adopt co-design methods,
enlisting the creative input of participating teens at each stage of the design
process. Supplementary materials and lesson plans developed in close
consultation with teachers, librarians, teens, and external stakeholders will
enable the ARGs to be widely and effectively used as a model in museums,
classrooms, libraries, and after-school programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed ARGs represent a unique environment to test learning principles that
enable players to bridge their learning through transmedia across multiple
contexts and test the effects of collaboration with massive numbers of
concurrent players. As a result, the project should yield insights on how
learning principles can be adopted and re-appropriated for emerging learning
environments, including those that that might be crowd-sourced. The research is
well grounded in the literature and the PIs do an excellent job of mapping ARG
design principles to the pertinent learning science research, providing a clear
sense of the particular affordances of the genre that should lead to new
understandings. The approach has profound implications for the way we might
teach the next generation of students. The ability to mix problem solving and
learning in virtual spaces with experiences and data derived from the physical
world could dramatically change how we understand the role of technology in
education.