* 1323429
* Control of a native and introduced foundation species by marine and terrestrial enemies
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* NONE NONE, Davidson                Timothy        M
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 01/31/2016
* USD 170,000.00

Overview: The morphology and structure of foundation species, such as trees and
coral reefs, are strongly influenced by the animals that inhabit them. Since
foundation species form the integral structure of habitats, changes caused by
animals can elicit cascading effects to the rest of the ecosystem. Red mangroves
are a critical foundation species that thrives in the ecotone between land and
sea; thus, they are affected by a suite of marine and terrestrial herbivores and
structure-modifying species. Damage by these species modifies growth and
fecundity and is responsible for the complex architecture mangroves exhibit.
When a foundation species is introduced without their natural enemies (such as
herbivores, structure modifiers) they may experience enhanced growth, fecundity,
and survivorship. This release from their enemies may explain why some invaders
succeed in a new range. Red mangroves (Rhizophora mangle) were introduced to
Hawaii from their native range (Caribbean) over a century ago. Here they exhibit
rapid growth, high fecundity, and few enemies appear to control them. These
mangroves convert native habitats (e.g. sand-flats, ponds) into dense thickets
causing substantial changes to Hawaiian ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this study, the fellow will (1) quantify the relative effects of different
marine and terrestrial guilds in affecting growth, fecundity, and architecture
of an important foundation species and (2) test a widely cited mechanism for
successful invasions (Enemy Release Hypothesis). This project will use
manipulative and natural experiments replicated across broad geographic ranges
where mangroves are native (Caribbean) and introduced (Hawaiian Islands). The
proposed sponsors, Celia Smith (University of Hawaii Manoa) and Mark Torchin
(Smithsonian), will provide complementary training for the fellow and access to
the logistical framework necessary to complete this project (e.g. Smithsonian
field stations in Florida, Belize, and Panama).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Results from this project will broaden
understanding of how habitat engineering and herbivory alters foundation species
and community ecology and reveal the importance of natural enemies in
controlling growth and architecture of introduced species. This project will
determine how different multi-species assemblages alter the architecture of a
foundation species between native and introduced ranges. This study will also
answer other important questions such as: how do terrestrial species mediate
habitat quality and quantity for marine species? And what is the relative
importance of marine vs. terrestrial species in determining growth and
architecture in foundation species in an ecotone? Finally, this study will test
an important mechanism underpinning successful biological invasions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will broaden the
participation of students from under-represented groups by integrating students
directly in the research plan. Students of diverse backgrounds (79.2% non-
Caucasian descent at University of Hawaii) will receive research training from
seminar courses taught by the fellow. Select students will assist the fellow on
international research trips and in Hawaii to participate in data collections.
The fellow will also work within the former GK-12 framework of University of
Hawaii to develop inquiry based curriculum for K-6 classes. The fellow will
disseminate curriculum and research findings through online resources (STRI
Bioinformatics website), scientific conferences, and through academic
publications. Results from this project will inform management of introduced
species and restoration efforts by revealing where managers could devote pest
control efforts.