* 1323221
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Engagement and Science Identity Through Participation--A Meta-Analysis of Citizen Science Outcomes
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Richard Bonney, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 772,568.00

The Exploring Engagement and Science Identity Through Participation is a
research project that examines the outcomes of various citizen science models
for Public Participation in Scientific Research (PPSR). The investigation
specifically targets citizen science projects that focus on relationships
between science learning and science identity. A mixed-method, meta-analysis
approach will be employed. The two primary goals of the study are to better
understand science learning and science identify within PPSR contexts and to
develop a valid Participant Engagement Metric (PEM) for use within PPSR
contexts. Data will be collected and analyzed from several PPSR projects and
over 4,000 PPSR participants.

The project addresses several research questions:

1. What are the dimensions of PPSR engagement and how can we measure them across
different project models? The research for this question includes approximately
50 interviews of participants in six primary projects representing a range of
PPSR approaches to develop and validate a Participant Engagement Metric (PEM)
that will be constructed from the frequency, duration and intensity of
involvement in key activities. The project uses a constant comparative method of
data analysis (processing of data as they are gathered in order to compare them
with emerging categories. The development of the PEM will be one concrete
outcome of the proposed research.

2. Within and among projects, what is the relationship between participant
engagement and individual learning outcomes? The project uses validated measures
of learning outcomes derived from Learning Science in Informal Environments
(NRC, 2009) and developed for the DEVISE project described below. The six
measures include: Behavior & Stewardship, Skills of Science Inquiry, Knowledge
of the Nature of Science, Interest in Science & the Environment, Efficacy, and
Motivation. The proposed research will look at how engagement affects learning
outcomes, as assessed by these six measures (science interest, efficacy, etc.).

The project conducts participant surveys in the six participating citizen
science projects in addition to several other PPSR projects to test the
relationship of the PEM and other measures of activity involvement to the
learning outcomes measured by the survey instruments developed and validated
through a previous project.

The data analysis begins with univariate summary statistics that will provide an
overview of the basic dataset. Inferential statistics including multiple
regression analysis will be used to test the relationships among the independent
variables (type of PPSR project, demographics), PEM as a mediator variable, and
the dependent variables.

3. How does degree and quality of participation in scientific research develop
and/or reinforce individual science identity?

The project conducts a 3-year longitudinal study using surveys, a series of in-
depth interviews, and on-site observations of 36 participants from the six
primary projects to understand the development of individual science identity
within PPSR environments over time. Quantitative and qualitative data and
findings are triangulated to determine if convergent, inconsistent or
complementary results can be identified.

The project dissemination plans include presenting research in journals,
disseminating research briefs, hosting online forums, and launching various
listserves and online forums at the citizenscience.org website.