* 1323800
* Paradigms in Physics: Representations of Partial Derivatives
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Corinne Manogue, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 649,293.00

This project contributes to the joint work of two ongoing larger projects: The
Paradigms in Physics Project, a complete redesign of the physics major, and the
Vector Calculus Bridge Project, an effort to bridge the gap between the
mathematics and physics of vector calculus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
looks at representations of the quantification of change, particularly partial
derivatives, across many STEM disciplines, with the goal of aiding students in
moving toward the robust and multifaceted understandings typical of STEM
professionals. The project includes strands that (1) explore the ways in which
STEM experts use and represent change; (2) develop and test curricular materials
for middle-division math and physics courses; and (3) establish students initial
and ongoing levels of understanding as they progress through the curricular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is advancing
knowledge within physics and mathematics education as well as across other
science, technology, and engineering fields that engage undergraduates in
learning how to use partial derivatives to model changing quantities in complex
environments. Success in upper-level undergraduate and graduate courses in these
fields requires understanding what partial derivatives are and how to use them.
Drawing upon expertise in mathematics, physics, and education, the team is
tracing learning trajectories from what novice students write, draw, and say
when encountering partial derivatives in upper-level courses through various
representations experts use as they identify and interpret ways that variables
change under different circumstances. Based on such research, the curricular
materials include prompts for encouraging ways to help students become aware of
their own thought processes while transferring their emerging expertise from one
context to another. Led by the PIs of the Paradigms and Bridge projects, the
team includes curriculum developers, education researchers, and recent adopters
of curriculum materials from previous projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project directly impacts mathematics and physics education at the
middle-division undergraduate level by providing classroom-tested curricular
materials and associated instructor resources to the education community through
existing, proven online resources, an activities wiki, and a textbook.
Mathematics materials support learning trajectories in multiple STEM
disciplines, not just mathematics and physics. The addition of the new materials
makes the existing resources easier to adopt by providing more complete
coverage, in line with most common course structures. The project structure
itself provides a model of how to advance STEM education holistically, combining
research and curriculum development. The project includes an influential
national advisory committee and a local interdisciplinary panel of experts drawn
from affiliates in OSUs new Center for Research in Lifelong STEM
Learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team has published 29 papers and 3 books
based on previous grants in this ongoing project. In addition, there is an
ongoing series of faculty workshops to aid faculty in using the materials. The
developments so far have been adopted and adapted in various forms by over 100
faculty at other institutions, and that number is increasing. Curricular
materials produced by this project, including group activities, instructors
materials, and publications, are all openly available on the project web site.