* 1323761
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Citizenship, Property, and Law in the Reintegration of Internally Displaced Persons
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Irina Levin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 18,138.00

Graduate student, Irina Levin, under the supervision Dr. Bruce Grant of New York
University, will explore how law shapes the return process for deported minority
populations. Focusing on a group of Meskhetian Turks in Georgia and Azerbaijan
as its sample this research uses ethnographic methods including participant-
observation, in-depth, semi-structured interviews, and archival and textual
analysis to examine how internally displaced persons (IDPs) experience and
interpret the process of return. The study's central questions are: (1) how
returnees' efforts at reintegration are shaped by their entanglements with
local, national, and international legal orders; (2) what their experiences
suggest for other displaced and stateless peoples across the world. This
research builds on anthropological and interdisciplinary research on law, the
nature of citizenship, and the transformations of postsocialist property to
offer novel anthropological insights to augment our understanding of refugees,
repatriation, and reintegration throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses broad intellectual and logistical questions regarding
displaced people. According to recent estimates from the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees, there are 15.4 million refugees and 27.5 million IDPs. As
displacement has become an increasingly prevalent social, political, and
logistical problem, it has also become an area of theoretical concern for
anthropology and other social science disciplines. In terms both abstract and
acutely practical, we are pressed to ask: Where do such persons belong? How can
they and the countries they come to inhabit be made more secure? Through long-
term ethnographic fieldwork this study sheds light on three domains that play a
crucial role in the return process -- law, citizenship, and property. This study
provides a timely examination of the issues that today's refugees and IDPs will
encounter in the years to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on the
struggles of former deportees as they attempt to become citizens, property
owners, and active participants in the legal and democratic processes in post-
Soviet Georgia, this research will reveal the practical, political, and social
challenges faced by IDPs and international organizations. As such, this research
has the potential to inform our understanding in areas including
democratization, anti-corruption, and the rule of law. Further, the study's
location in two South Caucasus nations will augment our knowledge of this
important but poorly-understood region. By focusing on legislation and its
impact on a vulnerable population, this research seeks to highlight areas of
concern for US and international governmental and non-governmental organizations
engaged with work on all aspects of displacement and its long-term aftermaths,
including return movements, repatriation legislation, and reintegration
programs.