* 1323964
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Investigation of Factors that Create and Mitigate Confirmation Bias in Judgments of Forensic Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Saul Kassin, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 352.00

The forensic sciences have recently been criticized, most notably by the
National Academy of Sciences, due to the alarming frequency of forensic science
errors in known DNA exoneration cases. Empirical data now suggests that
confirmation bias -- i.e., the tendency to interpret new evidence in ways that
validate one's pre-existing beliefs -- can produce such errors. That is to say,
forensic examiners' objectivity and accuracy can be undermined by their a priori
beliefs regarding a suspect's guilt or innocence. The current studies will
enhance our knowledge of factors that exacerbate and mitigate confirmation
biases in judgments of forensic evidence, in hopes of guiding reforms to
minimize the risk of costly miscarriages of justice. In each study, mock
forensic examiners will assist in a simulated criminal investigation by
comparing handwriting samples from the perpetrator and suspect. Study 1 will
test whether mock examiners who are led to believe that the suspect is guilty
will consequently perceive exculpatory handwriting evidence as more
incriminating than those who are not. In addition, Study 1 will explore whether
this bias is exacerbated when the handwriting samples are highly similar and/or
examiners receive simulated negative feedback from police investigators.

Study 2 will provide the first empirical test of "evidence lineups," a
procedural reform often proposed as a means of combating bias, but whose
efficacy remains unknown. Having been led to expect the suspect's guilt,
innocence, or neither, some examiners will receive one handwriting sample each
from the perpetrator and suspect -- a method which some claim is inherently
suggestive of guilt. The remaining examiners will utilize an "evidence lineup,"
which forces them to compare three different suspect samples against the
perpetrator's sample and indicate which, if any, matches it. Study 2 will thus
provide the first empirical data to inform the longstanding debate over the
potential value of evidence lineups.