* 1323677
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Jury Diversity on Deliberation Quality
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Margaret Bull Kovera, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 19,304.00

Juries with two minority group members have higher quality deliberations than do
all-White juries. Does jury diversity per se improve the quality of jury
deliberations or is it merely the inclusion of jurors from underrepresented
groups that improves deliberation quality? The proposed dissertation research
consists of three studies manipulating jury diversity and evidence strength to
examine whether diverse juries make better decisions than homogenous juries. In
each study, mock jurors will watch a trial simulation video (which varies the
strength of the evidence presented at trial), deliberate, and render verdicts,
allowing the PIs to examine whether more diverse juries are better able to
evaluate evidence strength. The three studies vary the method of manipulating
jury diversity. In Study 1, the deliberations of mock juries comprised of all
Hispanic jurors will be compared with the deliberations of juries with a
majority of Hispanic members and two White members to examine whether the
findings of previous research are dependent upon a privileged majority (Whites)
creating the homogenous jury. In Study 2, the deliberations of all-White juries,
all-Black juries, and mixed juries will be coded to evaluate the extent to which
jury diversity influences whether juries engage in more complex reasoning. The
third study will use a minimal groups paradigm to explore whether the impact of
diversity on deliberation quality extends to diversity created through a
characteristic other than race or ethnicity, specifically the distribution of
wealth among jury members. The intellectual merit of this proposal stems from
its investigation of the mechanism by which jury diversity improves jury
deliberations. U.S. courts have repeatedly recognized the importance of the
presence of minority jurors on juries. The proposed research will provide
evidence regarding what types of diversity are necessary to achieve the courts?
goal of improving justice.