* 1323804
* Pathways: Apprenticeships in Sustainability Science and Engineering Design (ASCEND)
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Doris Ash, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 03/31/2017
* USD 289,402.00

The ASCEND research and development project is a collaboration of UC Santa Cruz
(several departments) with area museums, municipal government programs in
vocational training and local businesses that explores the impact of integrating
and comparing two sustainable engineering apprenticeship approaches for at-risk
youth -- design-build and digital-storytelling about the design-build
experiences. It applies and expands into informal STEM education a model that
UCSC has implemented for undergraduates.

Project objectives are: (1) understand how to motivate and prepare at-risk youth
for careers in green technology; (2) learn via a research study whether/how
digital-storytelling can increase youths' proficiency in STEM, content knowledge
and practices; (3) explore how the science museums can be part of a community
network addressing project-based learning and local sustainability efforts.

The project seeks to better coordinate and leverage existing Santa Cruz green
technology and sustainability projects as a basis for preparing at-risk youth
for STEM-based careers in the sustainability/green technology field. The project
intends to provide a model for how museums can work with other organizations (in
this case, municipal wharfs businesses that employ green design) to create
lasting community relationships around sustainable practices and careers. The
feasibility, proof-of-concept study involves approximately 60 at-risk youth, as
well as several local professionals and entrepreneurs, staff and visitors at the
museums, municipal officials, undergraduate students as mentors and university
instructors and researchers in the content domain and in digital storytelling
approaches. Drawing on its findings over the course of the project, the team's
intention is to expand the model conceptually and geographically around
California and the USA.