* 1323006
* CREATE: Cornerstone to Capstone--Integrating a tranformative paradigm for undergraduate Biology education throughout the curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Sally Hoskins, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 395,535.00

C.R.E.A.T.E. (Consider, Read, Elucidate hypotheses, Analyze and interpret data,
and Think of the next Experiment), uses intensive analysis of primary and other
scientific literature to demystify and humanize science. To date, it has been
introduced in numerous upper-level capstone courses and a single introductory
stand alone course. The current CREATE toolkit includes the use of concept maps,
sketching, figure annotation, experimental design, grant panels, and student
email interviews of paper authors. These tools are applied to analysis of
primary or other scientific literature that illuminates key concepts of biology
or the nature of science. This project is investigating how best to deploy
CREATE strategies at initial stages of a curriculum and how best to integrate
CREATE strategies at intermediate levels of a curriculum in traditionally-taught
courses. The PIs are testing a full-semester City College of New York (CCNY)
CREATE course for first-year students in distinct new student cohorts, and
testing the effectiveness of embedding a two-week CREATE module into an
otherwise traditionally-taught Genetics course. They are investigating the
feasibility and effectiveness of interventions at each curricular level, by
assessing students' cognitive and attitudinal gains using a critical thinking
test and a survey of student attitudes/abilities/beliefs. The first-year CCNY
Introduction to Scientific Thinking course is being tested with first-year
students at Hobart and William Smith Colleges and Rowan University. Multi-week
CREATE interventions in Genetics are being developed and tested at all three
campuses. The data is providing insight into the adaptability of this
teaching/learning strategy.

Intellectual Merit: CREATE has been tested previously in full-semester elective
courses for upper-level students and found to lead to gains in critical
thinking, content integration, student self-rated attitudes/abilities, and
maturation of aspects of students' epistemological beliefs about science. This
project explores the potential of the approach to be adapted at a less intense
level and in a wider array of courses.

Broader Impact: The PI is also conducting a series of CREATE faculty development
workshops (supported by NSF 1021443). To date 96 faculty from a wide variety of
community and 4-year colleges and universities have been involved in these
workshops. Many of the graduates from the faculty development project teach at
institutions where options for teaching non-traditionally are limited, making
effective short-term CREATE interventions particularly appealing. Outcomes from
this new CREATE protocol can inform the faculty development project and that
project and the graduates from it can help disseminate outcomes from this new
project to a wide number of faculty from diverse institutions.

This project is being funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to support Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education.