* 1323991
* Sustaining opportunity: reducing discards in fisheries science and math education
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,08/31/2017
* NONE NONE, Woods                   Pamela         J
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2017
* USD 190,000.00

Overview: In this project, a two-pronged approach toward "sustaining
opportunity" is planned for improving fisheries science and mathematical
education in the United States.

The first approach involves an evaluation of a fisheries management strategy
that focuses on the utility of short-term time-area closures and catch-balancing
regulations, both of which are used in Iceland. Two-week area closures are
mandated in Iceland when the percentage of juvenile fish landed is too high.
Catch-balancing regulations allow fishermen to account for quota overages
through trade, between-year transfers, or species transformations. The ability
of these rules to reduce juvenile mortality and maximize long-term profitability
will be analyzed in a theoretical multi-species, age-structured bioeconomic
model that includes "discarding." Discarding refers to tossing overboard fish
resources that are unprofitable because the species or size is illegal or
unmarketable. The model will be parameterized using Icelandic groundfish
fisheries and results will be compared with a parameterization based on the U.S.
Northeast groundfish fishery. Stocks for the same species in each location will
be compared for analysis to determine whether results could change for stocks
with a rebuilding or depleted status.

For the second approach, the opportunity for a free and equitable mathematics
education will be enhanced by supporting a curriculum-based on-line math self-
tutoring tool (Tutor-web). An auxiliary website (Math is All Around Us) will be
developed to challenge graduate students with the task of contextualizing high-
school curricular math problems by using examples from their research or real
life.

This project will be completed at the University of Iceland under the
sponsorship of Dr. Gunnar Stefansson. The fellow will spend up to two months per
calendar year in New England consulting with math educators and fisheries
scientists and managers regarding analysis of Northeast groundfish species.

Intellectual Merit: In this study, the fellow will analyze fisheries management
regulations that are only used extensively in Iceland, and therefore a novel
approach to an old, yet bewildering question: How can fisheries be sustainably
managed? This study builds on recent evaluations of marine protected areas,
theoretical origins of fishery stock temporal variation, and studies that
indicate how the population dynamics of depleted or rebuilding stocks may be
wholly different from those of healthy stocks. This study is also well-timed and
urgent, as severe declines in the Northeast groundfish fisheries are likely to
prompt further evaluation of the current regulations in place. The proposed
website will also contribute to an innovative educational tool that uses
adaptive algorithms.

Broader Impacts: This project will further the theory behind fisheries policy
designs, as well as assist in knowledge transfers between the U.S. and Iceland.
Improvements to the fishing industry resulting from these analyses will benefit
the socioeconomic status of stakeholders and local communities, which are
important for the national economy and cultural significance. Methods for
building social capacity both within the U.S. and internationally are explicitly
built into this proposal through the website project. This will aid in: 1)
development of contextualized curricular math, 2) participation of graduate
students in education, 3) mentoring of high school students by graduate
students, 4) exposure of successful scientists from underrepresented groups, and
5) publicizing of Ocean Science programs and news.

This postdoctoral fellowship is managed by the Division of Ocean Sciences and
funded by the International Science and Engineering Section of the Office of
International and Integrative Activities.