* 1323463
* Collaborative - CS1: Creative Computation in the Context of Art and Visual Media
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Deepak Kumar, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2017
* USD 334,064.00

This project is developing a new context for teaching introductory computing
courses (CS1) using generative art and creative computation, focusing on multi-
institutional adoption and diverse partnerships with high schools. This is a
(re)-design and large-scale adoption effort of the CS1 course materials
developed in a previous TUES-I project, supported by NSF DUE-0942626 and NSF
DUE-0942628 (collaborative: Bryn Mawr College and Southern Methodist
University). Two lead high school partners, James Martin High School (public,
Dallas TX) and Sidwell Friends School (private, Washington, DC), are
participating in the project by testing, adopting, and leading in the
dissemination and adoption efforts among high schools nationally. An exemplar
course is being developed that aligns with both CS AP A and CS Principles
advanced placement initiatives. The project is working toward having the course
adopted and formally assessed at a dozen participating colleges, universities
and high schools nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates
several facets of research and development: rethinking of introductory computing
curricula and updating CS1 with contemporary, diverse examples of computing in a
modern context; integrated components; context-driven text and teaching
materials; formal assessment tools for evaluation; and community building in the
educational domain. Evaluation is being done to assess potential improvement in
student recruitment, retention and interest in computing as a result of a
broader adoption of this new context, particularly of women and non-STEM or
undecided majors, and of the viability of this model for the ongoing redesign of
the AP CS course.