* 1323084
* Passion-Driven Statistics: A multidisciplinary project-based supportive model for statistical reasoning and application
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* David Beveridge, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,995.00

This project team is building on the results of a TUES Type 1 award that created
new learning materials for a project-based course that provides greater access
to introductory statistics for large numbers of students primarily not in STEM-
intensive majors. The approach features training in flexible application of
knowledge, opportunities to analyze data in real world contexts, and education
about statistical concepts through computing. In this Type 2 effort the
principal investigators (PIs) are adapting and fine-tuning the current materials
to add flexibility and seamlessness so that they are usable across a wide array
of institutional settings and easily modified to meet the needs of students with
different levels of preparation, learning styles, and interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in its focus on
the need of students outside of traditional STEM disciplines to have conceptual
and analytical tools at their disposal to grapple with "big data" applications
in their fields of inquiry. Moreover, the initial course materials have been
piloted by nine different instructors and 350 students. Short-term and long-term
learning gains for students are also being assessed at both the transition to
college and post-graduation levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are pursuing
the broader impact of their efforts along two dimensions: first, by implementing
and assessing their project-based model for learning in five partner
institutions including universities, community colleges, and in a small number
of cases, secondary school settings; and second, by conducting summer workshops
for new faculty from varied disciplinary backgrounds to become prepared to teach
using this project-based model.