* 1323963
* The Role of Language in Infant Category Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Vladimir Sloutsky, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* david moore
* 08/31/2017
* USD 704,613.00

One of the central issues in the study of cognition and its development concerns
the impact of language on cognition and the nature of such effects. A variety of
effects have been proposed ranging from facilitation of learning and memory to
changing the ways we perceive and interpret events. In addition, the spoken word
may affect the very core of human intelligence--the ability to generalize and
take knowledge from known to novel situations, including the ability of infants
and young children to learn general categories and use this knowledge for future
learning. Despite the central importance of the problem, much remains unknown.
Most importantly, it is not known how language affects the developing cognition
and how these effects change in the course of development. Do words function as
teaching signals for the developing cognition from early in development? Or do
they become teaching signals as a result of development? The primary goal of
this 3-year-long project is to answer these questions by using a combination of
behavior experimentation and eye tracking analyses, with computational modeling
and model selection. In the initial study, multiple category learning
experiments with 8-to-24-month-olds will be conducted, in which words or other
sounds will accompany categories of different structure. In a second study, two
classes of computational models will be used to simulate the data, one, in which
words are considered part of the input, and another in which words are
considered a teaching signal. Formal model selection procedures will help
determine which mechanism underlying the effects of words is more consistent
with the entire body of data.

Results of this research will advance our understanding of how language affects
cognition early in development, thus contributing to better understanding of
typical cognitive development. The proposed research will also contribute to the
methodological toolkit of developmental research. The investigator will
disseminate the work via conference presentations and journal articles. The
researchers will also undertake outreach and education activities with children
and teachers, involving high school students and lab activities, and an
exposition for children at the Columbus Museum of Science and Industry.