* 1323788
* Collaborative Research: Training Next Generation Faculty and Students to Address the Infrastructure Crisis
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Thomas Szymoniak, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,613.00

This TUES Type 2 project is establishing the Center for Infrastructure
Transformation and Education (CIT-E) as the centerpiece of a community of
practice. The aim is to facilitate the transformation of undergraduate civil and
environmental engineering programs by incorporating infrastructure topics into
their existing curriculum. This project builds upon the sophomore-level courses
and other modules on civil infrastructure developed by the Civil and
Environmental Engineering (CEE) Department of the University of Wisconsin-
Platteville and the Civil Engineering program at West Point Military Academy.
The six collaborating institutions are of varying sizes, student population, and
settings (Arizona State University, New Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology, Norwich University, Portland State University, Rowan University, and
University of Toledo). The project objectives are to: 1) establish and sustain
the Center for Infrastructure Transformation and Education (CIT-E) as the source
for infrastructure education materials that can be continuously improved by a
community of practice, 2) develop educational expertise in infrastructure topics
and in pedagogy in faculty at collaborating institutions, 3) deliver, assess,
and institutionalize infrastructure-themed courses or modules for CEE and other
majors at collaborating institutions, 4) enhance the ability of CEE students to
view components and systems designed in CEE sub-disciplines as integral parts of
the larger infrastructure system, and 5) enhance the ability of CEE students to
view infrastructure challenges from a societal, rather than solely technical,
perspective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs a creative model that
engages collaborating faculty in roles of content creators and module
maintainers of the infrastructure-themed course material to develop and sustain
the community of practice. In addition, a structured plan to facilitate the
adoption and institutionalization of infrastructure curricular material at the
six collaborating institutions, and provide faculty development and support is
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 500 students and fifteen faculty at eight
diverse institutions, including some with large numbers of underrepresented
minority students, are directly impacted by the project activities, increasing
the number of students and faculty with knowledge and expertise in sustainable
infrastructure topics. A community of practice centered on CIT-E and multiple
faculty development workshops is employed to facilitate the dissemination and
adoption of the curricular material and practices developed in this project.