* 1323156
* Elementary Preservice Teachers Mathematics Project Phase II: Developing Faculty Expertise
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Ziv Feldman, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2016
* USD 549,999.00

The Boston University Elementary Preservice Teachers Mathematics (EMP) Project
Phase II builds on the outcomes of the NSF funded EMP project (CCLI #0837349,
2009-2011) and is extending the project to provide enhanced pedagogical support
for faculty who are using the EMP materials with undergraduates. Five
instructional units (30 lessons) for use in undergraduate mathematics content
courses for elementary teachers were developed, tested and revised in Phase I.
The present project has three goals: to investigate the feasibility of
implementing and the resultant impact of three of the EMP instructional units
(fractions, number theory and geometric measurement) in building pre-service
teachers' knowledge of mathematics; to develop accompanying multimedia-based
support materials for instructors focused on how to use discourse and arguments
to build students' knowledge; and to investigate the promise of the multimedia
support materials in terms of instructors' abilities to assist PSTs in
understanding mathematics content for teaching.

Multi-media support materials for faculty (video clips, interactive
presentations, web-based resources) that support a discourse/argumentation
approach to teaching are being developed. The project is employing a research
design that compares groups of faculty and PSTs (Preservice Teachers) at over 20
different institutions on the effects of the three modules with respect to
building undergraduates' mathematical content knowledge for teaching. Different
groups are accessing the instructor support materials that either do or do not
include the multi-media resources. The project is using a research-based design
and builds on prior work. It integrates the knowledge about the beliefs,
attitudes, and mathematical backgrounds of preservice elementary teachers with
an understanding of the needs of K-5 public education in mathematics. The
project contributes to theory and research on the role of specialized content
knowledge and discourse in preservice elementary content courses. Finally, it
produces an innovative model and materials to support faculty in teaching
mathematics courses for elementary education preservice teachers.

The project will contribute to the improvement of mathematics education by
providing materials for teacher preparation programs and by supporting faculty
members to help them implement the materials as designed. The research outcomes
will contribute to the growing body of knowledge about the mathematical
preparation of elementary school teachers. This project provides many faculty
members responsible for preparing elementary teachers (e.g., mathematicians and
teacher educators) with access to a wide array of innovative instructional
materials and directions on how best to use them.