* 1323636
* Collaborative Research: Decomposing Interviewer Variance in Standardized and Conversational Interviewing
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Frauke Kreuter, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 35,849.00

Standardized interviewing procedures require survey interviewers to read
questions as worded and provide only neutral or non-directive probes in response
to questions from survey respondents. Even though many major surveys in the
government, non-profit, and private sectors use standardized interviewing in an
effort to minimize the effects of interviewers on data quality, a substantial
body of research has indicated that interviewers using standardized interviewing
still influence the responses provided by individuals. This variability among
interviewers (or interviewer variance) in the types of survey responses
collected reduces the precision of survey estimates and therefore has direct
cost implications for survey data collection. Conversational interviewing is
known to handle respondent clarification requests in a more effective manner.
Interviewers are trained to read questions as worded initially and then say
whatever is required to help respondents understand the questions. Despite
existing research showing that conversational interviewing produces noticeable
decreases in the measurement error bias of survey estimates, survey researchers
(and government agencies in particular) have been hesitant to employ it in
practice, in part because of increased questionnaire administration time but
also due to the fear of increased interviewer effects on the survey data due to
the conversational style. This research project will compare the interviewer
variance, bias, and mean squared error arising in a variety of survey estimates
from these two face-to-face interviewing techniques. It will decompose the total
interviewer variance introduced by each technique into measurement error
variance (i.e., variance among interviewers in systematic measurement errors)
and nonresponse error variance (i.e., variance among interviewers in the types
of individuals recruited for the survey). To meet these research objectives,
this study will select a large random sample of persons from a unique economic
database that contains known values for selected economic characteristics of
interest. The researchers will assign random subsets of this sample to
professional interviewers who have been randomly assigned to receive training in
one of the two interviewing techniques. The two groups of interviewers will then
administer a face-to-face survey to their assigned subsamples, collecting
information on their economic characteristics. Analyses of the collected data
will employ innovative statistical modeling techniques that enable comparisons
of the interviewer variance, bias, and mean squared error values for a variety
of economic survey estimates across the two groups of interviewers as well as
decompositions of the total interviewer variance in each group into the two
aforementioned sources of variance among interviewers. These analyses will
provide survey researchers with the first empirical evidence of differences in
these two techniques in terms of the overall quality of survey estimates and
will uncover sources of the interviewer effects that can arise when using the
two interviewing styles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a scientific field, survey
methodology, which studies the science of survey data collection, is still
relatively nascent, but billions of dollars in public resources are dedicated to
survey data collection every year. This study will provide survey researchers
with a more complete set of empirical evidence that will enable informed
decisions about the face-to-face interviewing style that will yield survey
estimates with the highest overall quality. The resulting knowledge regarding
which interviewing technique produces higher-quality estimates therefore will
lead to higher-quality information being collected in surveys that employ face-
to-face interviewing and higher-quality decisions being made by policy makers
who use survey data.