* 1323148
* Wind over rock:   Quantifying the feedbacks among wind flow, bedrock erosion, and tectonic uplift
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Paul Kapp, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2018
* USD 328,643.00

The highest rates of erosion of bedrock on Earth are generally thought to
occur&lt;br/&gt;in steep areas subject to the action of large rivers and
glaciers. However, &lt;br/&gt;there are many deserts around the world where wind
and wind-blown sand are the &lt;br/&gt;dominant agents of erosion and where even
relatively flat bedrock landforms can be &lt;br/&gt;eroded as quickly as the
fastest eroding rivers and glacial valleys on Earth. &lt;br/&gt;Relatively
little is known about how wind and wind-blown sand erodes bedrock
and&lt;br/&gt;what variables control the morphology of yardangs, the dominant
landforms created&lt;br/&gt;in such areas. Wind erosion can also influence the
behavior of faults and folds &lt;br/&gt;in the Earth's crust by reducing the
stress caused by topography in areas of high &lt;br/&gt;erosion (i.e. on the
windward side of a slipping fault or growing fold).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further global climate changes will likely lead to more
desertification, making &lt;br/&gt;wind erosion and its impacts on humans (e.g.
reduced air quality) even more &lt;br/&gt;important to understand and predict.
This project will improve our ability to &lt;br/&gt;quantify wind erosion, a
process influencing human health and land sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;The project
includes field areas in southern California and the Qaidam &lt;br/&gt;Basin of
the Tibetan Plateau (in collaboration with Chinese colleagues). We will combine
field work, remote sensing, numerical &lt;br/&gt;modeling, and geochronology to
quantify the interaction between the flow of wind and&lt;br/&gt;wind-blown sand
over topography, the erosion of that topography, and the behavior&lt;br/&gt;of
faults and folds in Earth's crust. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
supported by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program, Tectonics Program,
and NSF's OIIA International Science and Engineering Section.