* 1323055
* Collaborative Project:Energy Sustainability Remote Laboratory (ESRL)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* John Telotte, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 63,632.00

Competence and confidence in using cutting edge technology is an important
element in preparing highly qualified engineers and scientists, while providing
access to the technology for students at a range of institutions is a
significant challenge. This collaborative project by Louisiana State University
&amp; Agricultural and Mechanical College, Florida State University and the
University of Nevada Las Vegas is seeking to make access to sustainable energy
laboratories possible for all engineering students by developing remote, web-
accessible laboratories. Increasing world-wide energy demand coupled with finite
conventional energy resources calls for a portfolio of sustainable energy
alternatives and new technologies. Engineering students would benefit from
learning about sustainable energy systems but it is impractical for all
engineering schools to invest in the complex equipment that such systems entail.
Through this project Louisiana State University, Florida State University, and
the University of Nevada Las Vegas will create laboratories in: cogeneration,
biofuels, and solar photovoltaic systems. These laboratories, and associated
educational products in renewable and advanced energy technologies, will be
formulated in a common fashion and provide real-time data through a two-way web-
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laboratories will be designed for use in
advanced third and fourth year chemical and mechanical engineering courses such
as thermodynamics, heat transfer, and process control. Materials will focus on
student understanding of sustainable energy practices and alternative energy
sources as applications of theoretical principles of engineering science. The
remote laboratories in cogeneration, biofuels, and solar photovoltaic systems
will provide real-time data from industrial and pilot-plant-sized facilities.
The project will include the implementation of an interactive web portal to
disseminate the data, and related background information in energy
sustainability. Students and faculty at participating institutions with have the
opportunity to provide feedback to the site developers. An important benefit of
the remotely-accessible laboratories is the possibility of reducing scheduling
problems that occur when conventional laboratories become oversubscribed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation will focus on the extent to which appropriate
student learning objective are achieved through the remote laboratory format.
The approach to assessing learning objectives involves collecting data in the
form of pre- and post-tests for each laboratory activity, formative assessments
such as quizzes, lab journal entries, problem-solving results, and other
artifacts exemplifying student learning.