* 1323587
* Research: InforMath: Mathematics to Enrich Learning Experiences in Science and Art Museums
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Paul Siboroski, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,517,474.00

This research project establishes a new research center, the InforMath
Collaborative, that brings together university educational researchers and
professionals at art and science museums in San Diego's Balboa Park. The
InforMath Collaborative is investigating and building the capacity of informal
learning institutions to support content and identity learning in mathematics.
Through sustained collaborations that unite research, design, and professional
development, members of the InforMath Collaborative are conducting design-based
research on exhibits and programs that integrate art and science content from
participating museums with the mathematics of topology and projective geometry.

The broader goal of the InforMath Collaborative is to transform cultural
perceptions of mathematics in ways that broaden learners' access to the
discipline. The project aims to develop informal mathematical learning
experiences that make mathematics feel accessible, body-based, creative, and
deeply relevant to a wide array of other knowledge domains, including both art
and science. The project will build and strengthen regional and national
networks of educational professionals who work in informal mathematics learning
and expand the capacity of informal institutions to support engaging,
innovative, content-rich, and culturally transformative mathematical learning
experiences.