* 1323319
* OCE-RIG: The impact of submesoscale processes on oligotrophic carbon cycling and the sensitivity of this interaction to climatically driven changes
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Naomi Levine, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,996.00

Overview: Anthropogenically induced warming has begun to change the global
oceans and has the potential to alter the ocean carbon sink. Future changes in
mixed layer depth and the delivery of nutrients into the surface ocean are
hypothesized to be the primary processes that will impact primary production and
carbon cycling in the ocean. Both of these processes are significantly impacted
by submesoscale physical dynamics (1-10 km). However, current global climate
models used to understand climate sensitivity do not resolve these important
features, and so are missing a fundamental mechanism impacting ocean carbon
cycling. In this project, the PI will develop a novel biogeochemical and
ecosystem model that captures the impact of submesoscale processes on carbon
cycling in a framework that is computationally tractable for large-scale
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Spatially Heterogeneous Dynamic Plankton
(SHiP) model will represent a distribution of resource environments at the
subgridscale and will include five phytoplankton functional groups, as well as
light, nitrogen, and phosphorus limitation on phytoplankton growth. This
research will focus on two oligotrophic sites, the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series
Station (BATS) and the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT). The SHiP model will be
used to explore the impact of the observed submesoscale dynamics captured by the
APEX/ISUS profiling nitrate floats on primary production, species dynamics, and
carbon export flux. A suite of model simulations will also be conducted to
investigate the sensitivity of carbon cycling at BATS and HOT to changes in the
frequency and intensity of submesoscale front formation, such as might occur
under future climate scenarios. Finally, the measurement-driven SHiP simulations
will be compared against an idealized Regional Ocean Modeling System simulation
that explicitly resolves submesoscale
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Submesoscale processes have
been shown to have a significant impact on ocean physics, however, the role that
these processes play in carbon cycling remains unknown. This study will provide
an observation-based analysis of the impact of submesoscale features on
community composition and function in oligotrophic gyres and the sensitivity of
this interaction to climatically driven changes. In addition, this work will
validate a novel approach for mechanistically incorporating the impact of
submesoscale dynamics into coarse-resolution models. This research will provide
a computationally tractable framework for exploring the impact of changes in
climate on global carbon cycling while including the impact of submesoscale
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The investigator and students
associated with this project will collaborate with the Neighborhood Academic
Initiative (NAI) at USC to develop an ocean sciences module including a field
trip on an oceanographic research vessel. The NAI strives to improve high school
graduation and college matriculation rates in the school district surrounding
USC, which serves predominantly Latino/Hispanic and African-American
communities. The module will also expose the students to oceanography, and help
local high school teachers develop an ocean sciences lesson plan to incorporate
into their curriculum.