* 1323852
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Political Stability, Property Rights, and State-Building in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Lauren Honig, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2015
* USD 17,640.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses property rights in developing
countries, an issue critical to political stability. High demand for
agricultural land in international and domestic markets is a critical national
security issue as property rights disputes could lead to conflict. In Sub-
Saharan Africa, where less than 10% of the land has formal state land title,
customary authorities (CAs) maintain a great deal of power in the allocation of
rural land. The rapid increase in large-scale land acquisition is replacing
customary forms of property rights with state-backed property rights, creating
the potential for conflict. The expansion of state authority over land has been
contentious, with protests over "land grabs" and violent state-backed expulsions
of small-scale farmers that threaten political stability. In response to
increased demand from investors for customary land, some CAs comply with state
requests for land while others challenge the state and claim the right to
control community resources. To contribute to the analysis of contemporary
relations between customary authorities and the state, this research seeks to
explain why, when, and how CAs resist or participate in the state's attempts to
move land from customary to state control to support agricultural investment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal is associated with
the advancement of knowledge about the relationship between formal and informal
governance, the collection of data across multiple contexts and the development
of a geo-coded dataset. To analyze this political phenomenon across contexts
within Africa, the research will be conducted in three representative forms of
customary authority systems: in Western Senegal, Eastern Senegal, and Central
Zambia. An original geo-coded dataset of land transfers and customary
authorities in Zambia and Senegal will be built, analyzed, and shared to
contribute new insight into the process of consolidating state authority. This
research revises existing scholarship on political authority in African by
demonstrating how CAs shape the outcomes of state attempts to consolidate power
over territory. It demonstrates that the internal constraints of the customary
institution condition how the CA responds to state encroachment of control over
land allocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposal are
related to its insights about factors affecting the potential for violent
conflict and political instability. Further, this study informs how and when the
conversions from small-scale to large-scale agriculture are contentious,
contributing to our ability to promote long-term political stability in the
developing world. Potentially volatile political situations and conflicts over
land can be avoided through better representation of the needs of local
populations in this land-use transition. Customary authorities are central
actors in mediating this process. This research will contribute to our
understanding of best-practices for American investments active in African land
markets and for promoting political stability in the region. This research will
be shared through publicly available data, academic conferences and journal
publications, policy and inter-disciplinary academic networks such as the Land
Deal Politics Initiative, presentations at my host research institutions in
Zambia and Senegal, and a book.