* 1323822
* OCE-PRF: Quantifying the genetic and epigenetic contribution to stress response in corals
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* NONE NONE, Putnam                  Hollie         M
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 06/30/2016
* USD 170,000.00

Overview: A combination of global and local stressors threaten the persistence
of coral reef ecosystems. Atmospheric CO2 and global mean temperatures are
expected to increase significantly. The rapid influx of atmospheric CO2 into the
oceans will result in ocean acidification (OA), or a shift in the buffering
capacity and chemistry of seawater leading to declines in pH and carbonate ions.
Together, these stressors are predicted to result in mass coral bleaching,
declines in coral calcification of more than 40%, and even extinction. It is
thought that the current rate of climate change will outpace the potential for
coral reefs to undergo necessary evolutionary adaptation. There is, however,
enormous variability in the response of corals to stress and differential
survival of species, suggesting that some corals possess mechanisms to better
respond to climate change. These mechanisms include innovations related to
genetic adaptation, rapid acclimatization through epigenetic mechanisms via
parental effects, and the associated symbiotic communities (Symbiodinium,
bacteria, fungi, and viruses). In corals, the overall contribution of these
factors to resilience is understudied. The fellow's PhD research was the first
to identify positive responses of coral offspring to OA and increasing
temperature via trans-generational acclimatization (i.e., an epigenetic
process). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will employ novel experimental
approaches to test hypotheses suggesting that there is a greater genetic,
epigenetic, and symbiotic potential for corals to respond to and resist the
adverse effects of increased temperature and OA than was previously thought. If
true, the outcome of this research will have the potential to transform our
understanding of coral response to environmental stress and to develop well-
parameterized predictions of the future of coral reef ecosystems. The objectives
of this research are to quantify the genetic, epigenetic, and symbiotic
contributions to stress response in reef-building corals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The oceans play an important role in
human health through factors such as food production, economics, and regulation
of atmospheric gases, climate, water supply, and protection from physical
disturbances. Although coral reefs cover a small proportion of the ocean
(&lt;1%), they generate vast revenue, valued in the hundreds of billions of
dollars annually. By describing and quantifying potential genetic, epigenetic,
and symbiotic processes of resilience and resistance this research will advance
our understanding of the genuine threats that changing climate poses to coral
reefs and the resulting economic, physical, and cultural consequences of the
coral reef ecosystem resource loss. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
fellow will be responsible for shared mentoring of PhD, MS, and undergraduate
students. The proposed research will be disseminated broadly to the university
and public community in Hawaii through existing connections to the public tour
and education department at the University of Hawaii and the Waikiki Aquarium,
and internationally through scientific conferences and publication in peer-
reviewed journals, in addition to online video tutorials of experimental
research and analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The host organizations are the
University of Hawaii at Manoa's Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology (HIMB)and the
James Cook University's (JCU)Australian Research Council Center of Excellence.
Together they provide the ideal organizations located on coral reefs to perform
the research, to broaden scientific participation, and to provide diverse
international mentoring and prolific networking opportunities with world
experts. The mentors include: (1) primary mentor and expert coral biologist Ruth
D. Gates, PhD at HIMB; (2) expert in larval biology and quantitative genetics
Robert J. Toonen, PhD at HIMB; and (3) international mentor and Super Science
Fellow at JCU and expert in coral stress response and coral microbial
associations, Tracy D. Ainsworth, PhD. Together these mentors provide world-
class expertise in coral biology, genetics, symbiosis, and experimental design.