* 1323229
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Processing of long-distance dependencies at the syntax-discourse interface:  The case of Clitic Left Dislocation
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Roumyana Slabakova, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 07/31/2015
* USD 15,070.00

It has long been theorized that acquiring a second language (L2) becomes more
difficult as a person ages.. Under the direction of Dr. Roumyana Slabacova, co-
PI Tania Leal Mendez will examine two accounts of the difficulties learners
encounter when attempting to master a new language after the critical
acquisition period (which ends roughly with the onset of puberty). These
accounts make contrasting predictions concerning native/non-native language
processing asymmetries--specifically, whether these differences are due to lack
of automaticity, as proposed by the Interface Hypothesis, or to the L2 learner's
tendency to develop less detailed grammatical representations, as proposed by
the Shallow Structure Hypothesis. This dissertation will test the predictions of
each hypothesis using a single linguistic construction: Clitic Left Dislocation
(CLLD) in Spanish. A variety of online and offline tasks will be used to test L2
knowledge of CLLD, including an acceptability judgment task, a proficiency task,
a self-paced reading task, a measure of inhibitory control, and a statistical
learning task. Based on previous work in L1 processing, the researchers
hypothesize a significant relationship between L2 proficiency and increased
prediction-generating abilities during on-line L2 comprehension.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this project will have implications for
second language instruction. In addition, this project will provide the
graduate-student co-PI with opportunities for building international scientific
collaborations and for the dissemination of project findings.