* 1323130
* Transnational Networks Amid Global Crisis and Change
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Jackie Smith, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2016
* USD 197,785.00

SES-1323130&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jackie Smith&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Melanie
Hughes&lt;br/&gt;University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal,
investigators map populations of transnational organizations, including inter-
governmental organizations (IGOs), international nongovernmental organizations
(INGOs), and transnational social movement organizations (TSMOs) to document how
changes in these populations impact state outcomes ranging from human rights
practices to international trade and health policies. It is known that such
wide-ranging impacts result from complex interactions among these diverse
organizations, but existing research fails to account for network relations
among different types of groups, for changes in the structure of inter-
organizational relations over time, or for implications of such changes for
models of world politics. This project uses network analysis to explore changes
in network relations among IGOs, INGOs and TSMOs over the last thirty years. The
investigators expect that recent financial crises and changes in the
international political arena - such as the growth of China and other emerging
economies, financial crises in the U.S. and Europe, and the global spread of
popular protests - have altered the ways in which international nongovernmental
and governmental organizations align with one another. A key contribution of
this study will the production of new data, including: 1) an updated biennial
dataset on the population of TSMOs (adding the years 2005-2013) and 2) a new
Inter-Organizational Networks Database of INGO, TSMO, and IGO connections,
constructed decennially from 1983 to 2013. A secondary goal of this study is to
bridge data and research on INGOs and TSMOs, allowing world polity and social
movement scholars to understand if, when, and how social-change orientations of
organizations matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The study
advances understandings of global conflict and change, and therefore offers
insights that can contribute to broader public and policy debates. The
investigators will provide reports on the analyses that are accessible to
general audiences in order to better inform public discourse about global
conflicts and the various organizations and institutions addressing these
matters. Specifically the research will speak to questions about how social
movements relate to inter-governmental organizations, as both types of groups
work to address conflict in areas of major global significance.