* 1323652
* Some Like It Hot: Mechanisms Behind Heat Tolerance in Coral Reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* NONE NONE, Traylor-Knowles         Nikki          G
* Fellowship Award
* Judith Pugh
* 09/30/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Overview: Global temperatures estimated by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) are expected to rise by 1.8-4.0 Â°C over the next 100 years
and reef building corals are particularly susceptible to these temperature
changes. One of the most characterized outcomes of heat stress on corals is
episodic coral bleaching. There are however, populations of corals that are able
to withstand higher water temperatures without bleaching. The corals found off
of the island of Ofu, American Samoa are an example. One of the biggest research
gaps has been the lack of knowledge of genetic mechanisms that indicate the
ability of a particular coral to resist stress. By studying the mechanisms of
the resilience patterns that are observed in the natural environment, the fellow
plans to lay down the foundation for future work in developing a coral stress
biomarker. The tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) is a good candidate for
this biomarker. It is a central mediator of apoptosis and innate immunity
pathways. The hypothesis driving this research is that amplification of
signaling occurs through transcriptional control of TNFR during heat stress, and
that individuals with environmentally induced higher overall expression levels
display better ability to acclimate to a changing environment. To test this
hypothesis, the fellow will work with Stephen R. Palumbi, PhD at Stanford
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Coral reefs are one of the
most diverse and economically rich ecosystems on the planet. The effects of
large-scale oceanic processes and climate change will determine how coral reefs
are sculpted, thereby effecting fisheries, ocean biodiversity and ultimately
global economies. By investigating the ability of coral reefs to adapt or
acclimate to these changes, we may be able to better predict which corals may
survive climate change, leading to improved conservation. If cell and genomic
research can make connections between the ocean environment and individual
survival and fitness then there is a better chance of identifying management
options for improving coral reefs. This research represents a cross-disciplinary
approach to span the disconnect between what is observed in the environment and
what is happening in the organism at a cellular level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: 1. Broadening the participation of
minorities from the United States in science: The fellow is a young, African
American, woman researcher, and currently mentoring an exceptional minority
student that is part of the National Minority STEM fellowship program at
Stanford. The fellow plans to get involved with the minority recruitment and
mentorship opportunities that are available through Stanford and has received
approval from the Director of Hopkins Marine Station to have several minority
high school students from the neighboring Seaside High School work with the
fellow on this project. 2.Inclusion of the American Samoan Community: The fellow
will work in American Samoa and the project includes collaboration and
assistance of members of the local community and of the National Park. Outreach
to students of Olosega Elementary School are also planned. 3.Involvement of the
scientific community and broad dissemination of research: The Palumbi lab has a
long, well-established collaboration with the cell biologist, John R. Pringle,
PhD at the Stanford Medical School. The fellow will collaborate with Dr. Pringle
for much of this project. The fellow plans to broadly disseminate research
results through publications and presentations at conferences, and data will be
publicly available. Lastly, the Palumbi lab is well equipped to distribute
research to broad audiences by using social media networking, databases and
local community outreach. The fellow plans to incorporate the research findings
into these resources, as a way to reach broader audiences.