* 1323230
* Collaborative Research: Creating a National Network of Engineering Ambassadors: A Professional Development Program with an Outreach Mission
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Melissa Marshall, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2017
* USD 547,970.00

This project addresses the need for a more diverse enrollment in engineering by
creating a national network of the Engineering Ambassador Programs that are
currently under way at Penn State, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), the
University of Connecticut (UConn), and Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI).
These programs develop the communication and leadership skills of undergraduate
engineers by having them perform an outreach mission to middle and high schools.
The Engineering Ambassador Programs place the right messenger - engineering
students who have been taught advanced presentation skills - with the right
message - messages about engineering from Changing the Conversation, a study
done by the National Academy of Engineering - in front of middle and high school
students. An NSF workshop grant was used to train 2-4 engineering ambassadors at
17 other geographically diverse institutions. Now the project is expanding the
network by increasing ten-fold the 2-4 ambassadors at these 17 pilot programs.
This expansion has two key goals: (1) providing valuable communication and
leadership skills to additional engineering students who are becoming
Ambassadors, and (2) having those Ambassadors speak to middle and high school
students to further increase the diversity of students entering engineering.

This project is determining whether the success that the Engineering Ambassador
programs have had on the professional development of Ambassadors at Penn State,
RPI, UConn, and WPI will transfer to 16 additional institutions across the
United States. The project is empowering 500 undergraduate engineers, most of
whom are from under-represented groups, with advanced presentation skills, such
as the assertion-evidence approach to slide design. These 500 undergraduates are
then creating and delivering well-crafted presentations to more than 70,000
students in middle and high schools across the United States. Because these
presentations carry the messages of Changing the Conversation, these
presentations are increasing interest in engineering among those students.
Moreover, more than 750 science and math teachers in these middle and high
schools are being influenced by the presentations and they are being placed in a
position to deliver those messages after the Ambassadors have left.