* 1323019
* Collaborative Research: Impact of the Summer Institutes on Faculty Teaching and Student Achievement
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Jennifer Knight, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2019
* USD 476,146.00

This collaborative project, designed to determine the outcomes of a long
standing faculty development effort, includes four institutions, Yale
University, the University of Colorado, Boulder, Cornell University, and the
University of Connecticut. Over the last decade, the National Academies Summer
Institutes (SIs) have trained almost 1,000 faculty and instructional staff in
'scientific teaching,' an approach to STEM instruction based on evidence about
how people learn (1, 2). The SIs are designed to teach effective use of active
learning and assessment with attention to fostering learning by diverse
students. They feature an iterative approach to examining the learning
associated with newly introduced teaching practices. At present few studies
systematically examine the outcomes of faculty development efforts. This project
is a Phase III assessment of the impact of the SI training on participants'
teaching practices and their students' outcomes. It entails developing a general
system for asking questions about the outcomes of faculty development efforts
and using the SIs as a base for testing that system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is an important large-
scale assessment of scientific teaching practices and their impact on student
outcomes. The project is unique because it employs a novel systems evaluation
approach to design and applies measures for the adoption of teaching practices
and student achievement. This work will create knowledge about educational
practices, instructor behavior change, and student outcomes, while developing
universal evaluation tools that will be widely disseminated to enable others to
evaluate their education initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
results from the study of the institutes will help inform future faculty
development efforts. In addition, the resulting evaluation system will provide
tools for designing and conducting evaluations of complex
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. J. Handelsman, S. Miller, C. Pfund,
Scientific Teaching. (WH Freeman &amp; Co, 2007).&lt;br/&gt;2. C. Pfund et al.,
Professional development. Summer institute to improve university science
teaching. Science (New York, N.Y.) 324, 470 (2009).