* 1323168
* Pathways: From The Lab To The Neighborhood:  An Interactive Living Exhibit For Advancing STEM Engagement With Urban Systems In Science Museums
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Eric Strauss, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 09/30/2016
* USD 249,999.00

This initiative is a collaboration of the University of Massachusetts Amherst,
the EcoTarium science museum in Worcester, MA, other scientists and teachers at
Clark University in Massachusetts and at Loyola Marymount University in Los
Angeles, along with six other museums in New England and California. The project
seeks to develop and study a model that would integrate the science research on
urban systems into science museum exhibits and programs, starting in this phase
in a new "City Science" exhibit space at the EcoTarium. The goal is to learn how
to assist citizens in decision-making and shaping a sustainable future for their
communities. The work builds on the NSF/SBS-funded Urban Long-term Research Area
Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) network, one of a set of awards by NSF/SBS and NSF/BIO in
the area of urban ecology. The exhibit (with four sections: neighborhood design;
land use and land cover; urban biodiversity; urban heat island effect) will
include activities related to "alternative futures" of cities, will be designed
to be updated as new results from this research are produced and also to allow
for visitors to respond to survey questions about their city environment that
will be used by the researchers. Deliverables will also include an integration
of the prototype exhibits with an NSF-funded K-12 urban ecology curriculum (co-
PI from Loyola Marymount University), which has already been done with nature
centers and would now expand into science museums. The significance of this work
includes the growing importance of new research on human/ecology interaction in
cities coupled with applications of this research to Public Participation in
Science Research (PPSR) and local decisions and choices. It is driven by the
future vision of the cities in which the target audience(s) is located. The work
in Worcester will focus on reaching underserved audiences, which characterizes
much of the city of Worcester, and will include partnerships with local schools
and community groups.