* 1323034
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Corruption and Incumbency Disadvantage in New Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2016
* Joshua Tucker, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2016
* USD 15,813.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013).

The project addresses corruption in emerging democracies, an issue critical to
political stability in the world. Developing an understanding of political
corruption is therefore vital for US national security interests. The project
addresses an important puzzle: why does it seem that incumbent politicians are
disadvantaged (less likely to win re-election than to be defeated by
challengers) in many new democracies, and what role does corruption play in this
process?

Intellectual Merit: The project develops and tests a theory that proposes that
incumbent corruption -- misuse of office for private gain -- is an important
source of this disadvantage. Corruption is known to be higher in younger and
poorer democracies than in established richer democracies. When voters cannot
know exactly who is corrupt, there are many conditions under which voters will
generally favor a challenger over any incumbent. This includes if the majority
of politicians are corrupt, if potentially corrupt incumbents are rare but
particularly rapacious, or if corrupt politicians can learn quickly how to
better extract resources (i.e., become "more efficient at being corrupt").
Empirically verifying this hypothesis is challenging because corruption is
difficult to observe and measure precisely, and because many factors related to
corruption -- such as poverty or inequality -- may instead account for the
incumbency disadvantage.

To address these challenges, the project relies on extensive data to infer
incumbent corruption in a study of Romanian mayoral elections, including: (1)
more than 4,000 publicly available declarations of assets to detect abnormal
wealth accumulation among incumbents; (2) over 1 million contracts by local
public companies to identify suspiciously high prices, uncompetitive bids, or
politically-connected awardees; (3) a comparison of budgeted expenditures on
infrastructure with data on changes in its actual physical stock to identify
leakages in public funds spending; and (4) data from more than 10,000 firms to
uncover corrupt privatization of state property inherited from communism.

Further, the project takes advantage of a unique institution in Romania: by law,
the salary of the mayor increases once a city's population exceeds a certain
threshold. Prior research has suggested that better pay decreases the need for
illegitimate income and attracts more upstanding candidates for office,
resulting in lower corruption. This rule permits a comparison of the incumbency
(dis)advantage in cities with populations just above and below these salary
thresholds. Cities near these thresholds should be similar in many other
important respects except for the mayor's salary (and so, by extension,
corruption). This strategy holds constant other potential causes of incumbency
disadvantage and isolates the effect of corruption.

Broader Impacts: Studying incumbency disadvantage in a young democracy such as
Romania is important for several reasons. While incumbency disadvantage may be a
desirable response to corruption, it also likely induces high policy instability
and discourages high quality candidates from running for political office. Both
high policy instability and low quality of political elites can threaten
economic and social stability, and ultimately endanger the prospects for
enduring democracy and economic growth. Unstable societies pose threats to
international security and trade, including the interests of the United States.
Learning how to better anticipate such sources of instability can better inform
both foreign policy decisions and anti-corruption programs.