* 1323769
* A Cultural and Linguistic Anthropological Analysis of Youth Language Socialization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Shalini Shankar, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 172,433.00

Dr. Shalini Shankar of Northwestern University will study child language
socialization through the exploration of contests that are focused on ritualized
learning. This project will employ cultural and linguistic anthropological
methodologies to investigate how ritualized learning contests contribute to
processes of child socialization, language commodification, and the production
of identities and racial imagery in the contemporary United States. It addresses
these questions: 1) How do children and parents participate together in
socialization rituals learn specialized ways of speaking, relevant vocal and
visualization techniques, and embodied practices to excel at spelling bees? 2)
How has the increased commercialization of these contests through corporate
branding and prime-time broadcasting transformed this language education
exercise into a mass mediated, sport-like spectacle? 3) How are the youth who
succeed subject to scrutiny and characterizations that contribute to overall
meanings about immigration, race, and the English language? Data will be
collected via observations, audio recordings, video taping, and interviews: at
three organizations that produce these events the latter two of which are
exclusively for South Asian Americans; at select regional and national events;
and in childrens' (ages 6-14) homes to document their preparation practices and
intergenerational relationships. Interviews will be conducted with children,
their parents, coaches, spelling bee organizers, pronouncers, judges, corporate
sponsors, and media broadcasters. Data will be analyzed to consider the
significance of the everyday acquisition and on-stage execution of socialization
to broader debates of socioeconomics, language, race, and
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to several contemporary
anthropological debates about language and socioeconomic change, by offering
broader insights about the commodification of the English language and new roles
for English in globalizing economies; youth, language, and socialization, by
exploring new perspectives on new paradigms of child learning and socialization;
and media, race, and language, by providing fine-grained empirical data about
how broadcast media and racial ideologies coalesce in the reinforcement of
stereotypes about race, immigration, and English language standardization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project broader impacts will occur as follows: 1) several
scholarly articles and a monograph; 2) at least two articles written in clear,
jargon-free prose aimed at K-12 educators and the general public; 3) the on-site
methodological training of undergraduate and graduate students; the PI will
guide students in conducting ethnographic observations and interviews with
subjects of different ages; 4) the creation of a free, child-friendly, website
developed from project data; this educational intervention will address
inequities in preparation materials and adult mentoring by advancing learning
techniques, including a "tutor" function that will quiz children when adults are
unavailable; and 5) the use of recordings, transcripts, and other project data
for linguistic and cultural anthropology teaching and mentoring.