* 1323753
* Pathways to Preparing Future Mathematics Faculty to Transform Undergraduate Mathematics Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2021
* Fabio Milner, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 02/28/2021
* USD 2,766,199.00

Graduate students in mathematics are often called on to teach sections of
introductory courses ranging from college algebra, to precalculus, to calculus.
In this project a team of mathematicians and mathematics education researchers
are developing a sequence of courses and associated activities that support
Ph.D. students in mathematics to adopt a scientific approach both to their
teaching and to evaluating the effectiveness of the underlying curriculum. The
intellectual merit of this effort lies in its use of previously developed
research-based student and teacher materials that have been documented to
transform precalculus and calculus teaching and learning. Based on this prior
work the investigating team is creating a model education certificate program
for mathematics graduate students that is envisioned to transform their teaching
practice. Concurrent with these teaching experiences, students complete a
sequence of courses and seminars in which they read select publications, review
materials, and design and conduct small-scale research studies of student
learning. These combined program components lay the groundwork for producing
mathematics Ph.D. students who are prepared to take leadership roles in
improving the teaching and learning of undergraduate mathematics. The project is
exercising its broader impact both by engaging the faculty to change the culture
and departmental infrastructure in the PI's own institution, and by serving as
model for other departments of mathematics who can incorporate the education
certification program into their graduate offerings, thus supporting pre-
professional faculty development of their students.