* 1323251
* Collaborative Research:Evidence-based Pedagogy in Engineering Education: Design Heuristics for Concept Generation
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Seda McKilligan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2019
* USD 403,924.00

The engineering design ability is critical in all undergraduate engineering
programs. Design fixation is one of the common problems facing engineering
design teams. This project is creating and evaluating tools that will help the
design group avoid the design fixation problem. The work is taking a unique
approach to the problem by creating 77 heuristics to help design groups avoid
the fixation problem.

The technique is based on prior studies involving both student and professional
teams. This prior work has demonstrated the technique is applicable to both
design groups. The prior success provides a high level of confidence that this
work will be successful.

Because design is included in all engineering programs and because the design
heuristics are rather generic the work pre performed in this project is
applicable to virtually all engineering programs nationally. As a result a
successful result in this project could be a transformative innovation for
engineering education.

This project is also producing instructional workshops to help instructors
utilize the heuristics to enhance creativity in design courses. The workshops
are not single point in time delivery of information but are distributed
throughout time providing a long-term engagement of faculty. This type of
prolonged engagement has proven to be more effective than other means of
development and will produce excellent long term change.