* 1323104
* OCE-PRF: Steps Toward Quantitative ENSO Reconstruction: Modeling Ocean Circulation Near Coral Proxy Sites
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* NONE NONE, Stevenson               Samantha
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2017
* USD 170,000.00

Overview: Reconstructions of the El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the
dominant mode of Pacific climate variability, are often created from the oxygen
isotopic ratio (delta O-18) in tropical corals. These records provide crucial
information for independent validation of climate models, as coral delta O-18 is
one of the only high-resolution tropical proxies available. But because of the
effort and expense involved, many reconstructions use only a handful of coral
records; then to interpret delta O-18 variability in terms of ENSO behavior, a
conversion must be made from local environmental conditions (as represented by
the model) and the isotopic signal on the reef. In the past, this has been done
using a linear calibration against temperature and salinity derived from gridded
instrumental data, but the associated errors in ENSO amplitude are enormous; so
large, in fact, that it becomes extremely difficult to identify specific
improvements to model physics. The conversion errors are due to some combination
of: uncertainties in observational products, small-scale effects (eddies/mixing)
local to the reef, or unaccounted-for atmospheric influences. In this project,
the fellow will assess the contribution of each of these processes, by
quantifying the relationship between ENSO properties and delta O-18 anomalies on
a variety of spatial scales in a realistic, "perfect-model" framework. The
results will improve both future model validation efforts and the
interpretability of existing coral delta O-18 records.

Intellectual Merit: The experiments developed for this study will nest a
regional ocean model within an isotope-enabled, coupled general circulation
model (GCM) constrained to match 20th century observations. This will provide a
spatially complete delta O-18 dataset with information on several different grid
scales, which will function as a sort of 20th century ?reanalysis? of delta
O-18; output will be provided as a public resource for interested researchers.
The regional domain will cover both Palmyra Atoll and Kiritimati (Christmas)
Island, two central equatorial Pacific coral atolls which have been used
extensively for paleoclimate research, are highly sensitive to ENSO variability,
and are influenced by dynamically interesting exchanges between tropical and
subtropical water masses. The regional simulations will provide one of the first
comprehensive model-based characterizations of circulation around tropical
Pacific atolls, in addition to providing detailed information on the
oceanographic impacts of 20th century El Nino/La Nina events on coral reef
environments. Both Palmyra and Kiritimati also have extensive local
environmental monitoring data available, which will be used for model
validation. The dominant processes affecting seawater delta O-18 will be
diagnosed in both the global and regional models, by constructing budgets of
delta O-18. This will determine, as a function of spatial scale, which processes
are most important for delta O-18 anomalies near sites used for proxy
collection. The results can then be used during future efforts to validate GCMs
against proxy data: is running an isotope-enabled model necessary, and if so at
what resolution? The delta O-18 budgets will also be used to assess how
different properties of El Nino/La Nina events (i.e. amplitude, warm/cold
asymmetry) might be recorded by fossil corals, which can eventually provide
guidance for improvements to physical parameterizations in GCMs.

Broader Impacts: This project represents a fundamentally new and highly
interdisciplinary approach to quantitative paleoclimate reconstruction, and the
results will be useful for a wide variety of applications; all model output will
be made publicly available. Collaboration with the NOAA Pacific Islands
Fisheries Science Center will ensure that the results are relevant for
ecological applications, and outreach work with underrepresented student
populations around Oahu in collaboration with the Pacific Center for Ocean
Science Education Excellence (COSEE-Pacific) will help to raise public awareness
of coral reef conservation.

Sponsoring Scientists: Brian Powell (U. Hawaii; lead sponsor), Russell Brainard
(NOAA PIFSC), Kim Cobb (Georgia Tech), Mark Merrifield (U. Hawaii), David Noone
(CU-Boulder)