* 1323306
* Full-Scale Development: Collaborative Research Advancing Informal STEM Learning Through Scientific Alternate Reality Games
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Kari Kraus, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 684,766.00

Full-Scale Development: Collaborative Research Advancing Informal STEM Learning
and Computational Thinking through Scientific Alternate Reality
Games&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership with the Smithsonian Institution, the
Computer History Museum, NASA, plus leading game designers, educators, and
scientists, Brigham Young University and the University of Maryland will design,
research and iteratively test two large-scale Alternate Reality Games (ARGs) to
engage thousands of youth aged 13-15 in scientific inquiry. Aimed at attracting
girls and other groups historically underrepresented in science and technology,
the games will focus on computational thinking and deep-time sciences in areas
of astrobiology and astronomy. ARGs are interactive experiences in which players
collaboratively hunt for scientific data, make sense of disparate data and
information, contribute content, and solve questions to advance a science-based
narrative woven into the fabric of the real world. Inquiry activities within
each ARG will be based upon the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). Unlike
video games or virtual reality experiences, ARGs lead players to use a variety
of media (social media, text messages, websites, videos, audio recordings).
Because players participate as themselves ARGs afford learners with intensive,
self-driven, scaffolded, scientific learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining
data from web and social media analytics, player interviews, surveys, and user-
generated content, researchers will establish the properties of ARGs that most
effectively advance informal STEM learning outcomes. Additionally, by comparing
open-ended and closed-ended ARGs, they will be able to assess the relative
strengths and weaknesses of two distinct approaches to Alternate Reality Game
design. The project team will test the hypothesis that open-ended, user-
generated content will support inquiry-based learning, peer-to-peer learning,
and life-wide and life-deep learning, while close-ended, narrative-rich ARGs
will support specific transfer of STEM knowledge, collaboration, and problem
solving. To help ensure that the games appeal to their target audiences, the
project team will adopt co-design methods, enlisting the creative input of
participating teens at each stage of the design process. Supplementary materials
and lesson plans developed in close consultation with teachers, librarians,
teens, and other key experts and stakeholders will enable the ARGs to be widely
and effectively used in museums, classrooms, libraries, and after-school
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to help
realize the potential of ARGs as effective and perpetually innovative tools for
informal STEM learning. By co-designing with teens, consulting with leading
experts in science, technology, and education, authentically embedding learning
assessments within the games, and creating ARGs with longevity and reusability
in mind, researchers hope to increase learners' scientific inquiry skills,
ability to use computational thinking for problem solving, understanding of
deep-time science, and positive engagement with other STEM topics. Additionally,
the ARGs will serve as templates and inspiration for future ARGs aimed at
increasing STEM outcomes and other 21st century literacies and skills.