* 1323977
* Statistical Analysis for Cognitive Diagnosis - Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jingchen Liu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 290,000.00

Diagnostic classification models are an important statistical tool in cognitive
diagnosis and can be employed in a number of disciplines, including educational
assessment and clinical psychology. This project focuses on the statistical
analysis of cognitive assessment. The research addresses issues concerning
fundamental statistical inference and experimental design. It aims at both
theoretical development and applications. First, the project will focus on the
statistical inference of the item-attribute relationship, which in the current
context is formulated as the so-called Q-matrix. The topics include point
estimation of the Q-matrix, hypothesis testing, dimension reduction, and model
diagnosis. Second, the project will focus on the individualized adaptive design
of items so as to measure the attribute profiles more accurately with fewer
items. In particular, a criterion is first proposed to measure the efficiency of
an item-selection rule based on the large deviations theory. In addition,
adaptive item selection schemes are proposed to approach the optimal
design.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is motivated by applications in
educational assessments, psychiatric evaluations, and other disciplines using
classification models. In educational applications, the research will help to
obtain a data-driven calibration of the skill requirements for exam problems and
also to validate the subjective beliefs of such skill requirements, so that
better and more accurate assessments of students' knowledge status and skill
mastery are obtained. In psychiatric assessment, this study will help to improve
evidence-based diagnosis by more accurately identifying the symptom-disorder
relationship. The adaptive item selection helps by shortening the lengths of
exams (in educational testing) and interviews (in psychiatric evaluation) while
maintaining the assessment and diagnosis accuracy. Project results have the
potential to positively impact these and other areas of study.