* 1323418
* Collaborative Research: Social exclusion as a determinant of individuation and stereotyping
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Bernstein, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 158,000.00

Maintaining positive social relationships is important for individuals' well
being. Despite this, people often experience social exclusion (colloquially
referred to as "ostracism"). The experience of social exclusion makes people
feel that they do not belong and leaves them wanting to re-connect. Rather than
attempting to connect with just anyone, research shows that excluded people pick
certain individuals. Specifically, they focus their attention on the
identification of the best and most receptive re-affiliation partners. As a
result, people who are excluded, compared to those who are not, are more likely
to evaluate people based on their individual characteristics and personalities
-- a process called "individuation" -- rather than characteristics based on
beliefs about their group memberships -- a process called "stereotyping." Three
lines of research will examine the relation between social exclusion and
individuation. These studies will examine several different stereotyped groups,
using multiple methods of social exclusion. Specific experiments will
investigate (1) the role of the desire to reconnect in producing greater
individuation after exclusion, (2) the circumstances under which exclusion is
more and less likely to trigger individuation, and (3) the role that social
exclusion plays in maintaining stereotypes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
extensive bodies of literature exist on social exclusion as well as the
processing of group-based information such as stereotypes, the proposed research
will be the first to synthesize these two areas of social psychology. Moreover,
the proposed work will also further education and broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in science. For instance, several undergraduate and
graduate students will aid in conducting, analyzing, and disseminating the
proposed research. Many of these students will come from groups traditionally
underrepresented in science, such as women, racial minorities, and those from
less affluent backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, research shows that
exclusion can trigger aggressive responses in both the laboratory and real-world
settings. Some scholars suggest that social exclusion may be a contributing
factor to tragedies such as school shootings. To help prevent excluded
individuals from engaging in destructive actions, the proposed research could
help scientists identify ways that excluded individuals can cope positively.
Though many factors likely determine which victims of exclusion cope well and
which do not, one factor may concern how they subsequently think about others
following exclusion. Excluded individuals who evaluate others carefully (e.g.,
via individuation) may cope better with exclusion by finding new friends and
therefore may be less likely to lash out. Encouraging the excluded to
individuate others may provide one method of fostering adaptive coping. These
efforts could prove especially useful in schools where incidents of bullying and
exclusion are common. Therefore, the current work may help researchers
understand how individuals handle exclusion and, ultimately, could provide
strategies to deploy in schools and other relevant settings to defend against
exclusion's potentially damaging consequences.