* 1323809
* STEMM: Sequence Technology Education Using Microbial Metagenomes
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Robert Edwards, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 538,979.00

This project is expanding and enhancing a series of courses focused on DNA
sequencing technology, an area of science that is expanding rapidly and
requiring skilled students to meet the challenges that are presented by the
genomics era. The development and implementation of these courses is responsive
to "Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education" in providing
undergraduates with competencies in conducting science. Additionally, the
project is facilitating the teaching of similar courses across a range of
institutions. The project is:1) Vertically integrating metagenomics and
developing a Metagenomic Certificate at San Diego State University (SDSU), a
Hispanic Serving University, 2) Integrating DNA sequencing and metagenomic
analysis across institutions via faculty workshops, 3) Facilitating teaching of
metagenomics through the development of dynamic web-based modules, and 4)
Analyzing the effectiveness of the programs.

Intellectual Merit: DNA sequencing technology is enabling an ever increasing
range of organisms to be sequenced quickly, cheaply and with high accuracy. DNA
sequencing of microbial communities is becoming important in medicine and life
science research and students require training in designing, conducting and
interpreting microbial experiments. This project is developing strategies to
facilitate the teaching of metagenomics in a wide range of institutions,
enabling students to conduct research and adding to scientific knowledge on
outstanding questions in microbial ecology. The project is providing
undergraduate students with the knowledge to use the latest technologies,
practice at thinking critically and forming partnerships across disciplines, and
empowering them to solve the complex problems of the 21 century.

Broader Impacts: This project is providing students with unique opportunities to
work and interact with scientists from Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Australia. To
date SDSU students have sequenced 40 microbes, 60 metagenomes and a marine
mammal, learned how to analyze the data and become part of an international
collaboration to identify the genomic signature in sea lion carcinomas.
Additionally, project personnel and students are involved in describing the
response of kelp forests and coral reef microbial communities to human
activities. Data generated is used by policy officials in natural resource
management. To inform the general community, project personnel lecture at public
forums, and for the popular press, such as National Geographic, and Good Morning
Brazil on Rede TV, and present at schools in San Diego, Australia, and Brazil
about environmental microbes, oceanography, conservation and college education.
Project results are being disseminated through websites and publication in peer-
reviewed journals.