* 1323137
* Collaborative Research: Rivers, Faults, and Growing Mountains: Dynamic Feedback between Crustal Deformation, Rock Strength, and Erosion
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Gregory Tucker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2016
* USD 19,436.00

The topography of most active mountain ranges shows a clear link between
deformation and erosion in the form of valley networks that align closely with
faults and shear zones. We propose that this association is the signature of
dynamic feedback between deformation, rock damage, and surface erosion, and that
this feedback plays a fundamental role in the evolution of orogens. With this
research program, we will test our hypothesis that the rock crushing associated
with tectonically-driven earthquakes reduces the strength and grain size of the
upper crust of the Earth, producing zones at the surface of material that is
more readily eroded by rivers, landslides and glaciers. Erosion along these
weakened fault zones proceeds more rapidly than the non-deformed material, and
consequently, the deformation history is recorded within the topographic fabric.
The 3D orientation of these fault-weakened zones is largely determined by large
scale plate tectonics related to mantle convection. Consequently, if our
hypothesis is sustained, then we will be able to use the orientation of surface
features (valleys and ridges) to describe the long term history of mantle
convection at relatively high resolution.

To test this hypothesis, we propose a program that combines advanced numerical
modeling and field data collection in the Southern Alps of New Zealand to
evaluate two testable predictions: (1) that there should exist a correlation
between topography and rock strength, as reflected in properties such as bulk
cohesion, fracture density, friction coefficient, tensile strength and grain
size; and (2) that a coupled model of 3D deformation and erosion, based on our
current understanding of the relevant physics, should produce patterns of
topography, erosion, and strain that are both consistent with observations and
substantially different from the case of uniform rock strength. We anticipate
that this research will provide critical information for scientists working on
the interdependence of surface and tectonic processes at scales ranging from
those of mantle convection to those of individual drainage basins. As part of
the outreach associated with this program, we will produce and test a Web-
accessible landscape modeling module that will permit numerical experimentation
by k12 and general audiences of landscape development in a simplified, coupled
geomorphic/tectonic orogenic system.

This project is supported by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics program and
the Tectonics program. In addition, this award is designated as an OIIA/ISE
Global Venture Fund Award and is being co-funded by NSF's OIIA International
Science and Engineering Section.