* 1323258
* Collaborative Research:  Impact of the Summer Institutes on Faculty Teaching and Student Achievement
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2020
* Jo Handelsman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,655,953.00

Over the last decade, the National Academies Summer Institutes (SIs) have
trained almost 1,000 faculty and instructional staff in "scientific teaching",
an approach to STEM instruction based on evidence about how people learn (1,2).
The SIs are designed to teach effective use of active learning and assessment
with attention to fostering learning by diverse students. The curriculum
features an iterative approach to examining the learning benefits associated
with these newly introduced teaching practices. At present, only a few studies
systematically examine the outcomes of faculty development efforts. This project
is an assessment of the effects of SI training on participants' teaching
practices and their students' outcomes. This project is developing an evaluation
system involving a generalizable protocol for conceptualizing and measuring
outcomes of faculty development efforts, using the Summer Institute populations
to test this system and its protocol. This effort to determine the outcomes of a
long standing faculty development effort is a collaboration among Yale
University, the University of Colorado - Boulder, Cornell University, and the
University of Connecticut. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This
project is an important large-scale assessment of scientific teaching practices
and their impact on student outcomes. The project is unique because it employs a
systems approach to determine effects of the program on adoption of teaching
practices and on student achievement. This work is designed to create knowledge
about educational practices, instructor behavior change, and student outcomes,
while developing broadly useful evaluation tools that can be widely disseminated
to enable others to evaluate their STEM education
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results from the study of
the institutes are designed to inform future faculty development efforts. The
resulting evaluation system provides tools for designing and conducting
evaluations of complex projects. In addition, the project is designed to develop
important expertise for key participating researchers in the evaluation of
faculty development for STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. J.
Handelsman, S. Miller, C. Pfund, Scientific Teaching. (WH Freeman &amp; Co,
2007).&lt;br/&gt;2. C. Pfund et al., Professional development. Summer institute
to improve university science teaching. Science (New York, N.Y.) 324, 470
(2009).