* 1323837
* OCE-PRF:  FEEDING IN AN ACIDIC WORLD: DOES HIGH pCO2 IN THE OCEAN AFFECT THE PREDATORY MECHANICS OF MANTIS SHRIMP CRUSTACEANS?
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2016
* NONE NONE, deVries                 Maya           S
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2016
* USD 170,000.00

Overview: The world's oceans are becoming more acidic at unprecedented rates,
which are dramatically changing ocean ecosystems. Ocean acidification has been
documented to affect everything from the composition of calcified structures to
the growth and metabolism. These changes to marine organisms at the individual
level are predicted to have major ramifications for the ecosystem as a whole. In
particular, they are predicted to affect trophic interactions between species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the fellow aims to quantify links between
the mechanical properties of exoskeleton and the trophic ecology of intertidal
coral reef and sea grass organisms. The Mantis shrimp (Stomatopoda, Crustacea)
has been selected as the study organism for this project because their feeding
mechanism for smashing hard-shelled prey is highly dependent on exoskeleton
structure and function. Mantis shrimp produce one of the fastest predatory
strikes in the animal kingdom through a power amplification system in the
raptorial appendage that stores elastic energy in the exoskeleton and then
releases the energy over very short time scale. Because mantis shrimp rely on
their exoskeleton for feeding, changes to the exoskeleton should directly affect
feeding mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will study changes to the
exoskeleton by placing the animals in experimental aquaria with elevated pCO2
levels and then examine the morphological, kinematic, metabolic, and behavioral
changes in feeding that occur in response to the elevated pCO2 treatments. The
fellow expects that acidic ocean conditions will alter a mantis shrimps ability
to generate high accelerations and forces because the string elements in the
exoskeleton will become too stiff to operate. If mantis shrimp are no longer
able to produce forceful strikes, then they will also not be able to consume
hard-shelled prey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scripps Institution of Oceanography
(SIO) is host institution for this research and Dr. Jennifer Taylor is the
sponsoring scientist. Dr. Taylor is an expert in biomechanics research on
crustaceans, including mechanical testing on exoskeleton and kinematic analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this project, the fellow will test
how ocean acidification could affect the fundamental connection between material
properties of crustacean exoskeleton and feeding. In addition, if mantis shrimp
are no longer able to consume hard-shelled herbivorous snails and hermit crabs
in response to changes in the properties of the exoskeleton, then this could
have affect the food web as a whole because pressure from herbivory would
increase. The proposed research will lay the foundation for determining whether
trophic cascades due to ocean acidification could occur.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The fellow will develop a program to
increase the participation of elementary and high school students from
underrepresented groups in ocean science in the U.S. by coupling the fellow's
research experience in working with educational programs in Panama with projects
currently underway at SIO. Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers at SIO
will work directly with classroom teachers to create lessons that integrate
their research with the actual science content which teachers are required to
cover. These lesson plans along with reflections written by the classroom
teachers will be available on a website created for this program so that
teachers across the U.S. can access successful lesson plans and use them in
their classrooms.