* 1323154
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Ethnic Distance and Voter Behavior in Post-Conflict African Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Kanchan Chandra, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2015
* USD 17,479.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013).

The project investigates how ethnicity is related to voting in post-conflict
societies, a critical issue in developing political stability, promoting
democratization, and advancing US foreign policy efforts.

It is generally understood that voters prefer to support candidates who come
from their same racial, ethnic, religious, or regional group. This is a
particularly important finding in Africa, where countries are ethnically
diverse, democracy is new and weak, and voters lack access to important
information about candidates, parties, and democracy. This study will open a new
research agenda in ethnic politics: the study of ethnic distance. Numerous
studies have found that voters in Africa are most likely to vote for candidates
from their own ethnic group, their "co-ethnics". However, these studies fail to
explain how ethnicity influences the voting behavior of those who do not have a
co-ethnic candidate in the race. By some estimates, on average, 40% of the
African population will face presidential elections in which they do not have a
co-ethnic candidate for whom to vote. Thus, because of the focus on co-
ethnicity, our understanding of how ethnicity influences the political behavior
of this 40% is extremely limited. This project seeks to explain the role of
ethnicity in determining the voting preferences of those without a co-ethnic
candidate.

Intellectual Merit: The project introduces the concept of "ethnic proximity",
and measures it through a survey conducted in Liberia. It investigates the
possibility that ethnic similarity is a more robust predictor of voter behavior.
This is important because it implies that multiethnic coalitions, which are
widely believed to benefit democracy (because they reduce civil conflict), are
most likely to form and be sustained in societies with sufficiently similar
ethnic groups. Diversity may not be the key factor that prohibits building
multiethnic coalitions, but it could be the degree of difference among the
various ethnic groups that is of greatest consequence.

Broader Impacts: If ethnic distance matters for coalition building, and ethnic
identities are changeable, then it can also be used in US nation-building
efforts. While Liberia is important for US security interests in its own right,
as strengthening democracy in Liberia will likely bring greater stability to the
region, understanding how ethnicity promotes or hinders the formation of multi-
ethnic political coalitions in Liberia can provide a basis to understand how it
would work in other areas of the world. The United States has invested
substantial amounts of money in Liberia's post-civil war reconstruction over the
past 10 years. This study's results could provide insight into the effective use
of resources: while money spent developing infrastructure and democratic
institutions is necessary, devoting some resources to reconciliation, in the
form of public campaigns to highlight ethnic similarities across groups in an
unbiased manner rather than blanketed national identity appeals, may enhance the
functioning of democratic institutions. More broadly, the US and its allies have
struggled to address the ethnic divisions that plague countries such as Iraq and
Afghanistan. These ethnic rivalries have often proven spoilers in efforts to
promote democracy in these nations. The findings of this study will be
instructive for those critical cases as well.