* 1323584
* RESEARCH:  "Making Connections: Exploring Culturally-Relevant Maker Experiences through an Iterative, Cross-Institutional Approach"
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Gina Svarovsky, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 09/30/2018
* USD 899,739.00

Making Connections, a three-year design-based research study conducted by the
Science Museum of Minnesota in partnership with Twin Cities' communities, is
developing and studying new ways to engage a broader audience in meaningful
Maker experiences. This study draws and builds on existing theoretical
frameworks to examine how community engagement techniques can be used to co-
design and implement culturally-relevant marketing, activities, and events
focused on Making that attract families from underrepresented audiences and
ultimately engage them in meaningful informal STEM learning. The research is
being done in three phases: Sharing and Listening - co-design with targeted
communities; Making Activities Design and Implementation; Final Analysis,
Synthesis and Dissemination. The project is also exploring new approaches in
museums? cross-institutional practices that can strengthen the quality of their
community-engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, Making - a do-it-
yourself, grassroots approach to designing and constructing real things through
creativity, problem-solving, and tool use - has received increasing attention as
a fruitful vehicle for introducing young people to the excitement of science and
engineering and to career skills in these fields. Maker Faires attract hundreds
and thousands of people to engage in Making activities every year, and the
popularity of these events, as well as the number of museums and libraries that
are beginning to provide opportunities for the public to regularly engage in
these types of activities, are skyrocketing. However, Maker programs tend to
draw audiences that are predominantly white, middle class, male, well educated,
and strongly interested in science, despite the fact that the practices of
Making are as common in more diverse communities. Making Connections has the
potential to transform how children begin to cultivate a lifelong interest in
engineering at a young age, which may ultimately encourage more young people of
color to pursue engineering careers in the future.