* 1324082
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Investigation of Biometric Identification
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Emily Martin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 25,074.00

New York University doctoral candidate, Vijayanka Nair, supervised by Dr. Emily
Martin, proposes to undertake research that explores the cultural implications
of biometric identification systems. Nair will conduct 12 months of field
research in Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka to examine the sociocultural
salience of the construction of the world's largest biometric database. In 2009,
the Government of India set out to issue each of its billion residents a Unique
Identification Number (UID), where identification would be facilitated through a
database linking the demographic and biometric (iris scans, fingerprints,
photograph) information of residents to a twelve-digit number.

Informed by social and legal anthropology, as well as and science and technology
studies, this doctoral research has two central concerns. Firstly, working with
enrollees as well as government officials charged with planning, enrollment and
biometric archiving, it asks: are there distinct, emergent ideas of individual
identity being articulated through this program? Secondly, this study asks how
the UID might reconfigure ideals associated with the state and governance in
India. Is the UID's large-scale technologization occasioning a reimagining of
the post-liberalization Indian state by bureaucrats, technocrats and the public
alike? This research pays attention to the novel procedures through which states
amass knowledge about individuals, thus advancing an understanding of the
layered connections between information, ethics, and contemporary governance.

The study will use a combination of social science methods, including
participant observation, semi-structured interviews, textual and discourse
analysis. This research is important because it takes an innovative ethnographic
approach to studying a key issue of our times - the relationship between the
technologizing state and the individual. Funding this project supports the
education of a social scientist.