* 1324385
* DIP: Collaborative Research: Impact of Adaptive Interventions on Student Affect, Performance, and Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ivon Arroyo, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 435,971.00

A major factor influencing learning is students' emotions and their general
affective state. Given the pivotal role that affect plays in learning activities
it is not surprising that there has been a good deal of interest in developing
affect-aware technologies. The overwhelming majority of this work, however, has
focused on modeling affect, that is designing computational models capable of
inferring how students are feeling while interacting with an Intelligent
Tutoring System (ITS). While modeling of affect is a critical first step in
providing adaptive support tailored to students' affective needs, very little
work exists on systematically exploring the impact of affective interventions on
students' performance, learning, affect and attitudes, i.e., how to respond to
students' emotions such as frustration, anxiety, boredom, and hopelessness as
they arise. The research fills this gap by analyzing the value of tailoring
different types of interventions to negative affective states for individual
students and groups of students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has two main
goals. First, it addresses how to respond to negative student emotion such as
frustration, anxiety, boredom in computer-based learning environments through a
variety of interventions. Some correspond to specially-designed digital
characters, integrated into the learning environment, which are intended to act
like students' learning companions. These agents support students through non-
verbal behaviors such as having the characters express empathy in response to
student frustration, or by messages targeting students' cognitive and meta-
cognitive skills, as well as motivation and affect. Other interventions involve
supporting collaboration between students to mitigate negative emotional states
when detected. The impact of these interventions are investigated through a
series of eight experiments with a total of 800 students. These experiments help
to unveil general prescriptive principles to address student affect.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal accomplished by this research is that the
experiments provide valuable data to continue to extend and validate existing
models of emotion. Specifically, the project triangulates and integrates a
complex space of partially overlapping models and constructs of affect in
learning (i.e. emotions, attitudes, incoming moods, motivation, engaged use or
misuse of software). The project refines several well-established models, in
particular the control-value theory of emotions to provide a more stable
theoretical framework for the field of emotions in educational software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is unique and ground breaking, as few
researchers have targeted students' emotion in classrooms, gathered fine grained
data on emotions during learning, or assessed the impact of specific affective
treatments on a moment-to-moment basis. Students using the tutoring systems have
already shown statistically significant gains and learning outcomes, as well as
increased positive affect and attitudes. The new affective interventions will
greatly increase the broad impact of these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is developing: (1) prescriptive principles about how to respond to
student affect; (2) new understanding about the impact of cognitive, affective,
and meta-cognitive interventions on emotions and learning; (3) new understanding
about individual differences in learning, unveiling the extent to which emotion,
cognitive abilities, and gender impact learning; (4) instruction that is
sensitive to individual differences; and (5) refined theories of student
emotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is also: (1) increasing
participation in mathematics of underrepresented populations (women and
minorities) who often avoid STEM careers; (2) creating broad access to web-based
technologies that help to engage more students by addressing their affective and
social needs; and (3) addressing the one-size-fits-all approach to education, by
responding to individual student needs with alternative representations of
content and pathways through which material is presented.