* 1324060
* Collaborative Research:   Elucidating the role of animal heme peroxidase and organic complexing agents in the formation of Mn oxides by a Roseobacter bacterium
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Deric Learman, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2016
* USD 170,000.00

The cycling of manganese (Mn) and formation of manganese oxide minerals has
sweeping environmental and health implications. Manganese is a micronutrient,
responsible for the function of a broad range of essential enzymes including
those involved in photosynthesis and destruction of toxic cellular oxidants. The
oxidized forms of Mn, both soluble Mn(III) and Mn(IV)-based oxide minerals, are
key players in the cycling and sequestration of carbon and metal contaminants.
The direct and indirect activity of microorganisms is largely responsible for
the formation of Mn oxide minerals, yet why and how these organisms produce
these minerals remains unclear. Animal heme peroxidase (AHP) enzymes have been
implicated in the oxidation of Mn(II) and formation of Mn oxides by a number of
bacteria. Further, the formation of Mn oxides by some bacteria and fungi has
been linked to superoxide, an oxygen radical, produced outside the cell.
Reaction between Mn(II) and superoxide results in the formation of hydrogen
peroxide and Mn(III), not Mn(IV) oxide minerals. Removal of the hydrogen
peroxide allows for the precipitation of small Mn oxides, yet their growth to
larger particles such as those found in the environment is impeded and appears
dependent upon the presence of organic compounds produced by the organism. It is
clear that the formation of Mn oxides involves a complex network of abiotic and
biotic reactions involving protein(s), superoxide, and organic molecules.
Accordingly, this project will unravel the relationship between AHP, superoxide,
and organic molecules in the formation of Mn oxides by a marine bacterium within
the abundant and widespread Roseobacter clade. The PIs will identify the role of
AHP in Mn oxide formation by disrupting genes encoding three AHP enzymes in a Mn
oxide forming bacterium and also inserting these same genes into a related
bacterium that does not make Mn oxides. The PIs will compare and monitor the
species of Mn, the levels of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide, and the presence
and composition of Mn-binding organic molecules produced by the wild-type and
genetically modified bacteria to unravel the conditions necessary for Mn oxide
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manganese is receiving increasing attention as a
dominant control on the release of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide from soils
and sediments, as it is one of a select few compounds that can degrade
recalcitrant carbon to more labile forms thus hindering its long-term
sequestration and stabilization. Further, since the formation of Mn oxides
requires particularly strong oxidants, Mn is now regarded as a promising
paleoproxy where it may serve as a key indicator of high oxygen conditions on
early Earth and other planets. Yet, a scientific understanding of the Mn cycle
is fundamentally incomplete, with major knowledge gaps in the processes
responsible for the formation of Mn oxide minerals. This project will obtain
essential information helping to close these gaps, thereby improving predictive
models of carbon cycling, aiding strategies for cleaning up contaminated
ecosystems, and informing interpretations of the early Earth and
extraterrestrial rock record. This project will also involve the PIs directly
mentoring and assisting an MS graduate student and 3 undergraduate students in
research associated with this project. Furthermore, the PIs will develop and
host a summer workshop for K-12 teachers to introduce them to the field of
geomicrobiology and assist them in the development of curriculum and in-class
activities to translate this knowledge to students in the classroom.