* 1324347
* Application of biomarkers to examine transformations of dissolved carbon and nitrogen reservoirs in Arctic rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Karl Kaiser, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 11/30/2016
* USD 74,209.00

Title: Application of biomarkers to examine transformations of dissolved carbon
and nitrogen reservoirs in Arctic rivers

Technical.

The sheer magnitude of organic carbon stored in Arctic watersheds dictates that
understanding its dynamics is vital to describing and modeling how current and
future warming will impact the release of carbon from Arctic ecosystems. Arctic
rivers carry large quantities of dissolved organic matter (DOM) and represent an
important conduit connecting terrestrial and oceanic carbon pools with a major
impact on biogeochemical cycles in the Arctic Ocean. This proposal utilizes a
geochemical approach to investigate the fate and transformations of dissolved
organic carbon (DOC) and nitrogen (DON) reservoirs in Arctic rivers. The goal is
1) to provide a detailed analysis of the bioavailability of Arctic river DOM at
the different stages of the hydrograph, and 2) to investigate the origins and
transformations of DON in Arctic rivers. We will combine molecular level
analysis of carbohydrates, amino acids including D-amino acids, and phenol
biomarkers on collected samples with laboratory incubation experiments. The
incubation experiments with fresh-leached litter collected in Arctic watersheds
will be used to internally calibrate biomarkers. Data generated during this
project will be integrated with a vast array of already measured parameters
(>50) to examine linkages among DOM sources, decomposition, climate, hydrology,
and river chemistry.

Broader significance and importance.

The Arctic regions have accumulated an immense reservoir of carbon in soils and
biomass over the last 12,000 years. A transfer of this enormous pool of carbon
due to current and anticipated climate change has a major effect on the health
of the Arctic ecosystem and global climate. The proposed application of
carbohydrate, amino acids and phenolic biomarkers will improve our very limited
understanding of sources and transformation processes of organic constituents in
Arctic rivers as they are transported from soils to the Arctic Ocean. The
proposal will also investigate how organic compounds decompose in different
Arctic river watersheds with varying vegetation, topography, mean annual air
temperature, and extent of permafrost at different flow conditions and seasons.
Knowing the sources (vegetation, soil, peat etc.) of organic constituents as
well as the dominant transformation processes (solution, absorption,
decomposition) is crucial if we want to predict the effect that a warmer climate
will have on the transfer of organic constituents from these watersheds to the
Arctic Ocean. The project will provide high-impact learning experiences for
undergraduate students from Texas A&M at Galveston and contribute to the
development of one beginning investigator. Results from this research will be
made widely available to the scientific community such that the data set may be
used to construct detailed models of organic carbon transfer from Arctic regions
to the Arctic Ocean.