* 1324097
* Approaches to the Aftermath of Intergroup Violence: Effects of Impunity, Trials, and Truth Commissions on Intergroup Peace and Reconciliation Between Victims and Perpetrators
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Bernhard Leidner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 374,875.00

What is the best way to achieve reconciliation and peace following international
or inter-ethnic conflict and violence? Impunity, trials or tribunals, and truth
commissions are different methods to that have been used to try to resolve
conflicts. Dr. Bernhard Leidner (University of Massachusetts Amherst) and
colleagues will test which approaches to international/inter-ethnic violence
(AIVs) are most likely to facilitate reconciliation and peace in post-conflict
societies. They have developed a model explaining the consequences and
underlying mechanisms of different AIVs among perpetrators and victims. Dr.
Leidner and his collaborators hypothesize that perceived fairness of an AIV
leads to increased willingness to reconcile and decreased motivation for future
violence; and this occurs by increasing empathy for, and decreasing anger at and
dehumanization of the adversarial group of a past conflict. Which AIV will be
perceived as most fair should depend on people's membership in victim or
perpetrator groups, and their beliefs in the superiority of this group over
other groups. This theory will be tested in ten empirical studies in multiple
countries, utilizing a mix of research designs. Participants will include
heterogeneous and representative groups of adults, some whom have experienced
past international or inter-ethnic conflict.

This research tests hypotheses of theoretical and scholarly interest at the
center of important large-scale social problems. Knowledge gained from this work
will be of interest to scholars from a broad range of disciplines (e.g.,
foreign/ international relations, international law, political science,
psychology, sociology) and will inform our understanding of and decisions about
AIVs. Therefore, this research constitutes an important step in working towards
minimizing international or inter-ethnic violence and maximizing reconciliation
and peace. This project will also provide unique, interdisciplinary training and
education for graduate researchers and undergraduate research assistants,
including some from under-represented backgrounds. Research findings will be
disseminated through journal publications and conference presentations, as well
as through NGOs and other entities outside of academia.