* 1324577
* Collaborative Research:  Testing the Early Late Ordovician Cool Water Hypothesis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Stephen Leslie, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2018
* USD 70,703.00

Collaborative Research: Testing the Early Late Ordovician Cool Water
Hypothesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by &lt;br/&gt;Achim Herrmann, Louisiana State
University&lt;br/&gt;Kenneth MacLeod, University of Missouri&lt;br/&gt;Stephen
Leslie, James Madison University&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1324954, -1323444,
-1324577&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The Late Ordovician glaciation
(LOG) is associated with the second largest mass extinction event of the
Phanerozoic. It marks the end of the global warm conditions of the early
Paleozoic that lasted ~150my and occurred under elevated pCO2 conditions.
Considerable doubt has recently been raised with regard to the duration of the
LOG, its potential driving mechanisms, and pre-glacial, long-term temperature
variations. For instance approximately 15 Ma prior to LOG the North American
continental plate was situated in tropical to subtropical latitudes, but
sedimentological and paleontological evidence suggest a shift from deposition of
warm water carbonates to deposition of cool water carbonates. It is not clear
whether this sedimentological change reflects global cooling (indicating
significant perturbation to the global climate system well before the Late
Ordovician glaciation) or physical responses to tectonic activity with no
requisite climatic implications. &lt;br/&gt;The projects will test competing
hypotheses that try to explain this event through an extensive geochemical
study. In particular, PIs will use the geochemical archive of conodont apatite
(delta18O and epsilonNd) and carbonates (DELTA48, delta18O, and delta13C) to
address questions about paleoceanographic conditions during the Early Late
Ordovician. They expect that this research will lead 1) to clarification of
potential causes for the paleontological/sedimentological changes during this
interval, 2) to a better understanding of epicontinental sea circulation and an
improved facies model for epicontinental low latitude carbonate platforms (for
which no modern-day analogues exist), and 3) to better documentation of the
temperature history of the Ordovician greenhouse interval.&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will have active participation by undergraduate students,
graduate students, and a secondary school science teacher. Therefore, the
project will not only impact present university students and researchers, it
will also impact future generations of students through enhancing an earth
science secondary educations teacher¡¦s knowledge base and science curriculum.
Data will be contributed to publicly accessible databases making them available
for further research and general education in the fields of paleoclimate and
paleoceanography.