* 1324922
* Fractional Imputation for Incomplete Data Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Jae-Kwang Kim, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 249,997.00

Incomplete data frequently are encountered in survey data due to nonresponse,
inaccurate measurement, and two-phase sampling, among other things. Any form of
incomplete data can damage the representativeness of a sample, and a naive
analysis with incomplete data can lead to biased estimation. Imputation is a
process of assigning values to the missing items with the objective of reducing
bias and improving the efficiency of the resulting estimators. This project will
develop fractional imputation methods as a tool for handling incomplete data for
general-purpose estimation. These methods will serve as important building
blocks for the establishment of a complete statistical package for analysis of
incomplete data that ultimately can be applied to problems in a variety of
disciplines, including the social, behavioral, and economic sciences. In
particular, the project will develop fractional imputation to address several
important problems with incomplete data, including (1) likelihood-based
inference, (2) robust estimation using fractional hot deck imputation, (3)
synthetic imputation for survey integration, and (4) statistical matching
technique.

Because fractional imputation is a relatively new approach for handling
incomplete data, there is a critical need for theoretical and methodological
development. The advantages of the fractional imputation approach lie in its
computational simplicity, wide applicability, and its statistical validity. By
using fractional weights, fractional imputation avoids the burden of iterative
computation, such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo, for the evaluation of conditional
expectation associated with missing data. The proposed approach can be used to
estimate parameters consistently and efficiently. The fractional imputation
approach can be applied to nonstandard situations such as measurement error
models, regression analysis combining two different surveys, and causal
inference from observational studies. The impact of the proposed research is
therefore substantial because the proposed approach can be used as a general
methodology for incomplete data. Because of the computational simplicity and
statistical validity of the fractional imputation approach, the results of the
proposed research should have wide applicability. It also should have a major
impact in providing complete data sets for analysis and new data products
combining information from different surveys.