* 1324070
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Infant feeding practices and maternal work in a context of rapid industrialization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Lindsey Mattern, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2016
* USD 25,200.00

Adequate nutrition during the first two years of life is essential for proper
growth/development and health. However, mothers must deal with competing demands
of work and infant feeding, and the trade-offs they make between these demands
have the potential to affect their own and their child's life history
parameters. India is currently experiencing urbanization and the rise of
professional opportunities for women that may alter IYCF practices, which
heretofore have included extensive breastfeeding, and these in turn may have
important impacts on infant growth and health. This project will investigate
infant and young child feeding (IYCF) practices and their relationship with
maternal work in urban and rural India. To examine the trade-offs between IYCF
practices and maternal economic activities, this study will employ a bio-
cultural approach and a life history framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
12-month longitudinal study will examine the relationship between maternal work
and the duration of exclusive breastfeeding, the quality and timing of the
introduction of complementary foods, and ultimately how these are related to
infant growth parameters and health. Furthermore, this study will also include
ethnographic information on cultural norms and beliefs regarding IYCF practices,
as well as allo-maternal care in a rapidly industrializing country and the
relationship to IYCF practices. Examining maternal economic activities and IYCF
practices allow for a better understanding of how to quantify the costs and
benefits of different feeding strategies to both infants/children (in terms of
growth and health) and mothers (in terms of economic and social gains or
deficits) and how these vary based on household composition and the different
employment opportunities that are available to women in the urban and rural
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data obtained from this study will be
important in the context of policy discussions of the constraints imposed by the
transition to the urban workforce on time available for breastfeeding and
maternity leaves that are shorter than the current breastfeeding
recommendations. This project will support the scientific training of a
promising graduate student.