* 1324791
* The mechanism of fumarate photoreduction on zinc sulfide nanoparticles
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jillian Banfield, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2018
* USD 399,730.00

(1) Technical Abstract

Light-driven redox interactions between semiconducting sulfide minerals and
organic molecules may have initiated the abiotic carbon chemistry needed for the
appearance of life on Earth. In particular, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
has been proposed as a primordial metabolism for emerging organisms. Testing
this proposal requires knowledge of the products and mechanisms of candidate
mineral-organic reactions. We will determine the rates, mechanism, and
intermediate species in one light-driven reaction from the TCA cycle.
Specifically, we will study the two-electron reduction of fumarate to succinate
on colloidal zinc sulfide (ZnS) surfaces, using time-resolved transient optical
and infrared absorption spectroscopy and Fourier transform electron paramagnetic
resonance spectroscopy to probe reaction progress from the subnanosecond to the
microsecond timescales. These complementary techniques will allow correlating
the temporal evolution of the charge distribution in the semiconductor and the
breaking and formation of bonds in the organic reactant. This research will
contribute new constraints on the geochemical conditions of the early Earth that
could have permitted the establishment of a prebiotic carbon cycle driven by
solar energy.

(2) Broader significance and importance

The absorption of light by metal sulfide minerals can initiate photochemical
reactions between the mineral surface and adsorbed organic molecules. This kind
of semiconductor photochemistry must have been occurring under the conditions
known to exist in the early Earth and it is speculated that they played an
important role in synthesis of complex organic molecules required for the
development of life. One particular reaction that transforms one small organic
acid molecule, fumarate, into another, succinate, occurs readily on the surface
of zinc sulfide (ZnS) particles under ultraviolet (UV) illumination. In this
process, the surface transfers two electrons to fumarate, which also acquires
two protons from water, to form two new carbon-hydrogen bonds. The precise
pathway of the reaction, including the ordering of electron and proton transfer
steps, is currently unknown. In particular, we hypothesize that the binding of
fumarate to the ZnS surface stabilizes the intermediate chemical species and
enables this relatively complex redox reaction to proceed without forming side
products. In our proposed research, we plan on using time-resolved spectroscopic
techniques to capture chemical signatures of the different intermediate species
and thereby determine the reaction pathway. By subsequently investigating how
the reaction pathway and rate changes in response to changing ZnS or solution
chemistry, we expect to be able to determine the role of the sulfide surface in
influencing this reaction. This work will put constraints on the geo chemical
conditions of the early Earth that could have permitted solar-driven, abiotic
organic reactions. This work has implications not only for understanding the
origins of life, but also the development of materials for solar energy
applications based upon Earth-abundant elements. This work also addresses
fundamental science at the basis of mineral-biomolecule interactions, which may
provide further insights into topics in medical geology.