* 1324092
* Multiscalar Approach to the Study of Vegetation and Plant Use during the Neolithic Period in the Central Balkans: A Case Study from the Vinca Settlement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Ksenija Borojevic, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 76,055.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Borojevic in collaboration with a
multidisciplinary international team will study plant remains to reveal plant
use and vegetation exploitation related to the built-environments at the Vinca
site, a type site of the Neolithic culture in Serbia in Southeast Europe. The
site provides an exceptional opportunity for the study of economic production
and building practices in the fifth millennia BC in the central Balkans, a core
area from which settled agricultural communities expanded into the Carpathian
Basin in the prehistory. The study will provide the initial data on past
vegetation and possible changes in the environment of central Southeast Europe
and use of space in the past 7000 years. The project will contribute to the
precise determination of the functions of the buildings, their life histories,
the overall function of the site and the use of plants and the exploitation of
natural vegetation during the late Neolithic.

This research is important because it will help to establish novel techniques
and methodology of identifying minute plant remains, an approach which can then
be expanded and applied to the study of vegetal matter world-wide, regardless of
the period and type of deposit.

Dr Borojevic will develop sample collection/preparation procedures which will
serve as a test case for assessing accurate, well-contextualized information
produced by combining micromorphological data (thin-sections) with those of bulk
flotation of plant remains from similar proveniences. The purpose is to reveal
the types of plants used for fuel, construction, fodder, and bedding, and how
their use changed spatially (ca. 4500 BC). Together with direct radiocarbon
dating, plant remains in thin sections can provide high resolution, contextually
controlled views of anthropogenic deposits and post-depositional histories
regarding vegetal matter and human activities. The combined information gained
from the analyses will enable reconstruction of the ancient vegetation and the
ecological conditions around the site in order to understand better the
strategies people employ in exploiting the natural vegetation and the choices
they make when using diverse plant materials for construction of different
features, types of fuel, or fodder.

The project will promote collaboration and cross training amongst scholars and
dissemination of the new technique to the graduate and undergraduate students in
the USA and Serbia.