* 1324303
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Expanding the legitimacy factor in the procedural justice legal socialization model
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Ellen Cohn, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Helena Silverstein
* 07/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

More than any group, adolescents have the highest rate of rule-violating
behaviors. This research investigates legal socialization, the process by which
individuals develop their understanding of society's rules and make decisions
about them. Specifically, the procedural justice legal socialization model
predicts that fair treatment by authority figures leads adolescents to view them
as more legitimate and, in turn, more likely to obey. Previously, legitimacy has
been examined as a composite of trust and an obligation to obey. The current
research examines trust and obligation as separate components. Furthermore,
although adolescents' perceptions of authority figures' right to make rules has
been supported as another important legitimacy factor, it has not been examined
in the procedural justice model. This research will examine "right to make
rules" as a third legitimacy component. Lastly, this research will incorporate
legal (police) as well as non-legal (parents) authority figures.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research will use a sample of 600 young adolescents currently
participating in the New Hampshire Youth Study, a longitudinal study of
delinquency. In Study 1, participants will read scenarios in which an authority
figure (parent/police) acts fairly or unfairly (procedural justice). Perceptions
of trust, right to make rules, and obligation to obey will be assessed. In Study
2, participants will read scenarios with trust, right to make rules, and
obligation to obey manipulated (high vs. low). Participants will rate how likely
the actor in the scenario and they themselves would be to break the
rule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings will be used to develop an expanded
model of legal socialization that integrates a new conceptualization of
legitimacy. Ultimately, the proposed research will be able to be used
immediately via workshops to inform and support school systems and social
service agencies working with youth by providing a basis for the development of
intervention efforts aimed at reducing adolescent delinquency.