* 1324792
* RAPID: Post-Disaster Risk Redefinition in Small New Jersey Municipalities During the Initial Recovery Period following Super Storm Sandy
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2015
* James Mitchell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 01/31/2015
* USD 24,992.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) will help identify how experts and
non-experts reassess storm surge flood risks that affect small municipalities
following a record-setting disaster. It is informed by, and will contribute to,
the interdisciplinary research literature on disaster recovery and risk
governance. Experts in emergency management organizations and flood plain
management organizations will be surveyed electronically to establish the scope
of risk information needs in the wake of Sandy, risk information exchange
activities, risk information gaps and unmet needs among user groups, openness to
involvement by non-experts, and suggestions about ways that risk information
could be employed more effectively. Public leaders and risk professionals in
each of three small municipalities that sustained losses will also be
interviewed to assess their roles in demanding, supplying, receiving, and using
risk information pertinent to their communities. Semi-structured interviews will
be conducted with local residents who have decided to continue living in these
communities after the storm. Interviews will identify residents' activities as
suppliers of local knowledge about post-storm risks, their assessments of other
flood risk information, and the perceived importance of risk information in
reducing uncertainties about recovery and community futures. Cross-tabulations
and content analysis of the data collected in surveys and interviews will be
undertaken to reveal shared concerns and assumptions about future flood risks as
well as to uncover the structure of evolving new networks that blend inputs from
external experts and local residents.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The grant will
provide information necessary to improve preparedness for coastal flood risks
that are anticipated to increase as a consequence of climate change. Progress in
anticipating more floods is being made at the global, transnational and national
scales but little is known about how small municipalities are equipped for that
urgent task. Small independent municipalities with limited resources and
populations of less than 10,000 are the norm for much of coastal America. These
are the places that most need, and can benefit from, decision-support
information. The survival of small municipalities and the wellbeing of adjacent
coasts will depend in large part on their ability to take advantage of expert
information in the aftermath of disasters that wreak major damage. At such times
prompt but judicious decisions are required about future uses of the damaged and
vulnerable areas that will increase their long-term resilience. What happens in
the small municipalities will determine the success of broader regional and
national responses to rising sea levels and worsening storms. By supplying a
sign-posted road map to the ways that risk information is being used and
pointing out opportunities for improvements, this research will make a valuable
contribution to human welfare, economic recovery and environmental
sustainability.