* 1324776
* EAGER: Synthesis, Material Investigation and Device Effect Demonstration of Nano Diamond Wires
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Jimmy Xu, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 213,839.00

The objective of this program is to begin the exploration of the feasibility,
phase-transition conditions and growth mechanism of a new allotrope of carbon
diamond nanowires. Through this exploration, the team will try to establish an
understanding of the basic science underlying and a synthetic process for
reproducible growth of diamond nanowires. The objective will be met through
iterative cycles of synthesis, materials characterization, and device effect
demonstration.

The intellectual merit of the proposed project is in proving the existence and
feasibility of synthesizing a new form of carbon - diamond nanowires, in
understanding their synthesis that apparently could take place so-far only at an
extraordinarily low temperature and pressure, both of which being greatly lower
than the corresponding conditions known as required for the diamond-graphite
phase-transitions. Successful completion of this Early-Concept study could help
door to further advances in the broad carbon-electronic revolution exemplified
by C60, carbon nanotube, and graphene, only this time on the diamond (SP3-bond)
side of the family. It could help enrich the classical phase-transition theory
with the effects of nano-scale capillary pressure and the surface charges in the
nano-regime.

The broader impact of this research project are expected in two primary areas;
1) The advancement of fundamental science in the nano-scale regime of the
diamond-graphite phase-transitions, 2) international collaboration between USA,
Korea, Australia, and Domenico Republic, with many students participating and
contributing to the common goal of bringing to existence of yet another new form
of carbon nanostructures diamond nanowires.