* 1324929
* Using novel genetic and isotopic techniques to understanding how microbial activity affects rates of dissolution of the mineral olivine.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2019
* Kenneth Nealson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2019
* USD 124,563.00

The results of this research will advance basic understanding in the Earth
sciences and will have practical implications for understanding Earth's carbon
cycle and the potential for carbon sequestration in mineral substrates. The
chemical breakdown of minerals ("mineral dissolution") regulates the
availability of carbon and other nutrient elements across a range of scales in
space and time. This means that understanding mineral dissolution is fundamental
to the study of the Earth system, and particularly to the study of Earth's
climate and biosphere. The rate at which minerals dissolve is known to depend on
a number of factors. Of these, the roles of biological activity and the approach
to thermodynamic equilibrium remain particularly poorly understood. This
knowledge gap stands in the way of efforts to develop models that scale
laboratory observations to field conditions and makes it difficult to use the
results from experimental studies to address large-scale Earth system problems.
Meanwhile studies of weathering in natural systems are often confounded by
multiple variables. The project proposed here will use novel experimental
methods to take a major step forward in understanding how microbial activity and
the approach to equilibrium affect the dissolution rate of the silicate mineral
olivine. Olivine plays a key role in the carbon cycle as a primary constituent
of highly weatherable rocks, and has been proposed as a substrate for carbon
dioxide sequestration, making it a noteworthy mineral for focused
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous field observations have shown that
biological activity drives higher increased silicate weathering rates, but a
mechanistic understanding is lacking because prior experimental efforts have
been complicated by variations in the activity and phenotypic expression of
organisms within and between experiments. To minimize this variability,
experiments in the proposed study will be preformed using microorganisms with
targeted genetic mutations. With this approach, the effects of a single
microbial process can be isolated and quantified over a range of environmental
conditions, allowing for a more robust determination of the effects of
biological activity on olivine dissolution rates than have previously been
possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dependence of mineral dissolution rates on
the departure from thermodynamic equilibrium is a critical factor that controls
dissolution rates in natural environments. Theoretical predictions vary
significantly in both the functional form of the thermodynamic equilibrium
dependence as well as the value of the thermodynamic equilibrium at which a
significant change in rate is observed. For olivine, near-equilibrium
experiments are complicated because solutions become supersaturated with respect
to secondary magnesium silicate minerals that precipitate at non-negligible
rates, making it impossible to quantify dissolution rates using standard
methodologies. To circumvent this problem, a novel method of determining
dissolution rates by isotope dilution will be used to study the near equilibrium
dissolution kinetics of olivine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support
the training of a doctoral student, who will supervise high school students from
traditionally underrepresented backgrounds. The doctoral student will also lead
the development of a laboratory exercise that demonstrates the carbon dioxide
sequestration potential of the mineral olivine while teaching basic science
concepts. This exercise will be incorporated into a display at the University of
Southern California and will be provided free of charge over the Internet for
educational use at other institutions.