* 1324962
* Pathways Project: Developing a Citizen Science Program Model to Engage Underrepresented Minority Groups
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Lindsay Goodwin, Ocean Discovery Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 06/30/2016
* USD 249,985.00

This Pathways project from the Ocean Discovery Institute (ODI) seeks to develop
and pilot a program model designed to fill an identified gap in citizen science
research and practice literature: how to effectively engage and better
understand how to foster participation among people from under-represented
groups in citizen science research. The ODI model is designed around six
principles: (1) leaders who are reflective of the community, (2) science that is
locally relevant, (3) guided, as opposed to self-guided, experiences, (4) direct
interactions with scientists, (5) progressively increasing responsibilities for
participants who express interest, and (6) removing barriers to participation,
such as transportation, language, family involvement and access to
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses environmentally degraded,
crime-ridden local canyons, a locally relevant STEM-related issue, and leverages
the Southern California Coastal Water Research Project's (SCCWRP) regional
citizen science effort focused on identifying the sources and pathways of trash
through regional watersheds. The scientific research components of the project
focus on four canyons in the area, employing sampling methods developed by
SCCWRP. Youth who are part of other ODI programs and who have demonstrated
leadership and interest in science, work with the project team to scaffold
family and youth participation in project activities taking place during
afterschool and weekend time. Based on continued participation in the project,
community participants can become more involved in the project, starting as "new
scientists" and moving through "returning scientists" to "expert scientists"
roles. The project evaluation seeks to identify the role and importance of the
components of the proposed model with respect to participation, retention, and
learning by participants from groups under-represented in STEM. The
dissemination products of this Pathways project include a white paper describing
the model and lessons learned as well as presentations to community groups and
education and citizen science practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on
insights from the iterative approach to the model during this Pathways study, a
subsequent full-scale development project would seek to engage citizen science
projects around the nation in adapting the model to increase participation of
individuals from groups underrepresented in STEM, including building out ODI's
citizen science programming.