* 1324911
* Calcium isotopic response to disturbance at Hubbard Brook: acidification, deforestation, and recovery
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrew Kurtz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2017
* USD 173,000.00

This study evaluates changes in Calcium (Ca) cycling at the Hubbard Brook
Experimental Forest in New Hampshire based on measurements of Ca stable isotope
ratios on a unique sample archive dating to as early as 1963. Like other
Northeast U.S. forests, the Ca cycle was significantly perturbed by acid
deposition beginning in the early 1950's resulting in increased Ca loss from
bio-available soil pools and detrimental effects on forest growth. Additionally,
several of the first order watersheds at HBEF have been experimentally logged
allowing examination of the relationship between harvesting, Ca cycling and
forest ecology. Research will address the following questions: How do the Ca
isotope ratios of streamwater and soil change in response to disturbances
including acidification and deforestation? What can such data tell us about the
mechanisms of Ca loss from forest ecosystems and changes in Ca cycling resulting
from disturbance? An isotope-tracer box model indicates that soil and
streamwater Ca isotopes reflect the relative magnitudes of important fluxes in
the forest Ca cycle (external supply, plant uptake, and recycling to soil),
leading to a series of testable hypotheses related to the ecosystem-level
response to these perturbations. The main hypothesis is that forest growth will
take up Ca, limiting it's input to streamwater, while deforestation will
increase streamwater Ca as runoff from soil. To address questions and
hypotheses, Ca isotope ratios and elemental concentrations will be determined on
a carefully selected group of archived soil parent material, precipitation,
streamwater, soil, and vegetation samples.

Ca biogeochemistry has important implications for forest sustainability, both in
the NE US, Northern Europe, and China. Ca isotopes, like other tracers of Ca
cycling, has the potential to resolve some of the uncertainties in the sources
of Ca loss from forests that are not apparent from mass balance studies alone.
This information is important beyond biogeochemical research, with implications
for forest management and regionally important agribusiness, such as maple syrup
production. This project will primarily support a graduate student in Boston
University's new Terrestrial Biogeosciences PhD program. The graduate student
and the PI will create modules for use by a future year's cohort of GLACIER
graduate students that introduce middle school students to New England
biogeochemistry, acid rain, and forest sustainability. The results of this
project will further be communicated to the about 300 students at Boston
University and Tufts that the PI teaches annually.