* 1324350
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal Status and Civic Engagement Among Refugees
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Shay Cannedy, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 25,200.00

Southern Methodist University doctoral student Shay Cannedy, under the guidance
of Dr. Caroline Brettell, will undertake ethnographic research on how the
retrenchment of political asylum and concomitant degrees of "partial legal
membership" impact civic engagement among migrants. Specifically, in examining a
sample of asylum seekers and refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who reside in Ireland, she will explore how migrants claim presence and
legitimacy in society despite their legal and social exclusion. The project asks
how migrants civically engage with their new surroundings and how bids for
belonging are impacted by legal status, socioeconomic factors, and pre-migration
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will undertake 12 months of
field research, and utilize a combination of social scientific methods that
employ both explanatory and exploratory elements, which include: questionnaires
to generate baseline data on demographics and overall trends in civic
engagement; in-depth interviews to capture perceptions of citizenship and
belonging, attitudes toward civic engagement, and ethnic identity; participant
observation at a variety of community events such as voluntary association
meetings, ethnic festivals, religious ceremonies, and political protests; and a
content analysis of relevant media and immigration legislation and policy to
understand how migrants are constructed in public discourse and immigration
law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research will contribute to social
scientific understanding of how, in an era of heightened immigration control,
refugees are claiming legitimate presence on their own terms through practice
rather than law. Its focus on the socioeconomic dimensions of this process and
how it intersects with legal status will yield greater insight into how migrants
enter the public sphere to enact social change which is critical for theorists
and policy makers alike. Funding this research also contributes to the education
of a graduate student.