* 1324830
* Collaborative Research:  Spatial Variability in Eroded Sediment Size and Geomorphic Processes Inferred From Detrital Thermochronometry and Cosmogenic Nuclides
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Leonard Sklar, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2016
* USD 101,385.00

Understanding patterns of erosion and sedimentation in mountains is important
for Earth scientists and land-use managers alike. Over management timescales,
eroded sediment affects water quality, influences the amount and quality of
aquatic habitat in rivers, and determines the lifespan of both natural and
manmade reservoirs by setting the pace of sedimentation within them. Over
longer, geologic timescales, eroded sediment also influences landscape erosion
by providing rivers with the tools they need to cut into underlying bedrock and
thereby adjust to changes in climate and tectonic forcing. Thus, the erosion of
sediment is both the product of and a key driving force behind landscape change.
Work funded by this grant will develop new methods for interrogating sediment
about where it comes from, how it is generated, and how fast it moves across
landscapes. This should permit progress on understanding erosional processes and
how they influence landscape response to climatic and tectonic forcing.

Geologists have long recognized that sediment contains a wealth of information
about its journey from intact rock on hillslopes to the jumbles of particles
that cover modern riverbeds and fill ancient sedimentary deposits. Extraction of
this information has become increasingly sophisticated with recent technological
and methodological advances. As a result, understanding of surface processes has
become increasingly quantitative. For example, rates of erosion from slopes can
now often be measured from cosmogenic nuclides, which build up in sediment
grains when they are near Earth's surface. Meanwhile, recent studies have shown
that the clockwork-like buildup of radiogenic helium in the mineral apatite can
be used as a fingerprint of where sediment comes from on catchment slopes. Here,
this apatite-helium tracing technique will be used together with cosmogenic
nuclides in a completely new way, to simultaneously unveil spatial variations in
both the erosion rates and sizes of sediment produced on hillslopes by bedrock
weathering. This marks an important advance in sediment tracing; until now,
there was no way to quantify how the sizes of eroded sediment vary over
catchment scales. Preliminary results show a connection between the elevation of
slopes and the sizes of sediment that they produce by weathering and erosion.
Higher-elevation slopes, which are colder and less vegetated, produce coarser
sediment. This points to climate as a key regulator of sediment size. The
proposed research will test the new sediment tracing approach in a steep
catchment and explore hypotheses about linkages between climate and the sizes of
eroded sediment. Expected outgrowths of this research include fresh insight on
common, but as-yet incompletely understood downstream trends in landscapes, such
as: fining in grain size in mountain streambeds; shifts from braided to
meandering channel forms; and changes in aquatic habitats and the organisms that
populate them.