* 1324086
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Victimization During Incarceration on Re-Entry to the Community
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Paul Boxer, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2015
* USD 24,961.00

According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, 11.6 million people were admitted
to jail from 2011-2012; yet, there has been relatively little research examining
the impact of short-term incarceration on offender adjustment. Two opposing
theories have typically been provided to explain how inmates adapt to the
incarceration environment. The importation model suggests that inmates bring a
host of pre-incarceration experiences and characteristics with them into the
incarceration environment that account for how inmates adapt and behave.
Conversely, the deprivation model posits the oppressive incarceration
environment is responsible for inmate adaptation. Research has found support for
both models. However, these theories have not been tested longitudinally in
jail. This project will test these theories throughout a stay in jail and into
the community to update and expand these models. The study will test the
overarching hypothesis that traumatic experiences with violence encountered
before, during, and after jail are related to increased mental health
difficulties and recidivism.

Two hundred male and female inmates will be recruited to participate in the
present study. Subjects will complete surveys approximately once a month for
four months, starting from the initial point of incarceration and ending a month
after release from jail. The subjects will self-report psychosocial problems
including symptoms of anxiety, post-traumatic stress, depression, antisocial
behavior, aggression, and substance use. Recidivism data will also be collected
for released subjects. The researchers will use self-report data on violence
exposure prior, during, and after incarceration, to explain the development of
psychopathology and predict mental/behavioral outcomes, as well as identify risk
factors for recidivism.

The current study is the first longitudinal examination to assess developmental
changes in mental and behavioral health throughout jail and in the community.
This project will identify risk and protective factors that can be used to
create interventions and programs, reducing the risk of recidivism. By learning
more about the context in which offenders must adapt, researchers can provide
informed recommendations to policy makers and increase safety in communities and
jails.