* 1324025
* Doctoral Dissertation in Political Science: Deliberative Autocracy: How Single-Party Regimes Manage Liberalized Assemblies
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,01/31/2015
* Paul Schuler, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2015
* USD 9,954.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is directly related to US interests in
democratization as it addresses how single party regimes create and control
legislatures, focusing on Vietnam. Recent scholarship has argued for the
importance of partially-liberalized legislatures in stabilizing power sharing
and generating growth under authoritarian rule. This research leaves unresolved
a fundamental commitment problem posed by partial liberalization, which is how
legislators are prevented from using their public platform to mobilize a
personal base of support. This project presents two novel arguments for how it
is overcome. It shows that agenda control and strategic vetting are used to
prevent debate from occurring on divisive issues while channeling debate towards
areas where the regime desires feedback. These arguments are tested in Vietnam,
which features a partially-liberalized legislature controlled by a single party.
The project will rely on state-of-the-art automated text analysis techniques to
analyze speeches made on the floor of the Vietnam National Assembly (VNA) and
interviews in the Vietnamese news media. It will also rely on qualitative data
collected from interviews with Vietnamese officials and VNA delegates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Understanding how authoritarian
regimes can manage institutions to serve their interests is a critical issue in
democratization and political stability. In the past decade, research has
considered the importance of parliaments or elections in stabilizing
authoritarian rule. This work will add depth to this agenda in two important
ways. First, it exposes a previously unacknowledged dilemma that prevents
regimes from reaping the rewards of authoritarian institutions. Second, through
its theoretical argument, it also proposes how successful regimes protect
themselves from this problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also be
important to those interested in authoritarian durability more generally. In
particular, it will help explain the empirical finding that single-party systems
are more durable than other types of authoritarian regimes, such as military or
personalistic regimes. This study suggests that single parties are strong
because they are adept at organizing agenda control and vetting through parallel
party institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will
have several broader impacts outside of its theoretical contributions. For
policy makers, it addresses a debate regarding the stability of partially-
liberalized regimes. Policy makers debate whether or not to engage partially-
liberalized regimes due to uncertainty about the democratizing effects of
partial political reforms. By specifying the challenges facing regimes that
attempt to liberalize, this project highlights factors suggesting that partial
liberalization may not be easy to manage for authoritarian rulers. In short,
while liberalization does not inevitably lead to democratization, it may
nonetheless increase the likelihood of an eventual transition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second broader impact of the project will be to deepen
our understanding of the recent political history and political institutions of
Vietnam, an important country to US national security interests. Since the
normalization of relations with Vietnam in 1995 and the signing of the Bilateral
Trade Agreement in 2001, the relationship between Vietnam and the US has
strengthened. As interest in the region, particularly regarding tensions in the
South China Sea, has grown, Vietnam has become an increasingly important
partner. This project will contribute by providing in-depth analysis of recent
Vietnamese politics and institutions. It will also produce the first
comprehensive digital archive and analysis of Vietnamese-language news articles
and blogs.