* 1324894
* Collaborative Research: Alterations of Soil Physical and Geochemical Properties Induced by Low-intensity Fire
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Markus Berli, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2017
* USD 226,147.00

The majority of fire research to date has focused on the negative impacts of
large, medium-to-high intensity burns, which typically cause massive combustion
of litter and organic matter in the topsoil followed by increases in soil
erosion, runoff, and loss of nutrients. The positive role of fires in vegetation
succession and nutrient cycling also is well recognized. In contrast, low-
intensity burns (with soil temp. of <220 degrees C) are presumed to cause
minimal soil degradation and landscape/ecosystem alteration. As a result, there
has been only limited research investigating potential negative consequences of
such burns, although they account for almost half of total burned areas in the
United States. Furthermore, climate change is expected to increase the frequency
and area of land exposed to such low-intensity burns. Recent long-term studies
on the effect of low-intensity fires on soil structure, however, are revealing
that substantial loss of soil aggregate stability and porosity occurs several
months to a few years after the burn has occurred. These degradations in soil
structure often are followed by reduced infiltrability and increased soil
erosion. The overarching goal of this proposed research is to investigate the
impacts of low-intensity fires on soil structure and the implication for soil
hydrology, erosion, and nutrient dynamics. Specifically, this project is
designed to test three hypotheses: a) soil structure deterioration is caused by
micro-scale stresses created within aggregates due to rapid vaporization or
thermal expansion of soil particles as well as preferential volatilization of
mostly hydrophilic simple organic molecules; b) disaggregation and subsequent
surface sealing result in reduced infiltration and increased erosion; and c)
preferential mobility of nutrient-rich dislodged fine aggregates and particles
results in accelerated loss of nutrients and carbon via lateral and vertical
transport. The proposed research will be conducted using soil samples collected
from arid and semi-arid ecosystems in eastern Nevada and will mimic
characteristics of past low-intensity burns of the region.

Improved understanding of how low-intensity fires can lead to land/ecosystem
degradation will benefit society by enabling more effective design of controlled
burns as well as post-burn land management practices. This knowledge also can
play an important role in planning for mitigation of the effects of low-
intensity fires in sensitive ecosystems and landscapes of arid/semi-arid regions
that are expected to experience more fires as a result of climate change. This
research will expand on-going collaboration with the Bureau of Land Management,
thereby facilitating adoption of new advances to support science-based resource
management. In addition, this project will provide educational and advanced
research training to one Ph.D.-level student and one postdoctoral researcher.
?Science boxes? will be employed to engage K-12 students in results of the
proposed project.