* 1324807
* DIP: EMBRACEing English Language Learners with Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Arthur Glenberg, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,365,915.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education DIP (Development and
Implementation) Project, the PIs focus on how to address the English-language
learning needs of young English-language learners (ELLs). They are enhancing the
Moved by Reading (MbR) computer program that has been used to increase the
reading comprehension of native English speakers. In MbR, a child actively
simulates a sentence or a set of sentences being read by moving pictures on a
computer screen to illustrate what he or she understands. When they become
competent at that, learners transition to imagining moving pictures as they are
reading so that they become independent and accomplished readers. In this
project, the PIs are enhancing MbR in several ways to help ELLs learn English
and learn to read in English. The new approach, called EMBRACE (Enhanced Moved
by Reading to Accelerate Comprehension in English), includes MbR as well as
facilities for vocabulary support in learners' first language (in this case,
Spanish), personalizing choice of next texts to read based on learners' syntax
and vocabulary capabilities and needs, game-like facilities for sustaining
engagement, and support for collaboration. Research is addressing the roles and
effects of each of these supports for learning so as to identify good practices
for promoting English-language literacy in ELLs, how to use technology to
support those practices, and trajectories of development of English-language
competencies in such learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because reading serves as a
gateway to academic success, graduation, and employment, there is a great
national need to address the English-language learning and reading needs of
those whose first language is something other than English. This project
addresses this issue through the development of an approach called EMBRACE --
Enhanced Moved by Reading to Accelerate Comprehension in English, an interactive
software system to be used in elementary school classrooms, supplementary
programs, and at home. Using EMBRACE, children learn English vocabulary, syntax,
and reading through manipulating pictures representing the content of what they
are reading. Choice of next texts to read is personalized to individual
learners. Learners also are supported in working on language issues with peers.