* 1324627
* Collaborative Research: Differentiating Between Lithologic and Baselevel Controls on River Profiles: Canyons of the Colorado Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Brian Clarke, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2016
* USD 25,549.00

The Grand Canyon is an iconic but enigmatic landform. For over a hundred years
geologists have puzzled over the mystery of how and when the canyon was carved.
Much new data has come to light recently, but the mystery has only deepened:
some evidence points to a geologically recent canyon (carved in the last 6
million years) but some new evidence points to a much older history, with parts
of the canyon dating back some 70 million years to when dinosaurs still walked
the Earth. The debate has become intense and public interest is at an all-time
high given the many visitors to the Grand Canyon National Park and the fact that
most introductory Earth science classes from middle school through university
involve some mention of the Grand Canyon. We bring a new, complementary,
approach to this old problem. Dramatic, sharply defined canyons can result from
either acceleration in river incision rate (the young canyon hypothesis) or
river incision into stronger rocks (the old canyon hypothesis). Either is
plausible given presently available data. Fortunately these alternative
scenarios are dramatically different in one key regard: whereas in the young
canyon hypothesis erosion rates within the canyon are much greater than in the
surrounding landscape, in the old canyon hypothesis erosion rates in the canyon
should be similar to, or even less than, erosion rates in the surroundings. We
will use a relatively new method to measure erosion rates averaged over
millennial timescales in key localities within and around the Grand Canyon: the
concentration of isotopes produced by exposure of rocks to cosmic rays in river
sediments and on river terraces provides a measure of how long rocks and
sediment has spent at or near the Earth's surface, and thus allows a
quantitative estimate of erosion rates. In addition we will study the strength
of rock units within and surrounding the Grand Canyon to assess how much of the
canyon's form can be explained by variations in rock strength alone. We
anticipate that our results will be incorporated into materials at Grand Canyon
National Park and into Earth science lesson plans across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We address three fundamental problems of broad
interest to Geologists and Geomorphologists: (1) the role of lithology in river
incision and landscape evolution in general, (2) how lithologic variability
affects, and limits, our ability to interpret river incision history from study
of landforms and (3) the controversial incision history of river canyons in the
Colorado Plateau. Despite the fundamental, and long-recognized, importance of
lithology in landscape evolution, it has received little attention in the
quantitative studies of landscape evolution in recent decades. Partly this is
because we have lacked the ability to quantitatively measure rock strength at
the process scale and partly because until recently we lacked firm theory to
relate rock properties to river incision processes; limitations that can now be
overcome. We draw on and extend recent advances in using shallow seismic
refraction surveys to estimate rock mass quality at the process scale, allowing
us to account for the extent of rock fracture in estimates of erosional
susceptibility. Thus we will contribute both to understanding of the controls on
river incision into rock (which is at the heart of the interrelations among
climate, tectonics, and topography) and to resolving the controversy over the
age and origin of the Grand Canyon.