* 1324912
* Elucidating the Roles of Manganese Oxides in Regulating Arsenic Contamination of Groundwater in Southern Asia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Owen Duckworth, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2017
* USD 399,998.00

Around the world, over 100 million people routinely consume well water with
naturally occurring arsenic concentrations that exceed safe drinking-water
guidelines. Although the global scale, health impacts, and extreme societal
costs of arsenic contamination are apparent, it is less well understood to what
extent arsenic may threaten groundwater that is currently arsenic-free. This
issue is critical because arsenic contamination of previously uncontaminated
aquifers has been observed to occur over timescales of decades. The overall goal
of this research is to quantify the potential for future arsenic contamination
of groundwater from sources that are both internal and external to aquifers. To
achieve this goal, we will conduct a suite of field, laboratory and
spectroscopic analyses on sediment samples from a well-characterized aquifer in
Cambodia, where groundwater is potentially at risk for future arsenic
contamination. In particular, this work will take advantage of natural sediment
variability to investigate how the quantities and chemical reactivities of
specific minerals govern arsenic concentrations in well water. Results from this
project will advance fundamental concepts in biogeochemistry by providing a new
conceptual model for the coupled cycling of elements that impact arsenic
distributions in the subsurface. Research outcomes will have direct implications
for the sustainability and safety of water resources, and to maximize benefits
of project results, informational briefs about risks for arsenic contamination
will be widely disseminated to policy makers and people who consume well water.
The project will galvanize a developing collaboration between two early-career
scientists, and train a postodoctoral scholar, a Ph.D. student, and
undergraduates in advanced approaches for assessing biogeochemical processes
impacting contaminants in the environment. Project materials will be harnessed
to develop programs for K-12 students that highlight local water quality issues,
motivate understanding of basic science concepts, and provide hands-on exposure
to aspects of environmental science outside the realms of typical classroom
curricula.