* 1324511
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Acquisition and Processing of Pitch Accents:  A Cross-linguistic Study of English and Japanese Second Language Learners
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Bonnie Schwartz, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2017
* USD 14,472.00

This dissertation investigates second language (L2) use of prosody--the "rhythm"
and "melody" of sentences--to convey and comprehend Information Structure. In
English, contrastive information ("Did Mariana make the apple bread?"-"Mariana
made the BANANA bread.") and new information ("What did Mariana make?"-"Mariana
made the BANANA bread.") are emphasized with higher pitch and longer duration,
whereas old information is deaccented ("Who made the banana bread?"-"Mariana
made the banana bread."). Contrastive information and new information are
differentiated by tune of pitch: the former with low tone followed by high tone,
the latter with high plateau tone. In Tokyo-Japanese, by contrast, presence or
absence of pitch indicates word meaning ("a'me" 'rain' vs. "ame" 'candy'), not
Information Structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In light of these differences, this
bi-directional study examines whether Target Language prosodic perception is
modulated by native language (L1) properties and how L2 learners develop
prosodic marking of Information Structure. L1-Japanese learners of English and
L1-English learners of Japanese are tested on 3 prosodies--contrastive pitch,
regular high pitch, deaccentuation--and their link to Information Structure: (1)
a perception task in which naturalness of pitch and duration vis-a-vis
information status is rated; (2) a dyadic picture-coloring production task,
manipulating information status of colors and drawing instruments ("Color the
dog with the blue spray / blue pen / red pen. Now color the cat with the red
pen."); (3) a comprehension task, the listening counterpart to task (2),
utilizing eyetracking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first investigation of
L2 prosody that systematically manipulates and analyzes prosodic details and
tests L2 learners' perception, production, and comprehension in well-controlled,
contextualized experiments. Since very little is known about L2 learners' use of
prosodic information, the project could serve as an important data source for
formulating an L2 acquisition theory of prosody and help set an L2 agenda for
higher-level phonological acquisition/processing/teaching.