* 1324818
* Survivability of glacially induced quartz grain microtextures during glacio-fluvial transport
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Dustin Sweet, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2016
* USD 49,943.00

SURVIVABILITY OF GLACIALLY INDUCED QUARTZ GRAIN MICROTEXTURES DURING GLACIO-
FLUVIAL TRANSPORT&lt;br/&gt;DUSTIN SWEET, TEXAS TECH UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;EAR-
1324818&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) analysis of microtextures on quartz grains has long been used to assess
depositional environment. Recent advances in this field of study indicates that
wet-based glaciers produce a unique suite of microtextures on the surface of
quartz grains, as a result of extraordinary stress imparted to grains during
glacial transport. Glacially induced microtextures are indicated by grooves,
gouges and microstriae exhibited on grain surfaces and reflect grain-to-grain
contact under high-stress. In contrast, fluvial transport of quartz grains has
been found to produce microtextures indicative of grain-to-grain contact as
grains bounce along the river bed. These fluvially induced microtextures are
indicated by v-shaped cracks and rounding of edges. The goal of this pilot study
is to test the survivability of glacially induced microtextures in a fluvial
system by progressively sampling modern river sands from glacial front to a
distance downstream. This study utilizes the Bear River in British Columbia,
Canada as an initial test because the river is easily accessible, emanates from
a glacial front, long reach with minimal tributaries and minimal chance of
inheritance of inherited microtextures. &lt;br/&gt;The results from this pilot
study should provide data that demonstrates a progressive overprinting of
glacially induced microtextures by fluvially induced microtextures. Yet, the
natural variability of rivers is vast and numerous rivers need to be tested to
develop meaningful overprinting trends. Thus, this pilot study represents the
initial foray of a much larger research project that will attempt to assess
progressive, downstream fluvial overprinting of glacially induced microtextures
from a variety of proglacial rivers. Successful completion of the larger project
will provide proxies for ancient systems that: 1) provide constraints on
distance of fluvial transport from glacial front and thus, extent of ancient
glacial systems; and 2) estimate paleohydraulic parameters. Thus, the
overarching goals of the project will be valuable to a variety of communities,
including glacial and fluvial sedimentologists, micromorphologists and
geomorphologists.&lt;br/&gt;This pilot study provides research opportunities for
at least 2 undergraduate students, likely first exposure to a scientific
project. These students will be brought on early in the project and involved
with field research, laboratory analysis and ultimate showcasing of findings at
appropriate scientific venues. Enabling students with scientific research skills
early on in the academic path makes better career geoscientists.