* 1324760
* RCN:   Building a Sediment Experimentalist Network (SEN)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Leslie Hsu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2018
* USD 440,559.00

Our dynamic landscape evolves as sediment travels a path through mountain
slopes, rivers, and deltas in events like landslides, floods, and hurricanes. In
nature, these processes typically occur over vast length and time scales, making
them difficult to study directly. Laboratory sedimentary experiments enable
improved control and observation of these Earth-surface processes. However, such
investigations often occur in isolation, and there is little if any coordination
for our scientific community. We will form a Sediment Experimentalist Network
(SEN) to help integrate the efforts of sediment experimentalists and build a
knowledge base for guidance on best practices for data collection and
management. We will also facilitate cross-institutional collaborative
experiments, and communicate with and educate the research community about data
and metadata standards for sediment-based experiments. This effort will improve
the efficiency and transparency of sedimentary research for field geologists and
modelers as well as experimentalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major outcomes from
SEN will be 1) creation of a Knowledge Base (SEN-KB), 2) coordination of
Experimental Collaboratories (SEN-EC), and 3) integration of Educational efforts
and Data standards development (SEN-ED) with tools for propagating new
technology and methods. SEN-KB will be a collection of online resources for
management and discovery of experimental data, metadata, analysis tools,
methodologies, and other user-driven needs. SEN-EC will pilot infrastructure to
foster multi-laboratory collaborations on experiments addressing broad and
interdisciplinary grand challenges that are difficult to solve in a single
laboratory: 1) extrapolation of experiments to natural systems and theory, 2)
comparability of experimental results from disparate facilities, and 3)
decoupling of external versus intrinsic processes observed in experiments. SEN-
ED will provide training for data management through workshops and outreach for
collecting and sharing experimental data. The project will facilitate access and
use of new and existing data for a wide range of users in the experimentalist
community and beyond toward modelers and field geologists.