* 1324181
* Collaborative Research: Policy Diffusion: International Influences on Appointments to High Courts
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Maria Escobar-Lemmon, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 109,907.00

Despite rapid demographic change concerning who is obtaining legal education and
occupying positions that traditionally serve as springboards to high courts, the
demographic characteristics ofjustices on high courts around the world are not
changing concomitantly. The United States, Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD), United Nations (UN), and World Bank among others have
poured significant resources into judicial reform. However, global data and a
clear understanding of why some high courts have become more descriptively
representative of citizenry than others are not available. This project
constructs a new dataset on men and women?s appointments to high courts in 168
countries from 1970 to 2010. Using the dataset, the PIs will explain change and
stability in demographic characteristics of those appointed to high courts in
some countries at particular points in time. Building on theories of
international norm diffusion, the PIs will test whether countries learn from
their neighbors or if countries respond to the preferences of international
donors. Further, global norms may interact with a country?s political system,
making change more likely when civil society can nominate judges, when courts
are larger, and when the country is democratic. In addition, the PIs will
interview judges and government officials in four countries to shed light on how
external and internal pressures influence high court appointments.

Demographic change might lead to changes in policies and might also contribute
to perceptions of the fairness of governing institutions as well as public
confidence in high courts, making the issue one of substantial social
significance. Understanding the conditions under which the demographic
characteristics of appointees might change could assist policymakers and would
provide evidence to evaluate the effectiveness of aid programs. In addition to
sharing findings with the scholarly community, the PIs will make the data
publicly available for scholars and policymakers.