* 1324243
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Measuring the Impacts of Physical and Structural Constraint on Refugee Women's Reproductive Health
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Sharon Williams, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 23,846.00

Graduate student, Elizabeth Wirtz, under the supervision of Dr. Sharon Williams,
will explore how experiences of violence, insecurity, inequality, and poverty
shape women's reproductive preferences, decisions, and actions. The researcher
will use systematic qualitative ethnographic methods to investigate the ways in
which physical and structural violence affects Somali refugee women's
reproductive lives. This project will seek to understand the interaction between
physical and structural violence and the ways in which they influence women's
reproductive choices as well as the constraints they place on women's ability to
successfully realize these choices.

This study contributes to a theoretical understanding of individual and cultural
resiliance and adaptation in the context of both prolonged and acute crisis,
violence, poverty, and suffering. The project also has strong potential to
inform policies and programs that address reproductive health, gender equality,
and various forms of violence, particularly sexual and gender based violence in
refugee communities. Specifically, this project aims to produce insights that
will be used by agencies working with refugees in East Africa and elsewhere to
improve the women's health, safety, and well-being. Part of the research design
includes training and employing research assistants from the local community to
foster local participation in social science research and increase refugee
participation in potential interventions and program implementation. Information
from this project will be disseminated through academic and non-academic
channels including academic conferences and publications as well as reports and
collaborations with international and local humanitarian organizations working
with refugees in East Africa. The project also contributes to the education of a
graduate student in anthropology.