* 1324263
* Dissertation Research: Changing Views of Social Roles among Clients in a Residential Addiction Treatment Program
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,03/31/2017
* Lee Hoffer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2017
* USD 16,123.00

Case Western Reserve University doctoral student Allison Schlosser, guided by
Dr. Lee Hoffer, will undertake research on how socio-political inclusion is
mediated by health-related power and knowledge for clients in addiction
treatment. This study examines emergent forms of citizenship among clients in
clinically hybrid addiction treatment that combines biomedical technologies,
mutual-aid, and various psychotherapies. This research situates client
experience in relation to values of economic efficiency, individual choice, and
self-responsibility.

Schlosser will conduct 19 months of field research at a residential addiction
treatment facility and the surrounding community in a post-Industrial city in
the Midwestern United States. She will focus on how clients' citizenship is
constructed in relation to clinically hybrid addiction treatment and in post-
treatment life. This study is grounded in a longitudinal ethnographic design
including participant-observation and repeated in-depth interviews with randomly
selected clients (N=40) during treatment and focused ethnography (ethnographic
shadowing, informal interviews, and in-depth interviews) with a sub-sample of
clients (n=12) for 6 months of post-treatment. Analyses will focus on how
diversely positioned clients (by gender, self-reported race, and
mandated/voluntary treatment status) experience treatment and how their
engagement with various forms of treatment relates to their socio-political
inclusion.

This research contributes to anthropological and related social theory examining
how novel forms of citizenship emerge in the context of complex health
interventions that are shaped by broader cultural and economic trends. By
contributing to our understanding of how shifts in the structure and provision
of health services in a influence the socio-political inclusion of the most
marginal in society, this study will also provide essential knowledge to inform
health services and public policy. Funding this research also supports the
education of a social scientist