* 1324281
* Collaborative Research: Voter Mobilization and Electoral Subversion in the Workplace
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2018
* Timothy Frye, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2018
* USD 82,393.00

This award satisfies Division B, Title V, Sec. 543 of the Consolidated and
Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-6, enacted on March 26,
2013).

Intellectual Merit: The project is important to US national security interests
because it addresses economic coercion that undermines democracy. Scholars have
long recognized that rulers in non democracies can extend their tenure by
subverting elections, focusing on ballot-box fraud, repression, turnout-buying,
vote buying, patronage spending, and the co-optation of opposition elites.
However, they have largely overlooked one prominent form of electoral subversion
in contemporary hybrid regimes: the coercive mobilization of voters by
employers. In many countries, employers - firm managers, supervisors, CEOs,
landlords, bosses, directors and so on - use their leverage over workers to
induce them to turn out and/or vote a specific way. Using surveys of 1) firm
managers in Russia and 2) residents of Russia, Ukraine, Georgia, Honduras,
Algeria, Lebanon, Mozambique, Botswana, South Africa, Malaysia, Indonesia, and
Cambodia, this research seeks to identify the conditions under which firm
managers apply political pressure on their employees during elections.

This research sheds light on an understudied means by which rulers in hybrid
regimes subvert elections and forestall democratization. It also identifies how
the structure of the economy affects a country's prospects for regime change. In
addition, while much of what we know about clientelism suggests that it is
largely confined to poor, rural settings with tight-knit social networks, this
research explores how clientelist exchange can persist in modern, industrial
settings.

Broader Impacts: By identifying the conditions that allow leaders to subvert
elections via the workplace, this research will help policymakers and the
democracy assistance community to develop programs that improve the integrity of
elections. More specifically, the proposed research will lead to the development
of vote monitoring techniques that can detect workplace electoral subversion and
informational programs that can be deployed by NGOs to reduce the incidence of
economic coercion in the workplace. The proposed research will also show how
incomplete economic reform, which leaves firms dependent on the state, can make
workers' voting rights vulnerable to infringement. Thus, this project will help
policymakers understand how economic reforms that reduce state power over firms
can help promote political liberalization. Finally, this research contributes to
our understanding of why and when hybrid regimes break down; an important public
policy consideration in its own right.