* 1324753
* DIP: Collaborative Research: Taking Hands-on Experimentation to the Cloud: Comparing Physical and Virtual Models in Biology on a Massive Scale
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Hans Riedel-Kruse, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,356,500.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education DIP project, the PIs are building
and evaluating a technological and curricular infrastructure to empower
scalable, low-cost experimentations for undergraduates and K-12 students in the
life sciences. The infrastructure exploits two technologies that have been
developed by the PIs: biotic systems, which enable low-cost remote
experimentation in biology, and bifocal modeling, which motivates students to
engage in deep scientific inquiry by comparing physical and virtual models in
real time. Using a low-cost local or remote Biological Printing Unit (BPU),
learners will 'print' organisms into petri dishes and run experiments with live
materials. Each learner will have control over the empirical apparatus for as
long as needed, due to the low cost and scalability of the system. The living
material itself has a small footprint, and ever-advancing high-throughput
technologies, such as automated microscopy and DNA sequencing, enable cost-
effective, automated multiplexing of massive numbers of simple, learner-guided
experiments, allowing learners to each personally carry out successions of
experiments. The second innovation is juxtaposition, in real time, of the
physical experimentation with computer modeling, known as Bifocal Modeling,
allowing students to observe and explore the real-world growth, interactions,
and characteristics of their organisms in parallel with observing outcomes of
models representing their understanding of the biological phenomena underlying
organism activity and subsequently refine their explanations and understanding.
Research focuses on cognitive affordances and constraints of this new bifocal
epistemic form, the supports needed by learners to handle the complexities of
this potentially powerful approach, and the progressions in student proficiency
in design and execution of experiments when they have both real and virtual
models available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are addressing the significant
challenge of how to bring modern bioscience into classrooms and informal
learning environments, at low cost and with substantial variety. The platform
they are creating, which integrates Biological Printing Devices with Bifocal
Modeling, provides for more open exploration and realism in what learners can
experience than is possible simply with simulations and virtual experiments.
Schools and universities will be able to integrate more advanced biology
experiments into their lab curricula as a result of this investigation,
broadening exposure of all students, especially the less privileged, to the life
sciences.