* 1324039
* Collaborative Research: Neighborhood Knowledge, Selection, and Segregation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Maria Krysan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 325,260.00

SES-1324039&lt;br/&gt;Maria Krysan&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1324024&lt;br/&gt;Michael
Bader&lt;br/&gt;American
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1323060&lt;br/&gt;Kyle
Crowder&lt;br/&gt;University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
flows from the idea that in several areas of research (from racial residential
segregation, to the study of neighborhood effects, to general interests in
residential mobility) we know relatively little about how people end up living
where they do. From the standpoint of neighborhood effects research (that is,
understanding how the social context in which people are embedded shapes their
life outcomes) there is the persistent thorny question of selection: are
observed differences in outcomes across neighborhoods due to differences in
neighborhood context, or due to differences in what leads a person to be in a
particular neighborhood in the first place? In the area of residential
segregation, theories of its causes have focused on preferences, discrimination,
and economics but have been largely silent on the residential search process and
how it contributes to segregation. Evident in both areas of research is that
relatively little is known about the process of neighborhood selection. However,
what is known points to the importance of understanding people's experiences,
knowledge, and perceptions of communities throughout their metropolitan area.
There is a need to better understand how people live in cities: which
neighborhoods they access on a regular basis, how they perceive various
neighborhoods in the metropolitan area, where they search for housing when it is
time to move, which areas they know little about and/or avoid, and which factors
determine where they choose to live. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing data-
collection tools are inadequate for efficiently collecting data on these
potentially crucial aspects of residential selection because they have focused
on perceptions of the neighborhoods in which people do live, and have tracked
movements of individuals across space, but they lack information on perceptions
of other potential residential locations--those not occupied by the respondents.
They also do not answer questions about how those perceptions are shaped by
daily experiences, residential histories, and social networks. The purpose of
this project is to develop an innovative computer-aided survey tool to measure
individuals' perceptions, experiences with, and knowledge of, a large number of
communities and neighborhoods within their larger metropolitan area. The tool,
which will utilize interactive, computer-based mapping features, will be
designed for incorporation into a large-scale survey designed to assess the
multifaceted factors that drive processes of neighborhood choice and maintain
residential segregation by race and ethnicity. This new set of survey tools will
permit, for the first time, the collection of detailed data about how
individuals, access, experience, and perceive large numbers of neighborhoods
within their region. This information, when combined with survey data on
individual economic characteristics, family dynamics, social attitudes, and
other factors that shape residential decision-making will provide the ability to
test both traditional theories of the causes of racial residential segregation
and previously unexplored factors related to knowledge of, experiences in, and
perceptions of communities in the metropolitan area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The issues at the
core of this research proposal--racial inequality in particular, and the
influence of neighborhood conditions on individual outcomes in general--are of
great social significance and concern. Residential segregation has been shown to
have an array of negative consequences for individuals and communities across a
host of outcomes, including health, education, employment, and exposure to
crime. To understand how to address these problems, it is critical to understand
the processes that generate them. The project develops a set of innovative tools
to collect data on previously ignored facets of residential selection processes.
The research findings will be of interest beyond sociology: social scientists
across a range of disciplines are interested in the question of how context,
especially neighborhood of residence, shapes life outcomes. From the standpoint
of survey methodology, the project also promises innovative uses of survey
technology in general (use of laptop/tablet combinations in CAPI), and mapping
technology in particular (for survey measurement, as against the sample
management and interviewer assignment tasks for which it has been used
previously).