* 1324778
* The Effect of School Finance Reforms on the Distribution of Spending, Academic Achievement and Adult Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Clement Jackson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 156,460.00

In an effort to ensure equal educational opportunity for all children, most
states adopted School Finance Reforms (SRFs) between 1970 and 1995 that made
significant changes to funding for public education. There exists little
evidence on whether and how these changes affect the adult well-being of
students from poor neighborhoods or whether they reduce differences in adult
well-being between those who were children from wealthy and poor neighborhoods.
This project will fill this gap in our understanding of such policies by
analyzing the effect of these reforms on state distributions of school spending,
and by presenting the first analysis of the effects of SFRs on both academic
achievement and long-run adult outcomes. This project will consist of two
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first analysis will investigate the effects
of different types of SFRs on both the level and distribution of education
spending in a state. Earlier national studies rely on data that were only
available every 5 or 10 years and were found to contain considerable errors.
Accordingly, newly released and more reliable annual data on government finances
allows for (a) a comprehensive analysis of the effect of SRFs on changes at
various points in the distribution of spending across poor and wealthy
districts, and (b) a detailed analysis on how the distribution of school
spending within a state evolves over time in response to SFRs. To identify the
effects of these reforms on spending, education spending will be compared for
years before reforms to education spending in same state after reforms. Changes
for those same years in states that did not implement reforms over the same
period will serve as a basis for comparison to account for underlying changes
over time. These results will be used to classify reforms into those that
decrease spending inequality, those that increase overall spending, and those
that decrease overall spending.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second analysis will
investigate the effects of different types of SFRs on long and short run student
outcomes. For this analysis, test scores from the National Assessment of
Educational Progress (NEAP) and adult outcomes (e.g. teen pregnancy, years of
education, unemployment, occupational status, and earnings) from Census data
will be linked to the timing of SFRs in an individuals state of schooling (NAEP)
or state of birth (Census). Outcomes will be compared for cohorts who were of
school-going age before reforms to outcomes of cohorts from the same state who
were of school-going after reforms. Changes for those same cohorts in states
that did not implement reforms over the same period will form as a basis for
comparison to account for underlying changes over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's findings may inform current and
ongoing policy debates and legal debates, particularly in those nine states in
which school finance rules are currently being reformed and ten states in which
school finance rules are being legally contested. As the first analysis of
school finance reforms on long run adult outcomes, the project will help answer
the broader question of whether increased school spending can lead to improved
outcomes. Due to large budget deficits caused by the most recent recession,
there are more than 30 states in which state education funding has declined
between 2008 and 2011. As such, understanding the extent to which changes in
school spending may affect outcomes in the short and long run is of immediate
policy relevance and importance. By using the large changes in educational
spending associated with SFRs and linking these changes to both, test scores and
long-run adult outcomes, this research will present fresh evidence on the effect
of education spending on the short run and long run adult outcomes of affected
students.