* 1324219
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Resource Conflicts in a Volatile Borderland
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Serkan Yolacan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2015
* USD 20,916.00

The researcher, Serkan Yolacan, under the direction of the PI, Ho Enseng of Duke
University, will investigate the factors that contribute to the formation and
maintenance of transnational networks in a context of resource conflict. The
research will take place in Azerbaijan, a state with rich oil reserves off the
shores and a region that attracts foreigners of competing agendas and projects.
The investigators analyze how external geo-strategic rivalries are driving and
becoming entangled with internal rivalries. While some groups within the state
ally with the West through oil-driven business networks and military agreements,
other more politically and economically marginalized groups have forged regional
networks. The increasing visibility of these marginalized groups in the national
public space constitutes a challenge to the regime. This project intends to
answer how sectarian allegiances with external powers help them build political
confidence at home. It aims to explore social networks, historical narratives,
and cultural resources that are mobilized vis-Ã -vis the state elites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will undertake a multi-sited
ethnographic fieldwork. The research comprises (1) collecting biographical and
family histories, (2) following individual itineraries, (3) analyzing textual
and oral stories of religious significance as well as actors' own
interpretations of these stories. In exploring the mobility, connections, and
oral histories, the investigators look to cast new light on the layered
landscape of sovereignty in the Middle East and central Eurasia; to have a
better insight into the dynamics behind the resilience of regions in a
globalized world; and to understand the role of ordinary people in international
relations. The research contributes to the education of a graduate student in
anthropology. In addition, the research will help us understand an area of the
world is strategically important to U.S. national security.