* 1324047
* DIP: BioSim: Developing a Wearable Toolkit for Teaching Complex Science Through Embodied Play
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Kylie Peppler, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,199,347.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education DIP (Development and
Implementation) Project, the PIs focus on better promoting science learning in
early elementary school (grades K-3). They focus in the discipline of life
sciences, with specific focus on complex biological systems. The approach to
learning about complex systems is through participatory simulation augmented by
wearable computers. Children act out the roles of agents in complex biological
systems (e.g., bees gathering honey, predators and preys) together, and with the
help of electronic puppets that they can wear on one hand, they watch changes in
the characteristics of animals they are simulating (e.g., energy, hunger,
thirst, need for sleep) as they interact in the environment the way those
animals would. Research focuses on how learning happens in the context of 1st
person participation in a simulated system and how to best facilitate that
learning, how learning about one complex system readies children to learn about
other complex systems, how the understanding of complex systems builds over time
with exposure to a variety of such systems, and best ways of using technology to
affect such learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is little understanding
currently of how to teach science productively in elementary school. As is
appropriate for this age group, these PIs take a playful approach to immersing
youngsters (in grades K through 3) in the lives of animals and organisms and the
ecosystems they live in. Children participate in simulations of natural
ecosystems, taking on the roles of animals or organisms in those systems. To
promote the kinds of reflection on experience that will lead to learning,
children are equipped with electronic puppets that help them experience how
those animals? lives are affected by their interactions with animal and plant
life in their environment.