* 1324007
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Parent-Child Discussion and Children's Eyewitness Memory
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Gail Goodman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 17,944.00

When children are eyewitnesses to crime, their initial reports typically are not
to the authorities. Rather, children likely first disclose crucial information
to parents. When parents discuss shared past events with their children, an
elaborative conversation style is associated with children's accurate, detailed
memory reports. In contrast, parental bias and misinformation can lead to
children's false reports. However, little is known about children's initial
discussions with caregivers following an event witnessed only by children. Even
less evidence exists about how caregivers' pre-conceived notions affect their
discussion style. The proposed research will examine parent-child conversations
about an unshared event and associations with children's memory accuracy. In
addition, the effect of biasing information on both parent conversational style
and children's memory will be examined.

132 parent-child dyads will come to the laboratory where the 3- to 6-year-olds
will experience a play session, while their parents wait outside. Parents will
be randomly assigned to one of three experimental conditions: biased (given
false information about the play session), nonbiased (given no false information
about the play session), or irrelevant (discuss a separate event). Parents in
the biased and nonbiased conditions will be instructed to find out as much as
possible about what occurred. Finally, for all groups, children's memory for the
play session will be tested.

New knowledge will be gained about parent-child conversations by examining how
parents discuss past events about which children are the "experts." In addition
children's eyewitness memory research will be extended by investigating effects
of biased parental interviewing on children's memory. This research is relevant
to forensic settings. Forensic interviewing techniques are becoming
scientifically based, leaving little room for misinformation and suggestion. The
present research will extend beyond professional interviewing, to explore how
initial disclosures to parents may be sources of memory error.