* 1324766
* The Integration of Immigrants into American Society
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Thomas Plewes, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 75,000.00

The National Research Council will convene a study committee of leading academic
experts in the United States to study the integration of immigrants into
American society and its consequences. U.S. immigration has changed considerably
in recent years in terms of countries of origin, receiving communities, and
education levels. New data sources are available to explore both the short and
long-term implications of these changes for the long term integration of
immigrants into their new communities. Because the study will play a critical
role in informing the important national debate on these issues, effective
communication of the report?s major messages will be critical. The National
Academies Press will publish a consensus report of the panel that will be
available on the web and in hard cover. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geographic
profile of immigration is changing. Immigrant families are increasingly moving
to nontraditional receiving states and communities, the U.S. economy is
sputtering, and, though there have been recent administrative changes in U.S.
immigration enforcement policy, the larger issues of immigration reform are
still unresolved. High rates of immigration into the United States and the
scattering of that population have led many groups to express concern about the
effects of immigration on the economic prospects of the native born, on the rate
at which our population is growing, on the fiscal burden at various levels of
government, on crime rates and threats to national security, and recently on the
ability of immigrants to integrate themselves into the social fabric of the
nation. It is an opportune time for the National Academy of Sciences to revisit
the issue of the challenges of integration of immigrant families in the United
States and to seek to come to a better understanding the consequences of
immigration on American society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of immigration as a public policy issue has
been well documented. An overriding concern on the part of many is to what
extent the new Americans are being integrated into U.S. society. Immigrant
integration is the process by which the characteristics of members of immigrant
groups and host societies come to resemble one another. The process, which has
both economic and socio-cultural dimensions, begins with the immigrant
generation and continues through the second generation and beyond. As
immigration has grown as a public policy issue, the literature on immigration
integration has expanded as well, particularly over the past two decades since
publication of the study: The New Americans: Economic, Demographic, and Fiscal
Effects of Immigration. The National Academy of Sciences will revisit the issue
of the challenges of integration of immigrant families in the United States and,
with the passage of time and the accumulation of a growing literature and
improved sources of data, to create a better understanding of the consequences
of immigration on American society.