* 1324404
* An Online Center for African Linguistics Research: Expansion of the Afranaph Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Kenneth Safir, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2019
* USD 557,122.00

Perhaps the single most pressing question in theoretical linguistics is the
following: Are the new patterns in grammar that we discover challenges to the
view that fundamental principles of mental organization in humans are
specifically linguistic, or do languages and the grammars that underlie them
arise strictly as function of the purpose they serve? The Afranaph Project
addresses this question by expanding our understanding of African languages. The
project uses internet access and the expertise of native speakers of African
languages who have been trained as linguists in order to elicit rich and
specialized data from many understudied languages of Africa, some of them
endangered. The principal goal of this project is the discovery, documentation,
analysis and explanation of new empirical patterns of interest to linguistic
theory and typology. New NSF support will permit the researchers to develop and
integrate a variety of research initiatives and insure that all data collection
from the new projects envisioned enrich the effectiveness of the existing
resources, which are the database and website, and permit the researchers to
expand their coverage from the 25 languages to over 40 by the end of the new
funding. The data, research tools, analyses and explanatory essays are freely
available on the website http://www.africananaphora.rutgers.edu. Open access is
fundamental to the project's second goal, which is to build an integrated
research community around the resources by expanding the network of consultants
and researchers. For each language in the project, there is at least one African
native speaker linguist, mostly linguists early in their career, who, through
Afranaph collaborations, become familiar with Western scholars and modern
methodologies in formal linguistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Afranaph Project
formerly specialized in the study of anaphora, the linguistic devices that are
used to refer back (such as pronouns and reflexives), but now the research
expertise developed in anaphora studies will be applied to many new research
domains, including the meaning, morphology and syntax of tense and aspect,
sentential embedding, noun classes, and agreement, and crosslinguistic study
adds to the aggregate of information available for each language in the project.
The Afranaph project supports the scholarship and documentation of minority
languages, some of them endangered. It enhances the training of junior scholars
and the creation of new international partnerships.