* 1324719
* Varsche Rivier 003: a new Middle Stone Age site (Namaqualand, South Africa)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* Teresa Steele, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 154,446.00

As is clear from responses to public lectures about human evolution and modern
human origins, humans are especially interested in knowing their origin and the
implications for how they have arrived to where they are today. Following this,
scientific inquiry into the origins of distinctively human behaviors is a
cornerstone issue in modern paleoanthropological and archaeological research. In
southern Africa, the Middle Stone Age (MSA; ~40,000-250,000 years ago) provides
the focus of this research, because during this time, all modern humans
originated in Africa and a subset of these fully modern humans expanded out of
Africa approximately 50,000 years ago. Within the MSA, the Still Bay and
Howiesons Poort industries have become central to understanding of the
development of this evolving human behavioral complexity, because both exhibit
distinctive and innovate stone technologies as well as several of the earliest
forms of evidence for symbolic expression, including the production of
engravings and the use of ornaments. However, the specific contexts that
stimulated these innovations remain unclear.

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Teresa Steele and an international
team from South Africa, Australia, Germany, and the USA will contribute
significant new information by continuing excavation at Varsche Rivier (VR) 003,
a newly discovered MSA site in the Knersvlakte of southern Namaqualand, Western
Cape Province, South Africa. VR003 provides an exceptional opportunity to
investigate human behavioral evolution during this critical phase of modern
human origins. Preliminary work at the site has revealed a series of stone
industries, along with animal bones, ostrich eggshells and landsnails. However,
this sequence is visible only through two small windows into the deposit, but
the site preserves much more. Continuing work at VR003 will advance knowledge of
the evolution of human behavior during the MSA because the site 1) is one of
only very few to preserve the above sequence of assemblages; 2) is located in an
environmental zone that is distinct from other long-sequence sites and other MSA
sites in general; 3) is situated within the spatial range of sites that preserve
evidence of complex human behaviors, such as engraved ostrich eggshell and
ochre, and therefore allows the testing of the ubiquity of these behaviors
during the MSA; and 4) provides the opportunity to develop a robust chronology
for these industries and to test previous models using independent laboratories
and methods.

This project provides opportunities for strengthening existing collaborations
with American, South African, German, and Australian colleagues and
institutions. To train the next generation of researchers, multiple graduate
students will participate. Results will be disseminated widely, not only as
research papers presented at conferences and published in peer-reviewed
journals, but also as raw datasets. The research group is participating in an
INQUA HAB COMM Project, which aims to combine technological, behavioural, and
environmental datasets from multiple Southern African research projects
(including VR003) and make them accessible to others. In addition, results will
be shared through formal teaching, local community public lectures, and
educational outreach programs in the Unites States and South Africa. All
materials that result from our work will be curated and accessible at Iziko
South African Museum, Cape Town.