* 1324180
* RAPID: Hurricane Sandy: Short-Term Emergent Citizen-Based Groups and Aid Mobilization
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Robert Schwartz, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

This Rapid Response Research Grant (RAPID) will investigate emergent citizen
groups that evolved after the landfall of Hurricane Sandy in October, 2012 in
the coastal areas of New York City and New Jersey. Sandy has been called a
superstorm by many in the media and may be the second most expensive weather
related hazard in the United States following Hurricane Katrina in 2005. It is
very common for citizens and survivors to be the initial responders to a
disaster before the established organizations such as local emergency management
personnel, FEMA, and the American Red Cross can aid affected communities.
Following the model of disaster-related organizations describing task and
structure from the Disaster Research Center, these informally organized emergent
citizen groups provide aid and disaster assistance before the traditional
established organizations could arrive and help survivors. In the past, many of
these emergent groups were mobilized by more traditional means of communication
such as in-person or by land-line telephones. However, nowadays many communicate
by cellular telephones, smartphones, texting, and social networking websites
such as Facebook or Twitter. This study will examine the mutual aid and disaster
relief by these new emergent groups along with their collaboration with
extending and established groups such as faith-based organizations and the
American Red Cross. The research will (1) identify these emergent groups (2)
study their communication methods and collaboration with other agencies, and (3)
describe the type of aid distributed, and the roles of these groups in disaster
response. Two primary methods will be utilized with the first being field
research with interviews of group coordinators and other volunteers. Second,
communications such as Facebook, Twitter, blogs, and other online forums will be
retrospectively analyzed for content. The expected results of this study could
help establish how new emergent groups aided with new communication technology
can enhance community response and recovery which could lead to more resilience
for future events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research could be used
by established organizations and communities for future disasters to get aid to
survivors in a timely manner. It is important that community members be involved
in both preparedness and response to help make a quicker recovery for the
citizens. This can involve having the various organizations participating in
disaster planning. In addition, this project can add to the field of disaster
research for both theory and applications by investigating traditional means of
response supplemented with new communication technologies.