* 1324106
* Collaborative Research:  Chronology of Epi-Classic Northwestern Mesoamerica
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Paula Turkon, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 66,587.00

The Epi-Classic is one of the most turbulent periods in Mesoamerican prehistory.
Primarily due to imprecise chronological control, it is also one of the least
understood. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Paula Turkon (Ithaca
College) and Dr. Sturt Manning (Cornell University) will use the
"dendrochronology-14C wiggle-match" method to develop a much higher-resolution
chronology than previously possible. Though narrowly focused on the northwestern
frontier of Mesoamerica, the strong connections between this and other regions
will allow this project to advance the dating of prehispanic cultural changes
throughout Mesoamerica

The most significant northward expansion of the Mesoamerican culture area
occurred during the Late Classic to Epi-Classic Period. Theories to explain this
mass movement of Mesoamerican peoples and their lifestyles into the north
include political disintegration in the Mesoamerican core, climate change in
this arid region, and the development of exploitive activities and trade
networks. Though our understanding of this region has greatly advanced in recent
years, indications of the timing and directionality of cultural influences rely
on 14C dates with errors of Â± 50-90 years. This project will simultaneously
address the chronology issue, and set the stage to examine the climate change
theory, by employing the "dendrochronology-14C wiggle-matching" method on
existing collections of archaeological wood from Epi-Classic archaeological
sites in the Malpaso Valley, one of the northernmost regions on the frontier.
The wiggle-match method fits 14C dates from tree-ring segments with a known
number of rings onto the 14C calibration curve, producing substantially more
precise dates than radiocarbon dating alone. Preliminary work on archaeological
wood from the Malpaso Valley demonstrates that even short, less-than-ideal
samples, can refine dating precision from a 100 calendar year range to as low as
a 16 year range.

This project represents the only current attempt to apply dendrochronological
work on archaeological wood in Mesoamerica. The development of precisely-dated,
tree-ring chronologies for the period that corresponds to the prehispanic
occupation of the northwestern frontier will also allow extrapolation of
variation in water availability that can, in a future project, set the stage to
address the climate change theory as an explanation for the frontier's short-
lived occupation relative to other regions of Mesoamerica.

This project will provide a forum for Mexican and U.S. archaeologists and
dendrochronologists, a venue to train undergraduate students at Ithaca College
and Cornell University, as well as provide training opportunities for Mexican
students and researchers to explore the application of archaeological
dendrochronology in Mesoamerica. Formal presentations by the researchers to
discuss the merits of tree-ring dating and project results at workshops and
universities in Mexico will both extend the call for suitable materials from
existing projects and collections, and encourage the collection of wood/charcoal
for tree-ring analysis. The data will be disseminated through peer-reviewed
journals, conference presentations, public lectures, and be made available in
open-access databases.