* 1324468
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:  The Impact of Medicare on Bankruptcy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Mary Hansen, American University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2014
* USD 23,112.00

Medicare aimed to improve access to medical care and to reduce out-of-pocket
costs for individuals over the age of 65, many of whom had low income, high
medical expenses, and no health insurance. On July 1, 1966, all 19 million
Americans aged 65 years and older became eligible for Medicare. Within a year
after the rapid implementation of Medicare, the personal bankruptcy rate began a
gradual decline that lasted until 1974. The objective of this project is to
determine the extent to which the implementation of Medicare contributed to the
decline in the bankruptcy rate by reducing medical debt. To augment publicly
available aggregate data, this dissertation will use newly collected data from
original bankruptcy court case files from the 1960s and
1970s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because out-of-pocket medical expenses have risen
more than 73% since 1996, medical debt and medical bankruptcy have become
important areas of research. Medical debt has been shown to be one of the
leading reasons that individuals file for personal bankruptcy; however,
estimates of the fraction of bankruptcies that are due to medical debt range
from 17% to 62.1%. The estimates are imprecise in part because today much
medical debt is subsumed in credit card debt. Because credit cards were not
widely used in the 1960s, the new data from court case files will allow a more
accurate view of the medical debt of petitioners for
bankruptcy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bankruptcy can be considered a form of
insurance. It transfers risk of loss from the debtors to the creditors in
exchange for higher interest rates. Though it is occasionally noted that both
bankruptcy and Medicare are forms of insurance that protect people from loss due
to medical debt, no study has looked at the impact one has on the other.
Understanding how health insurance can affect bankruptcy is critical to
designing a package of policies that reduces economic vulnerability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project examines how the implementation
of the first public health insurance program in the United States decreased
medical debt under bankruptcy by examining three different aspects of
bankruptcy:&lt;br/&gt;- State bankruptcy rates,&lt;br/&gt;- medical debt among
petitioners for bankruptcy, and&lt;br/&gt;- the demographic characteristics of
petitioners.&lt;br/&gt;The results will show whether Medicare effectively
reduced the burden of medical debt on those over 65. Moreover, the results will
increase understanding of the mechanisms through which public health insurance
can affect medical debt among the population of people who file for bankruptcy.
Therefore, it will inform future work on how health insurance more generally
affects medical debt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how health insurance
can affect medical debt under bankruptcy is critical to the analysis of the
benefits of public health insurance and to designing policy that may lower
personal bankruptcy rates. Understanding how the implementation of Medicare
affected medical debt is critical to designing policy such that individuals do
not have to declare bankruptcy as a result of illness or injury. In order to
make informed decisions about the future of the Medicare program, policy makers
need to understand Medicare's past benefits, including whom it helped.