* 1324203
* WORKSHOP:  Support for Graduates Students at the University of Houston EITM  Summer Training Institute
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,09/30/2017
* Jim Granato, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2017
* USD 164,250.00

The University of Houston Emperical Implications of Theoretical Models (EITM)
Summer Training Institute facilitates a rigorous and productive dialogue between
theoretical and empirical analysis in political science. While many political
scientists are skilled at developing intricate theoretical models of important
political phenomena, insufficient attention to the manner in which such efforts
can inform empirical work can limit the relevance of this research to important
social phenomena. On the other hand, scholars armed with a dataset and a
statistics package, but bereft of precise and logically coherent theory, may be
unable to provide credible accounts of cause and effect. The EITM research
approach is based on the premise that attention to the logical relationships
between theoretical models and empirical work can produce improvements in both.
Such approaches are inherently more advanced than the courses most departments
currently staff. The University of Houston EITM Summer Training Institute
provides participants with unique opportunities to learn and pursue innovative
research practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training at the institute includes
significant teaching and research components, providing students a high degree
of individualized interaction with a far wider and deeper array of EITM mentors
than are available at any individual institution. Students develop bonds with
other students and mentors that will facilitate their development in graduate
school, their research, and their academic or non-academic careers. Together,
the institute will create a direct positive impact for graduate students who may
not have these opportunities in their graduate programs. This could increase the
intellectual capital of the scholarly community as a whole. Other benefits
include the dissemination of improved research and internet-based course
materials such as EITM syllabi, lecture notes, homework exercises,
demonstrations, replication datasets, and working papers, which are made
available to the public as soon as they are released to the students. Such
activities can increase the social relevance of scientific research.