* 1324031
* WORKSHOP: Workshop on Women, Immigration, and Mass Incarceration: Feminist Analyses of the Laws and Legal Processes, Spring, 2014 at the University of Illinois at Chicago.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Beth Richie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2015
* USD 44,327.00

This workshop will explore factors common to the mass incarceration of women and
the gendered dimensions of immigrant enforcement, detention and deportation.
Prior research has examined incarceration and immigration as separate legal and
political issues, affecting different communities. This workshop explores
similarities and differences across these two issues to assess whether a common
set of factors links policies and experiences, and how a gendered lens
facilitates such understanding. The workshop will be interdisciplinary, bringing
together legal scholars, criminologists and other social scientists, and
practitioners to examine existing research and identify new questions. The
emphasis will be on the linkages between the social, historical and cultural
factors that influence public policy in these areas and on intervention
strategies to support women, families and communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research workshop will result in an edited volume incorporating the theoretical
and empirical papers presented, and in a policy-oriented paper. In addition, the
workshop will incubate two or more interdisciplinary collaborative research
projects between junior and more established researchers and offer opportunities
for collaboration between researchers and community organizations. A public
event will close out the workshop. Legislators, state officials and grassroots
leaders will be invited to the public forum.