* 1324188
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Liminality, Citizenship, and Social Stratification in a Rapidly Growing Migrant Population
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Carla Freeman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2015
* USD 18,774.00

This research will examine emerging patterns of economic migration that leave
populations trapped in liminal settlement between their sending communities and
desired destinations for undefined periods of time. The project will center on
ethnographic engagement with the rapidly expanding population of migrants in
North Africa. Through a focus on migrants' lived experiences, migrant-citizen
interactions in the public sphere of labor and the placement of "illegal"
subjects within national discourse, the researcher will examine interconnections
between new forms of transnational migration, identity construction and social
stratification. The research will be conducted in a heavily migrant-populated
suburb of a capital city. The researcher will employ a range of qualitative
methodologies, including: biographical questionnaires, semi-structured
interviewing, "go-along" interviewing, oral history collection and ongoing
participant observation as a volunteer caseworker at a migrant aid organization.

The project will advance anthropological understandings of citizenship and
"illegality" by exploring the racial, social and economic constructions of
political identity. Findings from this research will be important to scholars
and policymakers, who examine North Africa as a final stopping point for African
migrants. In addition to training a graduate student, funding this project will
contribute valuable information to those working towards policy reform to ensure
that international human rights conventions are upheld throughout the E.U. and
its periphery.