* 1324343
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Property Concepts in Wolof
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Rebekah Baglini, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2015
* USD 12,364.00

Property concepts (PCs) are a class of stative notions relating to speed, age,
dimension, color, value, etc. PCs are consistently lexicalized as adjectives in
languages which have this category. However, PCs may also be lexicalized as
nouns or roots, particularly in languages which lack a robust class of
adjectives. In an array of typologically diverse and genetically unrelated
languages, non-adjectival PC lexemes are found to systematically surface with
possessive morphosyntax. It has recently been suggested that lexical category
assignment thus reflects variation in the semantics of PC lexemes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Niger-Congo language Wolof splits its PC terms between nouns and
adjectival verbs and exemplifies both possessive predication and direct
predication strategies. Under the direction of Dr. Christopher Kennedy, Ms.
Rebekah Baglini will conduct primary fieldwork in Senegal to investigate the two
PC constructions in the language and how they pattern together or diverge
semantically. Several aspects of PC expression in Wolof will be given special
focus. Of particular interest is the interpretation of scalar properties
associated with the two types of PC expressions, and whether they behave
similarly with respect to degree modifiers, measure phrases, comparative
constructions, and the formation of degree achievements. Baglini will also
investigate whether particular semantic subclasses of PCs are predictably
assigned to one lexical category or another and evaluate whether the Wolof facts
are consistent with generalizations made in the typological literature on PCs.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will employ a mix of field methodologies,
including elicitation, production and comprehension tasks, and the collection of
spontaneous speech. The findings on Wolof will be linked to longstanding
questions in the theoretical literature about the nature of properties and their
representation in the model theory. Moreover, this project contributes to the
growing need for evaluating semantic theories against data from under-
represented languages. This award also contributes to the training of a
promising graduate student.