* 1324387
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Emergent dialect style: vowel realization and discursive identity construction in D.C. Latinos
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Natalie Schilling-Estes, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2015
* USD 8,323.00

Under the direction of Dr. Natalie Schilling, Ms. Amelia Tseng will investigate
the interrelationship of language, identity, and dialect development among
first- and second- generation Latinos in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area
through quantitative sociolinguistic analysis of the variable patterning of
dialect features found to be associated with Latino speakers in other U.S.
locations, and qualitative analysis of how speakers use these features to convey
particular social and identity meanings in ongoing conversation. The project is
of vital importance in that it (1) enhances our knowledge of how a growing and
diverse Latino population uses language to shape new identities in the U.S.
context; (2) increases our understanding of emergent language varieties as
legitimate language systems with important cultural associations rather than
'imperfect' learner English; and (3) in the long run helps ameliorate linguistic
discrimination against Latinos and other minority groups. In addition, although
Latino English has been studied to an extent in other U.S. locations, it is
understudied in the nation's capital, despite its growing Latino
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be collected using conversational
interviews and participant self-recordings in varied social contexts. Dialect
features will be investigated in terms of possible correlation with social
factors (for example, immigrant generation, gender, education, orientation to
Latino identity), and how and where they occur in discourse. For example, a
lower, backed /ae/ pronunciation is variably associated with Latino English
(e.g. 'can' does not raise to "kay-un," but may approach "con"). Pilot studies
suggest that this feature is used with higher frequency when speakers talk about
Latino culture, but with lower frequency when they wish to sound authoritative.
This indicates that although Latinos in D.C. may be internalizing derogatory
attitudes toward Latino English(es), they nonetheless retain a positive sense of
their unique cultural and linguistic heritage. By shedding light on dialect
development and identity construction in an immigration context, the results of
this study will help to demonstrate the linguistic validity and social
importance of Latino English, and, by extension, the cultural legitimacy of all
groups of people, whether 'native' to the U.S., immigrant, majority, or
minority.