* 1324725
* Collaborative Research:  Boron Isotopes Across the Carboniferous-Permian Glaciation: Assessing the Relationship of pCO2 to Seawater Chemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2019
* Emma Rasbury, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2019
* USD 230,610.00

The potential environmental, social, and economic consequences from the post-
industrial increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) due to fossil fuel
burning is one of the most important areas of scientific research today. Whether
this increase will affect weather patterns (ie. more frequent or more severe
storms, changes in precipitation resulting in floods or droughts), sea level
rise (ie. coastal flooding due to melting of Greenland and Antarctic glaciers),
needs to be better understood so that policies can be put in place to avoid or
adapt to these consequences. A useful approach to understanding how the Earth
responds to such changes in atmospheric CO2 concentration is to look back in
time to periods when the conditions were similar to those we are experiencing
today. Investigators propose using a relatively new tool to address this, the
boron isotope composition of marine carbonates which have been shown to reflect
the acidity of seawater. It is known that increasing atmospheric CO2 causes
surface seawater to become more acidic. Thus, boron isotopes have great
potential for examining changing atmospheric CO2 in the geologic past. They
propose a study of the Carboniferous-Permian interval (360-260 million years
ago), a time similar to today's Earth in that it represents a time of extensive
glaciation, with glacial-interglacial variability analogous to the Late
Cenozoic, that is then followed by significant climate warming. They will
produce a high-resolution record from a suite of brachiopod shells that extend
from the cold conditions of the early Mississippian to the culmination of the
glaciations and warming in the early Permian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
for perturbing the Earth's climate system is of immediate global societal
relevance. This proposal will not only address climate change questions in deep
time, which will help to inform the present, it will also continue the
development of boron isotopes as a pH proxy in deep time, providing additional
tools for multi-proxy studies of global climate change that will be valuable to
a wide range of climate scientists. The investigators are professors at Queens
College and Stony Brook University, institutions with considerable cultural
diversity and programs in place to encourage students from underrepresented
groups to become engaged in scientific research. Both investigators have
mentored undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups, and
will actively recruit them for this project. They have developed a summer
program for high school students employing a nested system that provides
valuable mentoring experience for graduate students, post-docs, and Earth
Science teachers as they guide the student research. Weekly seminars on the
topic of seawater chemistry will provide the students with the background to
understand the relevance of their work. This approach leads to great synergy and
naturally results in better communication of the science, as the teachers take
this experience back to their classrooms.