* 1324297
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement: Unmanned Aviation: Gender, Skill, and the Transformation of Pilot Work
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Dominic Boyer, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2015
* USD 24,861.00

This doctoral dissertation improvement project will focus on the rise of
unmanned aviation and its implications for what it means to be a pilot. Even as
commercial pilots in the United States face furloughs and other forms of
economic insecurity, a growing civilian market for unmanned aircraft promises to
create new opportunities for pilots willing to trade in their cockpits for
ground-based computer terminals. This study examines how the virtualization of
pilot work paradoxically produces new forms of embodied skill, and explores
whether the shift toward unmanned systems signals the feminization of an
historically male-dominated profession.

The research will be carried out in a Midwestern state. The study populations
will include unmanned pilot trainees, instructors, and curriculum designers, as
well as policymakers and aerospace executives. General aviation pilots have
emerged as an important source of opposition to unmanned aircraft development,
and the study will develop a comparative account of their values, beliefs, and
work practices. Research methods will include direct observation of unmanned
pilot training, semi-structured interviews, archival research, and an
attitudinal survey of general aviation pilots. This research is important
because it extends the analysis of unmanned technologies beyond discussions of
surveillance or state violence, by situating them within an existing ecology of
civilian aviation. Conducting the study in the Midwest, where farming and now
oil, dominate the economy, positions it to contribute to theoretical work on the
future of rural livelihoods. This award will also contribute to the scientific
training of a promising graduate student.