* 1324566
* In-situ isotopic effects of serpentinization and identifying the controls on biological activity in serpentinites
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Benjamin Gill, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 149,454.00

Serpentinization, the hydrothermal alteration of ultramafic rocks, has an
important impact on many global biogeochemical cycles and is a unique
mineralogical process that can support biological activity through formation of
hydrogen and methane. Evidence of microbial activity in the form of sulfur
isotope signatures in sulfide minerals has been reported in many peridotite-
hosted hydrothermal systems along mid-ocean ridges on the ocean floor and in
analogous ancient systems (e.g., outcropping as ophiolite sequences on
continents). Recent studies further suggest that biological activity plays a
significant role in the long-term storage of sulfur and carbon within
serpentinites with a potentially far-reaching impact on the global sulfur and
carbon cycles. That said, controls on biological activity in peridotite-hosted
hydrothermal systems, whether on land or under the sea, have not yet been
conclusively proven and hence the impact of microbial activity on seafloor
geochemical cycles remains unknown. This research will characterize the factors
that control microbial activity within serpentinites. Determination of the
coupling between biological activity and both temperature and fluid chemistry
during serpentinization will be assessed via a novel combination of geochemical
techniques that will indicate how these key parameters evolve through time.
Specifically, multiple sulfur isotope (32S, 33S, 34S) analyses of bulk sulfides
occurring in the serpentinites and additional, targeted, in-situ,
sulfide/sulfate isotope measurements will be used to detect the presence of
microbial activity. These data will be combined with detailed petrological and
mineralogical examination and in-situ isotope analyses of host mineral phases.
Serpentinites from three different tectonic settings and basic mineralogies will
be examined: (1) the continental Iberian Margin, (2) the 15°20" N fracture zone
along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, and (3) serpentinites from an ophiolite sequence
in the Northern Apennine, Italy. the first two were drilled as part of the
Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP). Research goals will be to determinee
how variable fluid compositions and temperatures affect the occurrence of
biological activity. This knowledge will provide new insights and constraints on
the limits of life on Earth and how sulfur is cycled through altered oceanic
crust, as well as how global geochemical cycles and the chemical exchange occur
between different Earth reservoirs. Broader impacts of the project involve the
support of two early career scientists, both of whom will be trained in the use
of new cutting-edge techniques, foster collaboration between Virginia Tech and
Harvard University, and engage two undergraduate students in the science.