* 1324074
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Accessing Assistance and Citizen Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Alyx Mark, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 28,908.00

This project asks whether civil legal assistance can affect recipients'
perceptions of judicial processes and institutions and their development of
civic skills. This project tests a theory of policy feedback--the reciprocal
effect of policies on those who interact with them--and applies it to legal
services. This project hypothesizes that the realization of the enforcement of
the civil law for one's self and working with a legal service provider could
lead to increasing belief in political and civic effectiveness and increasing
civic skills. Further, it is expected that interactions with a legal service
provider will enhance an assessment of procedural fairness and support for both
justice institutions and government institutions more broadly. To test these
theoretical expectations, the investigators will administer a survey to people
with civil legal concerns before, during, and after their contact with legal
assistance in order to assess its civil and political impact. The project's
intellectual merit stems from its contribution to what researchers know about
policy feedback by considering as yet untested mechanisms by which individuals
encounter legal institutions. Currently the method of service delivery and
access to it have not yet been considered in extant literature. The project's
broader impacts include collaboration with service providers to develop more
sophisticated measurement tools and evaluation of the effects of service
provision, as well as better understanding of the development of skills relevant
to civic and political efficacy.