* 1324257
* Economic Policy Uncertainty:  Public Data and Research
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Nicholas Bloom, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2019
* USD 565,077.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: SES - 1324257 &lt;br/&gt;Institution: National
Bureau of Economic Research Inc&lt;br/&gt;NSF Program:
ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Bloom, Nicholas&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Economic Policy Uncertainty: Public Data and Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep
recessions and slow recoveries in the United States and Europe, accompanied by
protracted fiscal crises in some countries, have spurred concerns about economic
policy uncertainty. The IMF, Federal Reserve Board and European Central Bank,
among many others, have raised concerns that policy uncertainty is impeding
economic progress in many countries. &lt;br/&gt;Baker, Bloom and Davis (2013)
develop a methodology to measure policy uncertainty based on: (a) disagreement
amongst professional forecasters about future government spending and inflation,
(b) counts of newspaper articles about policy uncertainty, and (c) scheduled
expirations of tax code provisions. Data for their policy uncertainty measures
are freely provided at www.policyuncertainty.com, which has more than 30,000
unique visitors since launching in January 2012. Financial firms, industrial
companies, policy makers, and academic researchers now use these measures to
assess policy uncertainty in several countries.&lt;br/&gt;This project would
improve the public dataset and advance research in three
directions:&lt;br/&gt;A)Improve the data, using more advanced computer search
methods and human audits of newspaper articles to address measurement concerns.
In particular, by using human readings of about 10,000 newspaper articles as a
training tool for automated methods, the proposal will develop richer and more
accurate news-based metrics of policy uncertainty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;B)Extend the data: (i) over time, including back to 1900
for the United States; (ii) across countries, adding Brazil, China, India,
Japan, Mexico and Russia; and (iii) across sectors to develop monetary, fiscal
and regulatory policy uncertainty measures. Many countries appear to have
heightened policy uncertainty levels since the global financial crisis of
2007-08. We would like to quantify this phenomenon in a systematic
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C)Researching the causes and effects of policy
uncertainty: Standard VAR methods show that higher economic policy uncertainty
(EPU) foreshadows slower GDP growth. While suggestive, this finding does not
establish a causal impact of EPU shocks ? for example, fears of an economic
slowdown can itself generate greater policy uncertainty. This research will use
shocks and natural experiments ? like the North Korean policy shifts, 9/11
terrorist attacks, the political cycle and wars ? to help identify the causal
effects of policy uncertainty. It will also investigate EPU effects at a firm
and industry level, exploiting cross-sectional differences in exposure to EPU.
&lt;br/&gt;This project should benefit academic and business users and
policymakers. On the academic front, the causes and effects of policy
uncertainty is an active research area. Two barriers to research progress in
this area, however, are data and identification. This project will collect and
publicly provide data, and seek to identify causation by exploiting large shocks
and firm-level differences in exposure to policy uncertainty.