* 1324916
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ethnicity, Substrate Effects, and Sound Change in New York City
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Gregory Guy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2015
* USD 13,110.00

Ethnicity and race have been pivotal in analyses of linguistic variation in the
United States. A strong ethnic identity and non-alignment with the majority
"white" group has been commonly taken to account for the presence of distinct
features, as well as the absence of regional dialect features, in the speech of
minority groups. This dissertation research aims to further our understanding of
the social and linguistic factors that determine an ethnic group's choice of
variables by investigating how the speech of white ethnics (Polish Americans)
who grew up in a majority minority setting (New York City) reflects their
complex identities.

With the goal of unpacking speakers' complex identities, such as "Polish",
"white" and "New Yorker", this research analyzes the co-occurrence of potential
substrate effects from Polish and regional features of New York City English in
the speech of individual speakers. On the linguistic level, this research
investigates whether the presence of one substrate effect entails the presence
of another, and whether the presence of one substrate effect can block the
adoption of a regional feature. On the social level, through a self-reported
Polish orientation survey, this research explores whether a strong Polish
cultural orientation and frequent use of Polish are good predictors of the
occurrence and rates of substrate effects. Social and linguistic data will be
collected through sociolinguistic interviews with first and second generation
bilingual Polish Americans. Additional data will come from reading tasks, a
Polish cultural orientation survey, and ethnographic observations.

This research will be of interest to educators and parents of bilingual children
whose foreign accents may cause them stigmatization in schools, the workforce,
and the legal system due to negative language attitudes. A deeper understanding
of how a speaker's first language (L1) can influence the second language (L2)
could help educators and caregivers to distinguish ethnic features from learning
disabilities. Funding this award will enhance the training of a promising
graduate student.