* 1324165
* Collaborative Research: Identifying the Conditions Under Which Indigenous Communities Engage in Legal Mobilization
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2014
* Karleen West, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 10/31/2014
* USD 76,393.00

One of social science?s greatest theoretical puzzles is ?What factors lead
individuals to join together collectively to protect a public good, when all
face temptations to free-ride, shirk, or otherwise act opportunistically?? We
examine this question in a study of poor, rural, indigenous communities to
understand how they overcome socioeconomic and geographic barriers to launch new
forms of social movements relying on Western science and international
collaboration. In contrast to arguments that environmental issues concern only
the relatively affluent, we argue that immediate threats to community
livelihoods may provide material incentives for poor communities to come
together to mitigate environmental impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
evaluates determinants of collective action at the individual, community, and
transnational levels using survey research in Ecuador, interviews in Ecuador,
Bolivia, and Brazil, and archival research at the Inter-American Human Rights
Commission. Understanding changes in indigenous movement strategies - from
confrontation to cooperation with government authorities and scientists - should
help communities and policymakers better cope with environmental threats. The
project will also help us understand how indigenous leaders draw attention to
scarcities they face, while using the climate change frame to help pressure
international organizations and governments regarding one of the most vital
issues of our time. Indeed, this project explains how small and apparently
powerless groups largely outside of the Western system of justice can leverage
judicial institutions to challenge powerful global energy interests. Finally,
the project will train graduate students in Ecuador and the United States, help
Ecuadorian scientists launch a social science component to environmental studies
in one of Ecuador?s premier universities, and disseminate findings among
academics and practitioners.