* 1324000
* Collaborative Research: Worker Insecurity and the Institutionalization of Part-Time Work
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Andrew Fullerton, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 104,921.00

SES-1324000&lt;br/&gt;PI: Andrew Fullerton&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1324019&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jeffrey
Dixon&lt;br/&gt;Holy Cross College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part-time work is an
important potential source of insecurity that workers around the world face, but
it is understudied in the context of worker insecurity, partly because of the
cross-national variation in the meanings and measurements of part-time work.
This project examines the relationship between part-time work and several forms
of perceived worker insecurity, including the perceived threat of job loss in
the near future, worries about the threat of job loss, and the perceived
difficulty of finding a comparable job in the labor market. Focusing on multiple
levels of analysis, this project asks: Do part-time workers feel more insecure
than full-time workers? Does this vary by country? At the country level, what is
the relationship between the size of the part-time workforce and average levels
of insecurity? Based on individual-level data from the 2005 International Social
Survey Program (ISSP) Work Orientations III module linked to macro-level data,
preliminary results reveal that workers in part-time jobs feel more insecure
than workers in full-time jobs, all else equal. However, the size of the part-
time gap in worker insecurity varies substantially across countries, and
countries with higher rates of part-time work tend to have lower levels of
average worker insecurity. To account for these seemingly contradictory
findings, the investigators develop a model of the "institutionalization of
part-time work," which refers to the creation and perpetuation of scripts and
shared rules that guide decisions and actions regarding employers' use of part-
time work. Using this framework, the research hypothesizes that the gap in
perceived worker insecurity between part-time and full-time workers will be
smallest in countries in which part-time work has been institutionalized to such
a degree that: A) a substantial number of men work part-time (even if most part-
time workers are women), B) part-time workers have the same legal protections
and benefits as full-time workers, C) most part-time workers are employed in
those positions voluntarily, and D) part-time work is not concentrated in low-
wage occupations. This model will be tested with ISSP and other survey data
linked to macro-level data, including a country-level dataset that will contain
aggregate measures of part-time work and other labor market characteristics for
more than 50 countries and several time points between 2000 and
2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gained from
this study about the sources of perceived worker insecurity has important
implications for scholars and policy makers concerned with the consequences of
part-time and other forms of non-standard work on workers' health, families, and
communities. The results will also bear on debates about "flexicurity" policies
in parts of Europe, which are intended to reconcile employer preferences for
flexible work arrangements (such as part-time work) with employment security for
workers. Furthermore, the new country-level dataset will be made available to
interested scholars, teachers, and researchers to examine part-time work and
other types of non-standard work. These data can also be supplemented with other
macro- or micro-level data to examine other socioeconomic outcomes.
Additionally, this project will involve undergraduate and graduate students who
have an interest in quantitative methods of research, comparative sociology, and
work and occupations, and the researchers will seek assistants who will help in
each stage of this project and gain valuable research skills as a result.
Finally, the principal investigators will produce several presentations and
scholarly publications based on this project.