* 1324123
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Sciences: Accountability in Multiple Fora After Extreme Mass Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Jack Snyder, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2015
* USD 25,200.00

The second half of the 20th century saw a shift from an international system in
which acts of mass extreme behavior were considered unpunishable to one in which
they are generally viewed as criminally culpable conduct. When events become
public, the states where they occur are now beset by calls to either prosecute
those responsible or allow an international court to do so.

Despite the growing consensus on the need for justice, the record of
accountability for extreme mass acts has been very uneven. Courts are sometimes
set up precisely for the purpose of accountability during wartime, yet the
courts may not hear cases concerning related events from neighboring countries.
While many have argued that a global norm requiring accountability after extreme
mass behavior has developed and taken hold over the past few decades, that claim
does not account for the different accountability outcomes pairs of seemingly
similar, nearly simultaneously-occurring, cases. Because accountability
mechanisms are an increasingly high profile feature of the global landscape,
explaining when and how accountability is provided in the aftermath of mass
extreme behavior will be a significant contribution to the study of
international and transitional justice. This project relies upon a strategic
theory of accountability that integrates the range of possible outcomes and the
role of bargaining between domestic and international actors. The project
evaluates state accountability behavior in the aftermath of mass atrocity, and
international audiences' reactions. The project employs a mixed methods
approach, using quantitative analysis of an original dataset to identify broad
patterns in the data, and process-tracing of case studies constructed through
fieldwork to explain causation.

The project will return the information gathered to relevant policymakers,
therefore assisting in improving justice mechanisms. The project will also
contribute to the training of a student and the dissemination of information
about accountability.