* 1324834
* Soil Slips Versus Flow Failures in Rain-Infiltrated Slopes: Using Mechanical Stability Principles to Enhance Spatially Distributed Models for Landslide Forecasting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Giuseppe Buscarnera, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2017
* USD 276,689.00

The goal of this project is to contribute to the transformative advancement of
physically-based models for landslide forecasting. This objective will be
pursued by incorporating novel concepts of soil stability into the failure
criteria for natural slopes. Particular attention will be given to the effects
of climatic forcing and rain infiltration, which are known to change the water-
pressure regime, deteriorate the strength properties of geotechnical materials
and cause dramatic failures in slopes and earthworks. The project will use
innovative methods to capture multiple types of failure (e.g., localized slips
or flow-like instabilities). These criteria will be combined with the simulation
of the hydrologic response of soil veneers, thus allowing the prediction of the
potential for unstable ground movements at regional scale. The project will
consider specific cases of landscapes which have suffered pervasive landsliding
during rainfall events. For these cases, we will generate charts of critical
triggering perturbations for given combinations of morphologic features,
geotechnical properties and hydrologic conditions. The expected outcome is to
formulate new quantitative methods to control the evolving state of stability in
natural and urbanized landscapes through physically-based
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this project will benefit
society by enhancing the ability to locate different types of slope failure via
physical modeling. Depending on site-specific features, soil covers can fail
either in the form of slides with limited mobility or as rapid flows. Several
cases around the world have demonstrated the dramatic implications of these
differences, as rapid landslides may involve considerable damages to property
and the loss of human lives. The physical understanding of hillslope dynamics
fostered by this project will play a role in the management of natural
disasters. In particular, the incorporation of scientific findings into the
practice of landslide forecasting can have broad societal and educational
impacts for risk assessment and land-use planning in several areas of the world.
In addition, an improved understanding of soil failure in natural settings will
impact a broad range of problems dominated by the interplay between human
activities and geomorphic processes, such as soil erosion, sediment transport
and river-channel management. Education and outreach initiatives will be
integrated to capitalize on the research components of the project, including
international experiences for graduate students and an integrated educational
initiative for engineering and geoscience students.