* 1324780
* EAGER: Developing Oxytricha Trifallax as a Model System for Small RNA Biogenesis and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Alan Zahler, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project addresses how the organization of genes is
inherited from generation to generation through the action of small RNAs. It
involves the study of the genetic organization of an unusual single-celled pond
organism, Oxytricha trifallax, which contains two kinds of nuclei where genetic
information is held. All gene transcription and activity occurs in the
macronucleus. This highly unusual nucleus contains 16,000 different gene-sized
chromosomes called nanochromosomes. By contrast, the micronucleus is the nucleus
that stores genetic information for the next generation. It has long chromosomes
each with thousands of genes. During sexual mating, micronuclei are exchanged
between cells (similar to fusion of egg and sperm nuclei in animals), and a new
diploid micronucleus is formed. The new micronucleus divides once, and one of
its daughters develops into the new macronucleus. The process of macronuclear
development involves elimination of 95% of the unique sequences in the
micronucleus. Sequences that are eliminated are not only found between genes,
but also within the regions destined to become individual nanochromosomes. One
fascinating twist in Oxytricha macronuclear development is that for many genes,
the pieces that need to be joined to form a nanochromosome occur in a scrambled
order. Complex DNA rearrangements are required to unscramble the micronuclear
genome, eliminate the unwanted sequences, and paste together what is left into
the individual nanochromosomes. This project explores the hypothesis that small
RNAs called 27macRNAs, that are derived from sequences in the parental
macronucleus and are made only during mating in Oxytricha, play a role in
guiding macronuclear development in the next generation. In essence the idea is
that the parental macronucleus is providing epigenetic information in the form
of these small RNAs to guide which sequences will be present in the macronucleus
in the next generation. The goal of the project is to develop the Oxytricha
system as a model for understanding how small RNAs are produced and how they
affect DNA structure. One unusual aspect of Oxytricha 27macRNA production is
that, unlike known small RNA classes in animals, the production of these small
RNAs is dramatically induced. Understanding the details of this induction could
provide transformative insights to a new aspect of small RNA-mediated
regulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The project will support
training of both graduate and undergraduate students, in part through
collaboration with the NIH-funded UCSC Minority Access to Research Careers
(MARC) program for which the PI is director. This project is perfect for
introducing undergraduates to the excitement of biochemical and bioinformatics
research science.