* 1324461
* The Cultural Shaping of Leadership Judgments: The Role of Ideal Affect
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2018
* Brian Knutson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2018
* USD 570,127.00

As the US population grows more ethnically diverse, so does its workforce.
Presently, individuals of non-European American backgrounds comprised
approximately 36% of the American workforce, and by 2050, these workers will be
responsible for 85% of its growth. There is a striking lack of ethnic diversity,
however, among leaders in all sectors of the American economy. For example,
although Asian Americans are the most highly represented minority group in
academic settings (comprising 6.2% of faculty), and have the highest percentage
of college degrees of any ethnic group, they hold only 2.4% of top
administrative positions in higher education, compared to African Americans
(9.4%) and Latino Americans (3.6%). This disparity, and similar ones observed in
business and political settings, have been cited as evidence of a "bamboo
ceiling," or limit to career advancement for Asian Americans. What factors might
be responsible for the bamboo ceiling and other barriers to advancement for
different ethnic minority groups? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various scholars have
argued that these barriers are due to racial discrimination and stereotyping. In
the current project, Jeanne Tsai (Stanford University) and colleagues propose
that European American employers may unknowingly engage in "affective
discrimination," or discrimination based on a cultural mismatch between the
emotional ideals ("ideal affect") of European American employers and their
ethnic minority employees. Affective discrimination may be less obvious than
other types of discrimination because people are often unaware of how their
cultures shape their emotions, and because the emotion-based judgments that
people make about others often occur quickly, automatically, and outside
conscious awareness. In previous work, Tsai and colleagues found that whereas
North American cultures value excitement, enthusiasm, and other "high arousal
positive" states more, East Asian cultures value calm, peacefulness, and other
"low arousal positive" states more. Thus, consistent with their ideals, European
American employers may seek to promote excited and enthusiastic leaders, which
may inadvertently disadvantage Asian Americans and other employees who value and
therefore express other affective states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
examine whether people's ideal affect influences their leadership judgments in
different occupational settings (business and engineering) and under varying
work conditions (periods of normality vs. periods of crisis), why biases occur
(i.e., the underlying psychological mechanisms), and whether people can be
taught to account for cultural and individual differences in ideal affect when
judging others' potential for leadership. The project uniquely utilizes cross-
cultural, experimental, and neuroimaging methods to capture these processes.
Findings from this work will advance scientific understanding of how culture
shapes the judgments people make about others based on emotional expression, and
will advance methods for integrating neural, psychological, and cultural levels
of analysis. This work also promises to identify ways of breaking down barriers
to advancement for different ethnic groups in the U.S., and to develop methods
of teaching members of all groups how to work together harmoniously in an
increasingly multicultural society.