* 1324382
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetically Modified Vegetables: Transgenic Agriculture, Contested Knowledge, and Democratic Practice
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kalyanakrishnan Sivaramakrishnan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,705.00

Project Overview &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STS Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement Grant will support research to examine how scientific knowledge
claims about transgenic (i.e., genetically modified) food crops are produced and
contested, and how different knowledge claims and associated interests clash at
informal and formal sites of democratic functions. The project will focus on the
development of policies concerning transgenic vegetables in India.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher
will use a combination of ethnographic methods (participant-observation, semi-
structured interviews, and life history information) and archival research;
multiple sites will be studied including vegetable farms in west India,
transgenic research labs of private seed companies in west India, and anti-
transgenic non-governmental organizations in New Delhi. Key issues concerning
transgenic vegetables are to be addressed in the study including knowledge
production about conservation and safety, deliberative decision-making, and
questions concerning national food security and food sovereignty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
study will illuminate how democracy works in practice, with particular attention
towards the convergence or divergence of policy making for transgenic food crops
from the standpoint of the ideals of participation and accountability. The study
can inform policies concerning food security and food sovereignty by uncovering
how difficult political questions are actually negotiated in the lives of
participants in science and democracy.