* 1324752
* Collaborative Research:  Deciphering the regional-versus-global aspects of the Toarcian (Jurassic) Oceanic Anoxic Event in North America
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Benjamin Gill, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 06/30/2017
* USD 185,562.00

Collaborative Research: Deciphering the regional-versus-global
aspects&lt;br/&gt;of the Toarcian (Jurassic) Oceanic Anoxic Event in North
America&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benjamin Gill, Virginia
Tech University, EAR-1324752&lt;br/&gt;Michael Formolo, University of Tulsa,
EAR-1324751&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The geologic record contains
many past instances of biological crises linked to environmental change. These
events can be thought of as past experiments that offer a window into
understanding the dynamics of the current and future Earth surface system. The
Oceanic Anoxic Events, or OAEs, of the Mesozoic Era (252 to 65 million years
ago) are particularly relevant examples to the present changes on Earth. These
intervals are notable because they are characterized by widespread marine anoxia
and extinction events. OAEs also occur during times of rapid global warming and
large disturbances to the global carbon cycle, thought to be associated with
increased levels of greenhouse gases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target of this
investigation is the oldest of the Mesozoic OAEs -- the Toarcian OAE of the
Early Jurassic (approximately 183 million years ago). Past studies of this event
have identified major disturbances to the global carbon and sulfur cycles and
the occurrence of widespread marine anoxia. However, to date, the majority of
these Toarcian OAE studies come from a relatively confined geographical area in
Europe. The incomplete Toarcian geochemical record has led to active debates
regarding the global nature of both the changes in the element cycles and the
geographic extent of marine anoxia. This study will investigate both the
inorganic and organic geochemical record of the Toarcian OAE in North American
black shales and carbonates to assess the global-versus-regional nature of the
event. Further, these new data will be integrated with the available data from
Europe in a comprehensive modeling approach that will test the hypothesized
mechanisms that triggered, maintained and terminated this
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will have three main broader impact
contributions. The first will be the development of graduate students and early
career scientists at Virginia Tech and the University of Tulsa. The second will
be the development of an educational program through the Museum of Geosciences
at Virginia Tech aimed to inform the public about past environmental change on
Earth. The Museum of Geosciences offers one of only a few public science venues
in the region, and it provides an excellent venue for reaching portions of the
population that would not normally be exposed to this science. The last
contribution will be the mentorship of undergraduate researchers through the
Tulsa Undergraduate Research Challenge (TURC). This program specializes in
facilitating research for undergraduate students and community outreach.