* 1324333
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Risk Minimization through Social Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Lee Cronk, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2015
* USD 24,872.00

Rutgers University doctoral student K. Padmini Iyer, under the guidance of Dr.
Lee Cronk, will investigate how agropastoralists of Uganda use their social
networks to manage the risks posed by their volatile ecological and political
environments. The pastoralists examined in this study have historically engaged
in livestock and food exchange relationships that carried an implicit obligation
to assist exchange partners during hardships such as drought, livestock disease,
and raiding. Exchange networks played a prominent role in recouping short-term
losses such as food shortage, and in ensuring long-term sustainability through
rebuilding herds. However, as a result of armed cattle raiding, military
intervention, and other large-scale changes, such as livestock loss, economic
diversification, and destabilized intragroup relations, the risk-buffering
social networks have become weak. This project will thus examine how social and
economic changes influence the ability to manage risk at the individual and
neighborhood levels. The researcher will collect qualitative and quantitative
data through interviews and social network analysis to address three main
questions: (1)How do such variables as wealth, geographic location, and kin
relation influence an individual's personal network of exchange partners?; (2)
How do the social network properties of a neighborhood (cluster of households)
influence its ability to minimize risk?; (3) To what extent do the norms
underlying the current system of exchange differ or resemble the norms of the
previous generations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By synthesizing anthropological,
economic, and historical data, this project will advance our understanding of
contemporary risk management among agropastoralists. The project will also
investigate how large-scale changes have affected institutionalized norms of
exchange, and to what extent individuals' behavior depart from these norms. As
pastoral communities begin to restore intergroup relations after decades of
armed raiding, herders are faced with such critical issues as widespread
livestock loss and poverty. Information generated from this project will aid in
guiding policy on livestock management, community development, conflict
resolution, and food security.