* 1324158
* Collaborative Research: Identifying the Conditions Under Which Indigenous Communities Engage in Legal Mobilization
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Todd Eisenstadt, American University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 223,603.00

One of social science's greatest theoretical puzzles is "What factors lead
individuals to join together collectively to protect a public good, when all
face temptations to act opportunistically?" We examine this question in a study
of poor, rural, indigenous communities to understand how they overcome
socioeconomic and geographic barriers to launch new forms of social movements
relying on Western science and international collaboration. In contrast to
arguments that environmental issues concern only the relatively affluent, we
argue that immediate threats to community livelihoods may provide material
incentives for poor communities to come together to mitigate environmental
impacts.

The project evaluates determinants of collective action at the individual,
community, and transnational levels through analysis of survey, interview, and
archival data. Understanding changes in indigenous movement strategies - from
confrontation to cooperation with government authorities and scientists - should
help communities and policymakers better cope with environmental threats. The
project will also help us understand how indigenous leaders draw attention to
scarcities they face, while using the climate change frame to help pressure
international organizations and governments regarding one of the most vital
issues of our time. The project explains how small and apparently powerless
groups largely outside of the Western system of justice can leverage judicial
institutions to challenge powerful global energy interests. Finally, the project
will train graduate students and disseminate findings among academics and
practitioners.