* 1324668
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Structure and Plasticity of Bilingual Sound Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Natasha Warner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2015
* USD 12,903.00

In an era of increasing globalization and immigration, the speech heard on a
daily basis is becoming less homogenous, and various accents and dialects
permeate everyday activities as interactions between people from different
language backgrounds increase. Speakers of different languages use different
acoustic information to decide what sounds they are hearing. For example, while
both English and Spanish have a sound contrast between "p" and "b," listeners
pay attention to different aspects of the sound signal (or different "acoustic
cues") to determine the difference between these sounds in the two languages.
This means that a person listening to another language, or to foreign-accented
speech, may not be paying attention to the same parts of the sound that are
relevant for the speaker, which could lead to difficulties in intelligibility.
For effective speech comprehension, listeners must rapidly accommodate to
different accents by shifting their attention to the aspects of the sounds that
are relevant for the speaker. The proposed dissertation research explores how
one's native language can shape the way sound categories are produced and
perceived, as well as to what extent listeners adapt when confronted with
changes in these categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the research
will explore which acoustic cues are most relevant to distinguishing contrasts
like "p" vs. "b" in English and Spanish. The second set of experiments will
explore how the "boundaries" of these sound categories can be shifted. Perhaps
the most striking example of accommodation is provided by bilinguals, who switch
from using the sounds of one language to another effortlessly and
instantaneously. However, monolingual listeners also shift their sound category
boundaries to accommodate to new accents. The proposed research will explore the
plasticity of sound categories, or the rate and magnitude at which listeners
shift their category boundaries when confronted with speech that is pronounced
differently than usual, as happens when hearing an unfamiliar foreign accent.
The research will also investigate whether bilinguals show more plasticity than
monolinguals. Together, the results of the proposed experiments will increase
understanding of how sound categories are structured in different languages and
which factors contribute to the plasticity of these categories, with the broader
aim of providing insight into the challenges involved in understanding foreign
or foreign-accented speech.