* 1324155
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Heterogenous Preferences and Dynamics of Cooperation in Networked Public Goods Games: A Dialogue Between Experimental and Computational Approaches
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Ragan Petrie, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 21,646.00

A series of behavioral and computational experiments examine mechanisms by which
cooperation is promoted in networked communities. Social groups are typically
built around some form of network structure, and cooperation and efficiency
within a group can be strongly affected by the flow of information determined by
the structure of the network alone. Furthermore, experimental and observational
studies show some real world groups are more successful at sustaining
cooperation than others for a given network structure. This research explores
the hypothesis that such heterogeneity is due to the interaction between the
social preferences of individuals and the network structure that determines the
dynamics of cooperation within a social group. Results from experimental
economics have shown that there is a great deal of heterogeneity in terms of an
individual?s preference to cooperate in group-dilemma settings. Depending on the
composition of these cooperative types in the group, socially optimal
cooperation may or may not be achieved without costly sanctions. This suggests
that, in addition to the network structure, the distribution and the placement
of different types within the network can also affect group outcomes. While it
has been shown that network structure can facilitate cooperation, this proposal
investigates the impact of the distribution of cooperative types and their
placement within a given network structure on social outcomes.

This project is an unusual use of both behavioral experiments and the
computational simulation methodology known as agent-based modeling. This
approach will allow us to systematically investigate the effects of network
structure on cooperative behavior in a heterogeneous population. While
observational data exists on naturally-occurring networks, the network structure
and behavior of the individuals participating in the network have typically co-
evolved. Thus, identification of the effect of structure on cooperation would be
biased with this data because of individuals choosing the network in which to
interact. The strength of this research is to use laboratory experiments to
identify the cooperative preferences of individuals and then strategically place
them in various network structures to examine how these types interact to
enhance cooperation. The research can create counterfactuals of existing
networks to examine how individuals with different levels of cooperative
preferences would behave in a network they did not choose. The dialogue between
the experiments and agent-based modeling will allow scholars to more efficiently
investigate the network structures that have the potential to most enhance
cooperation and to learn and calibrate the models to better represent behavior
in social dilemmas.