* 1324580
* 2013 AEESP Conference and CAREER Workshop: Environmental Engineers and Scientists of 2050, July 14-16, 2013 in Golden, Colorado
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2013,11/30/2013
* Linda Figueroa, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 11/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

CBET 1324580&lt;br/&gt;Linda Figueroa&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is
to partially support the 2013 AEESP Research and Education Conference, including
a workshop to assist junior faculty members with career planning and with the
preparation of NSF CAREER proposals. The funding would also be used to partially
offset the U.S. expenses of invited speakers to attend the conference. The 2013
AEESP Research and Education Conference will be hosted by the Colorado School of
Mines (CSM) and the University of Colorado, Boulder (CUB) and Denver (UCD) and
held on the CSM Campus in Golden, Colorado. The Conference will be held July
14-16, 2013. The team of Colorado Universities was selected to host the 2013
Conference through a competitive proposal process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
AEESP Conference is the flagship event of the Association of Environmental
Engineering and Science Professors (AEESP). This conference serves as a venue
for the exchange of information between the academic and practitioner
communities, particularly relating to the advancement of innovative research and
the preparation of students for professional practice in environmental
engineering. In this regard, the Conference benefits the practice of
environmental engineering and science, improves our collective ability to
educate the next generation of environmental engineers and scientists, and
facilitates discovery and advancement of knowledge in our field. The Conference
is typically well attended by Environmental Engineering/Science professors from
throughout the United States. Anticipated attendance at the 2013 Conference is
approximately 400 attendees, including graduate students and early-career
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the Conference is the Environmental
Scientist and Engineer of 2050, which will help to prepare faculty and students
to be globally competitive by promoting dialog and increasing awareness of
different global perspectives and to be ready for the challenges of the future.
Incorporation of professional practitioners at this year?s Conference aims to
attract, train, and retain a more diverse, globally integrated, and competitive
science and engineering workforce. The integration of research and education
within the Conference technical sessions, coupled with the workshops held in
conjunction with the Conference, will lead to innovation in course and
curriculum development. Members of groups underrepresented in environmental
engineering will be recruited to participate in the workshops, particularly the
CAREER workshop. This will include graduate students, post-doctoral researchers,
and early-career faculty members. Four nationally-prominent individuals (Lisa
Jackson-EPA, Glen Daigger-CH2MHill, George Tchobanoglous-UC Davis and Susan
Powers-Clarkson) have been invited to deliver keynote speeches at the Conference
on topics that include global perspective, future of our field and the evolution
of our educational breadth and mission. The participation of these nationally
prominent individuals at the Conference will provide Conference attendees with
perspectives and opportunities not typically available to educators and
practitioners in the field of Environmental Science and Engineering. A post-
conference report of highlights and findings from the Conference will be
published in the quarterly AEESP newsletter and will be disseminated through
other appropriate channels (web site, email distribution list, etc.).