* 1324294
* OCE-PRF The ecological and economic consequences of coastal hypoxia: a case study using a novel in situ benthic observing system, Wormcam
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* NONE NONE, Sturdivant              Samuel         K
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2015
* USD 170,000.00

Overview: In this project, the fellow will conduct a study of the dynamics of
community structure of coastal benthic systems, in situ, and under hypoxic
conditions, the role of physiological adaptations in maintaining benthic
services and functions, and the economic cost of hypoxia. This work will be
undertaken under the mentorship of Professor Cindy Lee Van Dover at the Marine
Laboratory of the Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University.

Coastal hypoxia can have negative consequences on benthic community structure
and function. While the effects of hypoxia on benthic community structure are
well understood, less well known are impacts to community function. At the onset
of hypoxia, mobile fauna are displaced, and, as the severity and duration of
hypoxia increase, community structure of non-mobile infauna degrades (i.e., loss
of biodiversity, biomass, activity). Impacts of hypoxia can have ecosystem-level
consequences, including reductions in benthic fisheries that depend on infauna
for their nutrition (e.g., demersal fish and epibenthic crustacean predators);
degradation of the infauna community also reduces bioturbation rates, altering
rates of biogenic remineralization of nutrients and pollutant sequestration.

Intellectual Merit: This study will take advantage of comparative systems that
experience sustained (Chesapeake Bay, VA) and intermittent (Neuse River, NC)
seasonal hypoxia to answer the following questions: 1) What is the relationship
between hypoxia and bioturbation rates under sustained and intermittent
conditions of hypoxia? This question will be addressed through 12-months of
benthic observations in two systems using time-series (hourly) sediment profile
imaging (SPI) and environmental sensing systems, together with monthly replicate
sampling for spatial characterization of bioturbation rates (sediment profiles)
and community structure (sediment grabs). Study locations will be chosen based
on the history of hypoxia in each system, using data from the Chesapeake Bay
Benthic Monitoring and Neuse River Estuary Modeling and Monitoring Programs of
the Chesapeake Bay Program and University of North Carolina Chapel Hill's
Institute of Marine Science, respectively. 2) What is the relationship between
hypoxia and physiological response of key system organisms? This relationship
will be examined using respirometry and gene expression methodologies in two
benthic polychaete species, and will test the hypothesis that there are
significant differences in response between organisms cultured from Chesapeake
Bay and the Neuse River. Cultured polychaetes from each system will be put
through hypoxia trials using stop-flow respirometry to determine metabolic rate,
O2 extraction, and the O2 saturation level that induces mortality. Subsamples of
worms will be removed and frozen at intervals in the hypoxia trials for
subsequent Restriction site Associated DNA sequencing to survey for differential
gene expression. 3) What is the economic cost of coastal hypoxia. The fellow
will develop a bioeconomic model that explores the economic costs of hypoxia in
Chesapeake Bay by relating hypoxic affects to a benthic fishery (i.e. blue
crabs), and compare those results with economic valuations of hypoxia previously
conducted in the Neuse River.

Broader Impacts: Research results will be disseminated in the scientific
literature and will provide new knowledge useful to coastal environmental
managers. The fellow will expand efforts to broaden the participation of
minorities in ocean science through mentoring programs at Duke University, in
the ASLO Multicultural Program, and in the annual Youth Education Summit of the
National Association of Black Scuba Divers, which targets grade school
minorities with an interest in ocean science.