* 1324977
* DIP: Community knowledge construction in the instrumented classroom
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Joel Brown, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,236,076.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education DIP (Development and
Implementation) project, the PIs are addressing challenges of knowledge
community pedagogy, where students are given a high level of agency and
responsibility for developing questions, exchanging and critiquing ideas with
peers, and advancing collective understanding. The project addresses four main
challenges in supporting such pedagogy: (1) making student ideas visible and
accessible, (2) supporting discourse and knowledge building with digital posters
and other summative representations, (3) scaffolding complex collaborative
inquiry through technology, and (4) supporting a sense of collective
epistemology. Knowledge building is well researched from a conceptual
perspective; until now, however, there has not been a concerted effort to
develop technological infrastructure that would support its pedagogy well. In a
series of design-oriented studies, researchers are working together with veteran
teachers to co-design elementary biology curriculum that takes a knowledge
community approach, develop the suite of tools, and carry out research
investigating ways of sustaining a knowledge community pedagogy over long
periods of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars have argued that the demands of a
"knowledge society" require new models of collaborative and inquiry-oriented
learning that engage learners in sustained investigations and promote agency and
autonomy. Several sophisticated pedagogical approaches have been developed to
achieve these goals, but up until now, the technological infrastructure for
supporting teachers and students in such approaches has not been at the same
level of sophistication as the pedagogical approaches themselves. This proposal
aims to narrow that gap through design of a suite of hardware and software tools
that supports representing personal and collective knowledge in both private and
public forms, tangible and embodied interactions as well as verbal interactions,
and the orchestration of activities. The aims are to support student work and
meta-cognition, provide to teachers the supports they need to carry out the
pedagogies, and to examine the interactions between teacher, students,
technology, and pedagogy that lead to sustained agency and community engagement
among learners.