* 1324248
* Comparative cross-national analysis of implementation of natural resource rights
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* LaDawn Haglund, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 317,902.00

This project explores the effectiveness of legal, institutional, and political
mechanisms for realizing human rights in natural resources that invoke
sustainability concerns. To date, scholarly approaches to human rights and
natural resources have remained largely separate, despite the social and
behavioral dimensions of sustainability and the resource dimensions of human
rights claims. This project integrates these perspectives in order to enrich
human rights scholarship and sustainability research, illuminating the dynamics
and complexity of human-nature interactions. Using archival research,
comparative-historical analysis, interviews, and quantitative analysis, this
project analyzes the mechanisms, actors, and pathways by which human rights and
sustainability goals might be fulfilled. Three megacities were chosen as the
sites for analysis because of the extreme governance challenges they face due to
the confluence of rapid urbanization, illegal housing, migration, poverty,
inequality, and water scarcity. All of these factors fundamentally affect public
health, social equity, and the environment. Research objectives include
documenting and evaluating the role of legal and non-legal mechanisms in
realizing human rights and sustainability norms for water and sanitation;
evaluating the role of state and non-state actors in implementing social rights;
and identifying and comparatively analyzing configurations of mechanisms and
pathways across research sites and sectors to see when and how they operate more
or less effectively. An important outcome will be the identification of
practical strategies for making social rights real in places where it is
difficult to do so. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The policy significance of rights to
natural resources gives the project substantial broader impacts. Findings will
be made available to respondents as well as to international development
agencies via a web portal and in-country presentations. The project will also
expand international research networks, foster curricular development at home
and abroad, and expose U.S. students to cross-national research.