* 1324367
* Bridging the Micro and Macro in the Study of Online Communication and Activism
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2017
* J. Craig Jenkins, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2017
* USD 239,994.00

SES- 1324367 Craig Jenkins Andrew Martin Ohio State University

This study examines the organization of online activism in a contemporary
context. This addresses a key gap in current literature, which treats online
activism in isolation from other mobilization processes. Our key hypotheses are:
1) Online activism is embedded in existing social networks and hence reflects
the networks and social commitments online activists have developed in other
contexts, 2) framing reflects these networks and commitments which shape the
resonance of groups' strategic communications, and 3) groups that gear their
messaging and tactics around these preexisting networks are more effective at
mobilizing broader public support for public initiatives. This study uses
regulatory initiatives in Ohio as its primary testbed for these arguments by: a)
conducting surveys of online and offline activists; b) analyzing framing in the
Twitter messages associated with these efforts; c) examining the network
structure of these communications and their links to mobilization efforts of the
rival groups; and d) linking the above dynamics to the public opinion and the
outcomes of the initiatives. The investigators also compare this Ohio Twitter
network to parallel initiatives in Wisconsin to confirm the similarity to this
other online activity. This addresses several major gaps in existing studies of
online activism and communications: How do the broader community networks
influence the content and diffusion of Twitter communications? Do online and
offline network ties equally or interactively facilitate activism at both the
community and individual levels? How do online and offline communications affect
public opinion and initiative outcomes? The answers to these questions will
strengthen our understanding of how online activism fits in the broader context
of contemporary activism as well as generate new text analysis tools for
studying communications.

Broader Impacts The major impact of this study will be to inform the
interdisciplinary study of the growth, organization and impact of online
communications in the arena of activism. This study will enable understanding of
how online communication content and network interacts with, and are embedded
in, offline communications and networks to shape mobilization. The project will
also generate new textual analysis tools for social scientists studying online
communications. Additionally, the project provides training for graduate
students who are directly involved in the research.