* 1324090
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement: Violence, Citizenship and the Resettlement of Defectors
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Adrienne Pine, American University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2015
* USD 16,975.00

The researcher will investigate the relations between violence and citizenship
in refugee resettlement. Violence -- whether political and physical, or
unrecognized and rendered invisible -- permeates the experience of forced
migrations and displacement, shaping and defining every phase of refugee
resettlement processes. It is of paramount importance, therefore, to examine how
violence operates in the lived experiences of citizenship as refugees resettle
into host societies of asylum. This research will investigate this violence-
citizenship nexus through an ethnographic study of resettlement and asks: (1)
how the many and wide-ranging forms of violence refugees experience in their
forced migration impacts their embodiment of citizenship; (2) how the formation
and embodiment of host country citizenship might be a violent process; (3) and
whether refugees articulate alternative imaginations of home, belonging and
citizenship beyond the dominant confines of host country citizenship, and how.

To obtain empirical data, the researcher will employ a mixture of social science
research methods during field research including semi-structured interviews,
life-history interviews, participant observation, and discourse analysis. This
study contributes both theoretical and empirical insights into conceptions of
citizenship beyond the juridical-political possessions of and claims to status
and rights. It argues for a broader conceptualization that includes people's
sense of belonging in the political entity and social body. Particularly,
because violence permeates the experience of forced migrations shaping refugee
resettlement processes, this study illuminates the active role of violence in
the conception and embodiment of citizenship, and will offer insights to similar
processes at work in other places where refugees are resettled within the
citizen-body. This award will also support the scientific training of a
promising graduate student.