* 1324587
* The Expanded Hierarchical Rater Model: A Framework for the Analysis of Ratings
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jodi Casabianca, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,001.00

Assessment of individuals' proficiency at complex tasks is often accomplished by
observation and rating. Teachers or testing agencies, for example, rate
students' essays and their solutions to complex problems in mathematics and
science. School districts employ trained observers to rate teachers' performance
in the classroom. Experts rate radiologists' ability to classify x-ray images.
Ratings, however, may change over time due to changes in the way the rater
perceives the work and/or changes in individuals' proficiency. The material
being rated also may reflect more than one dimension of proficiency. Finally,
summaries of these ratings may be misleading when the data collection design
includes groupings (schools, hospitals, etc.) that introduce extraneous
statistical dependence into the rating data. This project will expand the
Hierarchical Rater Model (HRM), a multilevel item response theory model that
accounts for dependencies between multiple ratings of the same work, into a
framework that will accommodate (a) variation in ratings over time; (b)
multidimensional assessments; and (c) clusters and other hierarchical structure
introduced by the data collection design. This new framework will allow the HRM
to provide estimates of the overall proficiencies of individuals on the rated
tasks, as well as estimates of precision, accuracy, and other rater
characteristics, under a broad variety of practical rating situations.
Analytical work, simulation studies, and real data applications will be used to
explore and demonstrate the feasibility and applicability of the expanded HRM
framework. In particular, planned analysis of data from the Measures of
Effective Teaching project (MET; Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 2012), a
large study of class-room teaching in the United States, will demonstrate
feasibility of the proposed methodological advancements to the HRM. The research
will culminate with a new HRM framework with unified notation and formulations
so that researchers may specify and estimate special cases of the generalized
model as needed. The project also will provide computational tools including
algorithms and source code, so that researchers can apply the framework with
ease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new HRM framework will advance scientific and
practical knowledge in two ways. It will enable researchers and practitioners to
obtain high-quality estimates of proficiency that account and adjust for complex
structure in the ratings. It also will provide rich information about raters and
the rating process. Ratings of work, performance, and behavior are an increasing
part of high-stakes decisions in many fields including human resources, medical
diagnosis, and psychology. The largest impact of this project may be in
education policy and research, where ratings of teachers and students are
increasingly common. The new HRM framework will allow researchers and
practitioners in these fields to produce more accurate assessments of
individuals being rated, and to diagnose possible issues in the measurement and
rating design, contributing to improved high-stakes decision making based on
rating data.