* 1324238
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:Information Acquisition and Mercantile Credit Reporting in the 19th Century U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Gary Gorton, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,702.00

In the wake of the 2007-2008 financial crisis, a main criticism of credit rating
agencies (CRAs) has been that they produced biased ratings that led investors to
overvalue structured financial products. Aside from regulatory concerns, biased
ratings only have direct detrimental effects on the economy if investors know
the ratings and use them to make investment decisions. Nevertheless, economic
theory suggests that investors might not look at ratings during business cycle
peaks if demand for idiosyncratic information decreases when aggregate returns
increase. In general, we don't know what information investors have; often the
best we can do is infer their information from trading actions. This inference
is imprecise and does not indicate the source of the information. In order to
evaluate the economic importance of CRAs and other information producers, we
need to know more about what determines demand for their product.&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation research aims to (1) construct a unique direct measure of
information acquisition from an information producer and (2) use this measure to
identify the determinants of demand for information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary sources for this research are the credit report records of the
Mercantile Agency. Founded in 1841, the Agency was one of the first mercantile
credit-reporting firms and, along with its main competitor, J.M. Bradstreet
&amp; Company, established the system on which modern credit rating is based.
Wholesalers subscribed to the service to gain information on the credit quality
of their trading partners. The credit reports cover merchants for almost the
entire United States between 1850 and the mid-1880s. A sample of the reports
will be collected from the R.G. Dun &amp; Company Credit Report Volumes, located
in the Baker Library Historical Collections at the Harvard Business School. The
main variable for this dataset will be a feature of the credit reports that has
yet to be exploited by any scholars: indications of how many subscribers
inquired about each report. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These data will support two
main research projects about how subscribers acquired information. If we assume
that subscribers used the credit reports to make trading decisions, they should
only have inquired after a report if they expected the information to impact
their decisions. The first project will empirically identify the economic
conditions under which subscribers acquired the most information. The
preliminary evidence based on a small sample suggests that subscribers acquired
information counter-cyclically. If this finding holds more generally, it implies
that information was less valuable in boom periods relative to bust periods. The
second project will investigate what types of firms the Mercantile Agency
reported on relative to the entire market and how this supply changed over time.
If the Agency learned about its subscribers' preferences over time, it should
have improved at predicting the information its subscribers would find useful.
Hence, the development of supply can shed light on the characteristics of firms
for which credit reporting was most valuable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By studying
the credit reports of the Mercantile Agency, this research will further our
understanding of how people acquire information and the economic significance of
the institutions that produce information. This research will contribute to the
literature in economics on costly information acquisition by providing a direct
measure of acquisition and contribute to the literature on the history of the
Mercantile Agency by studying a key component of how the company operated.