* 1324971
* US-Italy Collaboration: Determination of Boron Isotope Ratios in Subducted Sediments
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Demian Saffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2015
* USD 30,538.00

Subduction zones are the primary site of crustal recycling into the Earth¡¯s
mantle, with important implications for mantle and continental crustal evolution
throughout Earth history. Subducted sediments contribute volatiles including H2O
and CO2, trace elements, and unique isotopic signatures to the formation of arc
magmas. By assessing the co-variation of boron concentrations and isotope ratios
in progressively dehydrated marine clays, the proposed study will constrain 1)
the initial variability in the composition of marine clay inputs to the trench
within a well-constrained segment of a single subduction zone; 2) the evolution
of sediment composition through progressive dehydration prior to entering the
sub-arc region; and 3) the composition of fluids that are ultimately expelled
back to the ocean, or carried deeper and released into the forearc mantle. The
proposed catalytic investigation makes use of a novel sample set collected from
the Nankai Trough and Shikoku Island in Southwest Japan, which effectively
samples a continuous transect along the surface of the subducted slab from the
trench to the inner forearc, and for which peak paleo-temperatures are
extraordinarily well-constrained by previous studies. The sample set consists of
twenty subducted, underplated, and exhumed shales and mudstones from the
Tertiary and Cretaceous Shimanto Belts, (peak paleo-temperatures ~100-285¢ªC).
This unique suite of samples provides an opportunity to constrain the
geochemical effects of diagenesis and metamorphism during the first few tens of
kilometers of subduction.

Understanding elemental cycling through subduction zones is critical for
understanding the complex interactions and exchanges between the Earth¡¯s
atmosphere, hydrosphere, and geosphere. For example, carbon dioxide levels in
the atmosphere influence carbonate solubility in the oceans, and subduction of
precipitated carbonate sediments is an important long-term sink for atmospheric
carbon. In addition, significant amounts of ocean water are subducted into the
deep Earth at subduction zones, which over geologic time may lead to the
accumulation of a significant reservoir of hydrogen in the Earth¡¯s deep mantle.
Boron and lithium are light elements with distinct isotopic signatures that
allow us to track the recycling of surface materials such as water and sediments
into the depths of the Earth. This catalyzing research project, supported by the
CNIC program, will establish a close collaboration between US and Italian
geoscientists, and gives early-career student researchers the valuable
experience of being trained in the internationally recognized isotope
geochemistry laboratory at the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR) in Pisa.