* 1325333
* Biostratigraphic and paleogeographic utility of Cambrian-Ordovician trilobite faunas in Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* John Taylor, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2018
* USD 119,753.00

Biostratigraphic and paleogeographic utility of Cambrian-
Ordovician&lt;br/&gt;trilobite faunas in Alaska&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;John Taylor, Indiana University of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;
EAR-1325333&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Paleogeographic maps of
North America, which depict our continent as it appeared at certain times in
Earth history, are utilized by geologists exploring for fossil fuels and other
critical societal resources, climate specialists seeking greater insight to
conditions that prevailed on our planet in 'deep time', and geoscientists
investigating the behavior of tectonic plates and derivative processes that
shape the surface of our planet. But the data for constructing such maps for the
Cambrian and Ordovician Periods, a time of greenhouse climate, are exceedingly
sparse for the northern half of the continent, and the Arctic regions in
general. This project will improve that situation through detailed study of
Cambrian-Ordovician trilobite (extinct marine arthropod) faunas)from the Arctic
Alaska Terrane (AAT) of northern Alaska, and the Yukon Stable Block (YSB) of
eastern Alaska. It will utilize large fossil collections archived by geologists
of the U.S. and Canadian Geological Surveys over the past century, supplemented
by new material collected in several key areas in Alaska. The goal for the AAT
is to test, by comparing newly discovered faunas from its North Slope Subterrane
(NST) with trilobites previously reported from the Seward Terrane (ST) in
western Alaska, the hypothesis that the thick limestone succession in the NST
was deposited somewhere in northeastern (modern coordinates) North America,
whereas the ST originated in or near Siberia. In the YSB, thorough documentation
of rocks and fossils in the Jones Ridge Limestone will refine correlation with
rocks of the same age in other regions. For many of the horizons targeted for
study, the data from Jones Ridge will be the first information acquired from the
entire northern half of the continent. The refined time control through this
thick (ca. 450m) stack of limestone preserved near the northwestern corner of
North America will serve to test the claim of continent wide (and perhaps
global) extent for numerous events documented across broad areas in the U.S. and
southern Canada, on the opposite side of the continent. These include (among
others), 1) a number of significant rises and falls in sea level and 2) episodes
of platform-wide suppression of microbial reef development in the aftermath
stage boundary extinctions in the late Cambrian. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
scientific results of the proposed project will benefit society by advancing
knowledge of the Arctic region, an area rich in vital resources but still a
frontier with respect to our understanding of even basic aspects of its tectonic
history. Extensive involvement of undergraduate Geology majors and Earth and
Space Science Education majors as junior collaborators in the project will
produce a cadre of professional geoscientists with exceptional insight and
secondary school teachers able to teach science with the enthusiasm and
knowledge of someone who has actually done science.