* 1325004
* DIP: Developing Frameworks, Tools and Social Practices to Support Effective Instructor use of Online Social Learning Networks in Blended Learning Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Nichole Pinkard, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,449,230.00

In this Cyberlearning: Transforming Education DIP (Development and
Implementation) project, the PIs focus on understanding the kinds of tools and
help for teachers that will support them as they integrate use of learning
technologies into their classroom practices. There are a variety of challenges
in creating and managing "blended learning" environments where students are
learning in the classroom and also using tools and resources online and
communicating with distant collaborators online. The PIs posit seven critical
research and development needs in learning how to design such environments and
help teachers learn to practice in these environments: better understanding of
the types of interactions that are uniquely afforded by networked technologies
and the ways those interactions contribute to learning; shared datasets that
document and link face-to-face and online instructions in ways that enable
analysis of learning outcomes; design principles for online learning tools to be
integrated into such learning ecosystems; flexible instructional tools for
teachers and data that help teachers to adjust classroom orchestration and allow
them to realign online interaction structures; sharable frameworks for analyzing
the affects of online learning tools; appropriate collaboration tools; and
professional development facilities. The PIs in this project take a design
research approach to the design of these technologies and approaches and to
investigating the ins and outs of socio-technical systems that best support
blended learning -- the types and patterns of online interactions that create
opportunities for learning, what leads to learning outcomes, how and which data
to capture to analyze learning, the kinds of analyses that are needed to inform
understanding of interactions within online social learning networks, and ways
of supporting practitioners in effectively using the affordances of the socio-
technical system to create learning ecosystems that promote digital literacy and
learning of 21st century skills along with disciplinary learning. This research
is being carried out in the context of the robust ecology of the Digital Youth
Network (DYN), an already-existing infrastructure for connecting youth to each
other in after-school contexts that includes a variety of tools for digital
inquiry and expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many teachers understand the
utiity of technology in their personal lives, the norms of classroom instruction
make it difficult for the majority of teachers to make effective use of
networked technologies in their classrooms. However, it is essential to make
sure that our educational systems integrate digital and technological learning
experiences into daily learning activities to ensure that all youth become
technologically literate and learn the skills they need for engaging in the 21st
century workforce. This project focuses on designing "blended learning"
environments and helping teachers take on and learn to productively use digital
technologies in their classrooms to help students learn disciplinary content,
disciplinary skills, and the many communication, collaboration, and inquiry
skills so important to their futures. As well, investigation focuses on how to
use the data collected while learners are engaging in learning activities online
to help teachers visualize the capabilities and understanding of individual
students so as to be able to give appropriate attention to every student's
needs. It is expected that analysis of the data collected, along with future
analysis by other researchers, will contribute novel forms of online analytic
tools to document the relationship between interactions and outcomes related to
digital literacy, including evidence of skills and understandings and also other
important capacities such as developing interest, spreading knowledge, engaging
in creative practices, taking on independent learning, and expanding ideas for
future careers.