* 1325227
* Coastal SEES (Track 1):   Planning for hydrologic and ecological impacts of sea level rise on sustainability of coastal water resources
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2016
* USD 441,125.00

Coastal SEES (Track 1): Planning for hydrologic and ecological impacts of sea
level rise on sustainability of coastal water
resources&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jonathan Martin, Andrew Ogram, Zhong-ren Peng,
and Arnoldo Valle-Levinson &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of
Florida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Overview of the Project&lt;br/&gt;Sea
level is projected to rise by 1 m or more by 2100. A common concern for rapidly
growing coastal communities is storm-driven inundation of coastal zones, but
another subtle and potentially more critical impact will be changes to drinking
water resources from salt water intrusion into aquifers along the coasts. These
negative impacts from sea level rise could increase with the growth in coastal
populations and their elevated demand for groundwater. Impacts will include both
salinization of available water resources as well as changes to coastal
ecosystems that rely on discharge of fresh water. Fresh water flows from coastal
aquifers in a spectrum of ways, ranging from widely distributed discharge from
sandy sediments to discharge from springs in limestone areas that contain water-
filled conduits and caves. Moreover, the intrusion of salt water is likely to
change the microbial communities living underground. Because these microbes are
important for controlling the water chemistry, changes in the communities could
also lead to a change in the water quality of the aquifers. Specific questions
to be addressed with this project include: (1) how will changing coastal
demographics and sea level rise impact the sustainability of coastal water
resources, (2) what are the relative magnitudes of salt intrusion if coastal
aquifers discharge diffusely from sand or from springs, (3) how does
salinization change microbial communities, (4) will these changes in microbial
communities affect the quality of water in coastal aquifers and hence the cost
of water supplies, and (5) what strategies can be proposed to improve the
sustainability of these water resources? These questions will be addressed in
two locations: Puerto Morelos Lagoon on the east coast of the Yucatan peninsula,
which is characterized by numerous spring discharges from limestone and Indian
River Lagoon on the east coast of Florida, which is characterized by diffuse
flow from sandy sediments. Two field trips to the Yucatan and three to Florida
will allow collection of human demographic information, measurements of the
exchange of salt water following extremely large tides and storms, and
measurements of changes in microbial communities and water quality following
these events. The work will be carried out collaboratively by investigators with
expertise in multiple disciplines including urban and regional planning, coastal
hydrodynamics, microbial ecology, and aqueous
geochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Explanation of the Projects
Broader Significance and Importance&lt;br/&gt;The sustainability of coastal
water resources in the face of rising sea levels should depend on how quickly
coastal aquifers are intruded by salt water and how the water quality changes as
a result of salt water intrusion and the effects on the microbial communities
from that intrusion. Results from this project should aid in general planning
for potential impacts related to changes in the coastal water resources,
regardless of whether the intruding flow of water originates at springs or
across broad areas of sand. Both of the field sites to be studied for this work
have important regional impacts; Indian River Lagoon is designated an estuary of
national importance by the National Estuaries Program, and Puerto Morelos Lagoon
is the site of a national park. Findings from this work will be incorporated
into regional water planning through collaboration with local water management
districts. This work will also directly impact a newly formed program at the
University of Florida UF that includes a cohort of seven faculty members, each
of whom will support research of a PhD student. The cohort consists of the PIs
of this proposal, along with three additional scientists and engineers with
expertise in studies of past sea level, coastal ecosystems, and water treatment.
This program, with internal funding from UF, will provide the stipends (but no
research funding) for a cohort of six PhD students, three of whom will work
directly on this project on interdisciplinary and collaborative studies of the
effects of sea level rise on coastal aquifers. In addition to these graduate
students, at least one undergraduate student will be integrated in the research,
with recruiting occurring through the Minority Mentorship Program at
UF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was co-funded through the Coastal SEES
program (GEO Directorate) and the ISE, who generously sponsored the
international participation of the PIs in thie project.