* 1325454
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Endogenous Institutions in Virtual Worlds
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Kevin McCabe, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 10,308.00

In the absence of strong institutional rules within a group governing the usage
of shared resources, the decisions of individuals to engage in resource
extraction may create suboptimal outcomes for the entire group -- this outcome,
when it occurs, is commonly called the "tragedy of the commons." Forests,
fisheries and water represent some of the best-known examples of resources whose
management is vulnerable to this dynamic, wherein an individual's choice to
extract a given amount of resource may be made without internalizing the
negative impacts that this decision will have on the resource's ability to
replenish itself in order to facilitate sustainable extraction in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of private property rights over
the common resource is a classic mechanism by which the tragedy of the commons
may be avoided. Property rights guarantee private resource owners the rents
accrued from future extraction of the resource, and thus these owners do not
face strong incentives to immediately exploit the resource out of fear that
someone else will if they do not. However, in many cases "privatizing the
commons" may be infeasible because of difficulties in defining or enforcing
formal property rights. Nonetheless, even when resources are not formally
privatized groups are often able to effectively define rules governing a
commons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploration of the effectiveness of different
institutional rules and organization forms in different commons environments has
generated a very important literature in the past half-century which has
generated valuable advice pertaining to how policymakers should both identify
and respond to the tragedy of the commons in its various manifestations. These
insights have been applied to deal with the management of resources such water
in southern California, crab populations from the Chesapeake Bay to the Aleutian
Islands, and most sorts of game wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design in
this proposal will shed light on how different levels of survival pressure may
affect a group's ability to establish rules for commons management. A controlled
laboratory experiment will be implemented wherein subjects will be given control
of avatars in a naturalistic online environment. Subjects will acquire income by
moving their avatars around within this environment and gathering resources;
however, if resources are overharvested then they will replenish more-slowly and
the group's overall income will be reduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a previous
experiment implemented in a similar environment, the establishment of
institutions such as informal property rights and territoriality proved
essential to effective commons management. However, this design introduces the
additional notion that poor resource management may lead to the disruption of
homeostatic equilibrium within avatars -- in essence, a failure to gather
resources may lead to avatars becoming weak or dying. This process may also be
hastened via avatars being able to directly attack one
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Survival pressures will take the form of a
requirement that avatars must gather resources at different rates in order to
survive each period of the experiment. By examining multiple levels of pressure
-- ranging from very low (avatars need to do very little gathering to survive)
to very high (even under optimal management, not enough resources will be
produced for all avatars to survive) -- data will be gathered concerning how
this threat of avatar mortality directly impacts the institutions that groups
implement in order to govern the common resource. It is hypothesized that
increased pressure will make informal institutions much more fragile since
tactical failures may lead to the deaths of avatars. In turn, this will lead to
worse commons management and increased violence in this
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is undoubtedly the case that for many
individuals, ineffective commons management may lead not simply to marginally-
diminished incomes but also to severe impoverishment and death. In the real
world, high survival pressures may result in the collapse of informal
institutions and outbreaks of violence. This design brings to bear the
advantages of the controlled experiments by examining the direct impacts of
survival pressure on commons management. The naturalistic environment being used
allows for the collection of much-richer institutional data compared to previous
designs that have examined similar issues. In doing so, this design aims to
glean new insights into the conditions under which groups can effectively self-
govern.