* 1325230
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying rates of Neoproterozoic global change, Ethiopia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Nicholas Swanson-Hysell, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 12/31/2017
* USD 152,425.00

Collaborative Research: Quantifying Rates of Neoproterozoic Global Change,
Ethiopia&lt;br/&gt;By&lt;br/&gt;Adam Maloof, Princeton University,
EAR-1323158&lt;br/&gt;Nicholas Swanson-Hysell, Univ. California, Berkeley,
EAR-1325230&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;While carbon and strontium
isotope, magnetostratigraphic, and paleontological records exist for the early
Neoproterozoic Era, and are the primary bases for correlation of stratigraphic
sections around the world, radiometric calibration is limited. Most carbonate
platforms well-suited for the development of chemostratigraphic data are
developed on passive margins far from explosive volcanic activity that might
deliver zircon-rich ash to the basin. The Tambien Group of northern Ethiopia is
ideal for solving this problem because it is a thick carbonate-containing
succession deposited in a back-arc basin proximal to active volcanism. We will
develop integrated chemostratigraphic, paleomagnetic and U-Pb geochronological
data from the Tambien Group of northern Ethiopia to provide a new backbone for
stratigraphic correlation in the 100 million years preceding Cryogenian
glaciation (~820-720 Ma). Our overarching goal is to understand how and when
potentially unique geochemical and paleogeographic boundary conditions were
developed that allowed for global glaciation at the onset of the Cryogenian
Period. This grant was jointly supported by the International Science and
Engineering Division.