* 1325367
* EAGER: Microstructured Sapphire Optical Fiber for SERS Sensing and Measurements at Elevated Temperatures
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Henry Du, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2014
* USD 130,483.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to explore an innovative concept
that leads to microstructured sapphire fibers with porous, anodized aluminum
oxide as cladding that further functions as anchor of Au and Ag nanoparticles
for chemical sensing and measurements by surface-enhanced Raman scattering at
high temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual
merit is to theoretically calculate mode-field distribution in the porous
aluminum oxide cladding to determine the optimal microstructure of the oxide for
high mode-field overlap and thus strong light-analyte interactions; to use the
calculated results as a guide to coat and anodize Al coating on sapphire fiber
to obtain porous oxide-cladded microstructured sapphire fiber; and to evaluate
the feasibility of microstructured sapphire fibers decorated with Ag and Au
nanoparticles for SERS measurements of hot combustion gas at 500ยบ-1500ยบC. The
program is transformative in that it will help usher in a new category of
specialty optical fibers for demanding applications where existing fiber
technologies are not suitable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader
impacts are multi-faceted. Technologically speaking, optically coupled
microstructured sapphire fibers could be used as a micro-reactor or test bed for
the development and understanding of new catalytic phenomena with laser
spectroscopy as a powerful in-situ probing technique. From educational
perspective, this program will provide a fertile training ground for a graduate
student and a diverse group of undergraduate and high school students. The
collaboration with Czech researchers adds a significant international dimension.
Dissemination of research results will be achieved via conference presentations
and peer-reviewed publications.