* 1325379
* Collaborative Research:  Elements of an extinction: Exploring the delayed Caribbean extinction with stable isotopes and trace elements
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Aaron O'Dea, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2017
* USD 44,343.00

Biologists warn that the current degradation and fragmentation of ecosystems
will lead to extinctions long into the future -- a process dubbed 'Extinction
debt' --but making accurate predictions requires a much better understanding of
how extinctions occur over long-term time scales. This project will dissect the
Plio-Pleistocene extinction event (1-2 Myr) in the southwestern Caribbean (SWC)
to examine the relationship between environmental perturbation and extinction
rate. During the Plio-Pleistocene event, extinction rates peaked between 35 and
100% in a variety of marine taxa across the Caribbean. Taxa better adapted to
nutrient-rich conditions were impacted most. Thus, the extinction is often
attributed to declining planktic nutrients in Caribbean water due to isolation
from the Pacific after the closure of the Central American Isthmus. The
extinctions lagged closure by 1-2 Myr, however, leading some researchers to
attribute increased extinction rates to climate change associated with the onset
of northern hemisphere glaciation. &lt;br/&gt;This study will integrate biotic
and geochemical data to reveal the direct causes of the Caribbean extinction
event and evaluate the evidence for the perceived delay using established and
new paleoenvironmental proxies and the unprecedented breadth of sampling and
depth of taxonomic analyses provided by the Panama Paleontology Project (PPP).
Three hypotheses will be tested: (1) Doomed taxa survived in nutrient-rich
refugia that persisted after Isthmus closure; extinction occurred when refugia
diminished sufficiently. (2) Extinction was driven by cooling related to
northern hemisphere glaciation. (3) Temporary survival of doomed taxa was
unrelated to changes in nutrients or temperature, suggesting stochastic
processes were responsible. To accomplish this, we will generate high-resolution
stable isotopic (18O/16O, 13C/12C) profiles of ~90 gastropod shells from 26
fossil localities in the SWC dating between 5 and 1.4 Ma, supplemented by
clumped isotope (13C18O/12C16O) and trace element (P/Ca, Sr/Ca, Ba/Ca) analyses,
to determine past local temperature and nutrient availability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first to establish a well-
constrained environmental system using the Tropical American fossil record and
multiple high-resolution geochemical proxies to test a range of evolutionary
hypotheses. These include the processes responsible for speciation, extinction,
niche expansion, and evolutionary maintenance of sexual reproduction. Uniting
biotic data with detailed paleoenvironmental data will reveal the root cause of
the most geologically recent marine extinction and provide a real-world example
with which to test models of the process of large-scale biodiversity loss. The
modern anthropogenic fragmentation of natural habitats and populations mirrors
the refugia that are purported to have delayed the extinction of SWC taxa in the
Pliocene. Our data will evaluate this hypothesis and demonstrate whether this
loss in biodiversity was directly related to environmental
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate a Panama-based field
experience into the undergraduate capstone course of the Environmental Programs
in Geoscience at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU). Students will work in groups
and conduct paleobiology and stable isotope research on samples they collect in
Panama, and sample and analyze at TAMU. In addition to presenting results,
students will write, peer-review, and revise research papers. The project will
train a post-doctoral fellow and graduate student in interdisciplinary science
and research mentoring. Finally, research findings will be presented at major
national and international meetings and published in premier journals.