* 1325622
* Coastal SEES (Track 2), Collaborative: Improving Chesapeake Bay water  quality by creating sustainable coastal watersheds
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2019
* Jonathan Winsten, Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2019
* USD 248,869.00

Coastal water quality is controlled by land uses in the surrounding watershed
and is declining in many coastal regions. The land that drains toward estuaries
contributes pollutants (primarily nitrogen, phosphorus, and sediment) from
fertilized lawns, septic systems, and sewage treatment plants. Water quality in
the Choptank River and estuary, which flow into the Chesapeake Bay, is declining
because of runoff from agriculture, but sewage disposal is also a contributing
source of nutrients. Better management of cultivated and residential land is
required to improve water quality, and many best management practices are
employed to reduce pollutants. Although we know a great deal about how some
individual Best Management Practices remove nutrients and other pollutants, best
management practices have never been tested at the watershed scale to determine
if they actually improve receiving water quality. This research will study the
people and land management of four Choptank watersheds. The researchers will
determine the attitudes towards adoption of best management practices,
mechanisms of pollutant reduction in specific best management practices, and
landscape water quality as a result of widespread implementation.

Many government programs are committed to encouraging best management practices
to improve water quality, but there is uncertainty whether commonly applied best
management practices significantly reduce pollutant fluxes from watersheds to
estuaries. The Choptank study will provide an important test of the
effectiveness of best management practices at the watershed scale, the results
of which can potentially be applied elsewhere. This project will involve
education of residents, farmers, the media, and government officials, and will
also involve scouts and 4-H organizations. The research has the potential to
identify effective best management practices and to create sustainable,
agricultural watersheds in the coastal zone.