* 1325674
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Taphonomy, paleoecology, and evolution of mammals and squamates from Egg Mountain: An exceptional view of a Late Cretaceous ecosystem
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Gregory Wilson Mantilla, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 09/30/2018
* USD 109,893.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Taphonomy, paleoecology, and evolution of mammals and
squamates from Egg Mountain: An exceptional view of a Late Cretaceous
ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gregory Wilson, University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;David Varricchio, Montana State University&lt;br/&gt;Jack
Conrad, New York Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern mammals and
lizards had their origins in the Cretaceous (145-66 million years ago)
geological period within the shadow of the dinosaurs. However, the poor fossil
record of these small-bodied groups has hindered a clear understanding of their
early evolution. Recent excavation at a long idle dinosaur locality in the Two
Medicine Formation of Montana (Egg Mountain) has produced abundant,
exceptionally well-preserved and largely un-transported fossils of both groups.
Already, Egg Mountain has contributed more relatively complete skulls and
skeletons of mammals and lizards than any other locality of the same geologic
age in North America. Our research will investigate the preservational history,
the evolutionary history, and the ecologies of these new specimens. Through this
integrative approach, we will investigate the ecological significance of the
unique Egg Mountain assemblage, how mammals and lizards partitioned resources in
these ancient ecosystems and the pattern of phylogenetic and ecologic
diversification within Late Cretaceous (100-66 million years ago) mammals and
lizards. With the incorporation of more complete skeletons, this research will
clarify our understanding of the evolutionary history of these groups,
characterize the ecology of fossil relatives of modern mammals and lizards, and
shed light on the nature of Late Cretaceous(100-66 million years ago) land-based
ecosystems and the diversification and geographic distribution of ancient
mammals and lizards. The integrated approach together with an exceptional fossil
assemblage will greatly increase our understanding of land based ecosystem
structure and dynamics and inform studies on other localities with large fossil
sample sizes of more poorly preserved remains of the same geologic time period.
The proposed research promises to lead to major insights that will impact the
scientific community and the broader public. These findings will be disseminated
via publication of results, training for undergraduates and graduate students,
and public outreach through museum programs. Among the PIs, there are two early
career scientists, both of whom are underrepresented minorities (one Latino and
one Native American), and among the graduate students, one is a first-generation
college student and U.S. military veteran.