* 1325805
* Efficient Resampling and Simulation Methods for Nonlinear Econometric Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Han Hong, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 176,707.00

Many procedures of statistical estimation and inference in economics and in
other disciplines rely on intensive computation, which include the use of
computer simulations and resampling methods that reuse a random set of the data
that is being used for economic analysis. This proposal consists mainly of two
projects that study the statistical properties of simulation and resampling
based estimators, which are applicable to highly nonlinear and computationally
intensive models. This is important because ignoring the statistical uncertainty
introduced by simulation and resampling methods can lead to erroneous conclusion
in the statistical and economic analysis. Generating the random numbers is easy
but computing the moment condition or the likelihood function is typically
difficult. Whether using overlapping simulations for all observations presents
an improvement in computational efficiency depends on the specific
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the first project is to study the large
sample distribution of a particular type of simulation based estimator
procedures where the same set of simulation draws are used for all
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two important cases are considered. These
include estimators that solve a system of simulated moments (MSM) and estimators
that maximize a simulated likelihood (MSL). The theory being developed in this
project applies to many simulation estimators used in empirical work which
involve both overlapping simulation draws and non-differentiable moment
functions. It is proven that both MSM and MSL are consistent when both the
sample size and the number of simulations increase without bound. Under suitable
regularity conditions, both MSM and MSL converge at the rate of the square root
of the minimum of the number of observations and the number of simulation draws,
to a limiting normal distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conditions differ
between MSM and MSL. For MSL, on the one hand, the condition that the number of
simulations has to increase faster than the square root of the sample size is
needed for asymptotic normality with independent random draws. On the other
hand, with overlapping draws, asymptotic normality holds as long as both the
number of simulations and the number of observations increase to infinity. It is
also found that the total number of simulations has to increase without bound
but can be much smaller than the total number of observations. In this case, the
error in the parameter estimates is dominated by the simulation errors. This is
a necessary cost of inference when the simulation model is very intensive to
compute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project proposes a fast resample method
that can be used to provide valid inference in nonlinear parametric and
semiparametric models. This method does not require recomputation of the second
stage estimator during each resample iteration but still provides valid
inference under very weak assumptions for a large class of nonlinear models.
These models can be highly nonlinear in the parameters that need to be estimated
and can also be semiparametric through dependence on a first stage nonparametric
functional estimation procedure. The fast resample method directly exploits the
score function representations computed on each bootstrap sample, thereby
reducing computational time considerably. The method presented here can also be
extended to models in which the first stage computation is more intensive than
the second stage, by making use of a linear representation for the first stage
when resampling the second stage estimation procedure. The desirable performance
and vast improvement in the numerical speed of the fast bootstrap method are
demonstrated in the Monte Carlo experiments that have thus far been
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing sampling theorems with overlapping
draws and nonsmooth functions in the first project provides an important
complement to the existing results in the literature on the asymptotics of
simulation estimators. The fast resampling method in the second project is used
to approximate the limit distribution of parametric and semiparametric
estimators, possibly simulation based, that admit an asymptotic linear
representation. It can also be used for bias reduction and variance estimation,
which are important components for the econometric inference of empirical
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results obtained from the project can provide
very useful guidance to empirical researchers who make extensive use of
computational intensive nonlinear models for which obtaining the estimator and
conducting inference on the parameter of interest can both be numerically
challenging. Beyond applications in economics, nonlinear models are also widely
used in statistics and various disciplines in social sciences and natural
sciences, where researchers often resort to simulation and resampling based
methods for estimation and inference. This analysis can provide guidance to
empirical researchers making use of these models by shedding light on
understanding and accounting for the statistical uncertainty introduced by the
simulation and resampling procedures.