* 1325031
* Statistical Methods for Large Interacting Systems and Applications to Mortgage Pools
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Kay Giesecke, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 220,000.00

This research will model and analyze systemic default events in the mortgage
market. It is motivated by the mortgage meltdown of 2007, which was the central
catalyst for the subsequent financial crisis. New dynamic stochastic models of
default and prepayment in mortgage pools are designed to capture the influence
of idiosyncratic, systematic, and contagion effects on event timing. Statistical
estimation for such large systems typically has been intractable. The project
will develop and rigorously analyze novel statistical methods for model
parameter estimation that are computationally tractable for the large pools of
mortgages common in practice. The likelihood methods are based on asymptotic
approximations for large pools. They are broadly applicable to large interacting
stochastic systems that appear in a wide range of fields, including finance,
economics, engineering, and other sciences. These statistical methods will be
used to perform an empirical study with the goal of identifying key factors
responsible for the mortgage collapse, delivering new risk analysis tools for
mortgage-backed securities, and providing insight to policy makers on how to
prevent similar events in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant
impediment to empirically studying large systems like the mortgage market is the
lack of tractable methods for statistical inference. The project will develop
and analyze computationally efficient statistical methods for this and related
problems, which could be of great use to regulators, industry practitioners, and
rating agencies. Moreover, the empirical portion of the project will yield new,
significant insights regarding how systemic risk events develop and spread and
how that risk can be managed.