* 1325466
* Coastal SEES (Track 2), Collaborative:  Toward Sustainable Urban Estuaries in the Anthropocene
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Tracy Quirk, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 356,023.00

This project will evaluate how anthropogenic changes in estuarine morphology
affect sediment fluxes in urban estuaries, and how consequent shifts in the
physical regime affect estuarine sustainability, based on a combination of
environmental and socio-economic factors. Geophysical models of hydrodynamics,
sediment transport, and morphodynamics will be combined with economic models
that value ecosystem services to examine two study sites, the Delaware and
Hudson-Raritan estuary systems. The work will incorporate field observations,
historical analysis, high-resolution physical modeling, morphodynamic modeling,
and coupled modeling of the human-natural system. Studies of estuarine physical
processes will lead to the application of dynamical models that represent the
hydrodynamics and recent morphodynamics in these estuaries, with particular
emphasis on coupled estuary-wetland responses to channel deepening and shoreline
modifications. Socio-economic analyses will provide a quantification of the
ecosystem services under past, present, and future states of the natural-human
system. The culmination of the research will be a coupled model of the natural-
human state trajectory, which quantifies the feedback between human actions to
alter the estuarine regime, the response of the physical system, and the changes
in values of the altered ecosystem services. The proposed work will define the
relevant and appropriate natural and human scales for sustainable management of
an urban estuary and identify a decision framework that permits the assessment
of socio-economic values across generations such that alternative predictive
outcomes can be compared and ordered in terms of their sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique contribution of this research is the
quantitative integration of advanced analysis and modeling of physical processes
in estuaries with socio-economic analyses, in order to predict the trajectory of
the coupled human-natural system. Assessment of sustainability in estuaries
requires this type of coupled analysis because of the sensitivity of the
physical regime to human impacts and because of the critical human dimension of
ecosystem services in estuaries. Important intellectual advances will also occur
within the sub-disciplines. The morphological model of the estuary and
surrounding wetlands will provide novel coupling of three-dimensional estuarine
hydrodynamics and sediment transport with system-scale morphodynamics. The
socio-economic analysis will analyze the linkage between policy, economics and
ecosystem services within the context of the coupled human-natural
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a framework for
decision-making leading to the sustainable management of estuaries. The models
will provide prototypes for future decision-making tools for planning of urban
estuarine economic development, environmental management, and risk management.
Engagement with policy professionals at the municipal, regional, state and
federal levels with responsibility for management of the Hudson-Raritan and
Delaware estuarine resources will advance the use of system-scale integrated
analysis of the human-natural system. Communication of methodologies to the
broader community is intended to shape future analysis and decision-making
concerning estuarine sustainability throughout the U.S. and worldwide. The
research program provides professional development for six graduate students,
one post-doctoral investigator, and undergraduates through the institutional
research experience for undergraduates (REU) programs. The diverse-yet-
integrated project team will foster strong interdisciplinary collaborations and
educational experiences that will prepare the students for future careers in
sustainability science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under
NSF's Coastal SEES (Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability)
program.