* 1325489
* Collaborative Research:  Coastal SEES (Track 1):   Chesapeake Bay Sustainability: Implications of  changing climate and shifting management objectives
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Shana Jones, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This project aims to develop an advanced modeling framework that integrates the
physical, biogeochemical, and human components needed to simulate and select
climate change adaptation strategies that will support a sustainable system. It
merges a fine resolution hydrodynamic model with a broader-scale whole-ecosystem
model that is capable of simulating socioeconomic interactions to characterize
human-natural linkages in the system. The research specifically uses
hypothetical alterations to the Chesapeake Bay designed to reduce storm surge to
examine the impacts on estuarine dynamics, fisheries production, and potential
flooding risks, with emphasis on feedbacks to the human
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conceptual framework for the project is an
examination of the physical, chemical, and biological consequences of an
alteration of the estuarine system designed to reduce risks in the linked human
system. The focus of the proposed work is simulation of the intervention?s
impacts on fisheries production and potential flooding risks, both feedbacks to
the human system. This work directly addresses the issue of risk mitigation
through physical alterations of estuarine systems potentially confounding
current efforts to sustain water quality and fisheries production. Informing the
policy and management decisions will require this type of enhanced modeling
tools and expanded understanding of system responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together researchers with complementary strengths in the
essential modeling efforts and the subsequent translation to policy guidance.
The project will provide two senior graduate students training in
interdisciplinary research on issues of sustainability, and it will provide
course materials for other graduate students working in the Center for Coastal
Resources Management at VIMS and the Coastal Policy Law Clinic at William &amp;
Mary. Because the project will be managed from the Center for Coastal Resources
Management at VIMS, the products and insights developed will have a unique
connection to the coastal management and policy communities in Chesapeake Bay.
The results of this project will be incorporated into the formal guidance, the
outreach education programs, and the online data provided to local and state
government personnel by the Center, thus ensuring the direct translation of
project products to management and policy. In addition, because these topics are
currently of great interest to a wide variety of public and private entities,
there are opportunities for outreach education sessions to increase the
understanding of sustainability concepts, policy options, and management
challenges across a wide spectrum of stakeholders including state legislators,
NGO staffs, and private citizens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
under NSF's Coastal SEES (Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability)
program.