* 1325210
* Oceanographic Technical Services, 2012 -2016, R/V Pelican
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Daniel Guidry, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 09/30/2017
* USD 179,930.00

Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium (LUMCON) proposes to support technical
services on R/V Pelican, a 116 foot, general purpose research vessel operated by
the consortium as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory
System research fleet. They request support for basic services only; they will
provide one technician on each seagoing research project. In addition, the
technical services group will maintain, calibrate and provide for qualified
users items from their pool of shared-use research instrumentation. The budget
included with this report is for the first year of a 4-year continuing
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2012, Pelican had no days for NSF. All other
vessels in the Academic Fleet submitted proposals in 2012 for the first year of
a 5-year continuing grant. For LUMCON, however, there was no award made in 2012.
In order to keep all vessels on the same schedule with regards to the length of
the technical services continuing grants, this award is proposed as the first
year of a four-year continuing grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program received
the proposal on 1/18/2013. As required, the proposal provided information
regarding 2012 operations as well as outlining plans and a proposed budget for
2013. Research vessels in the Academic Fleet provide support for researchers
from a variety of federal and state agencies, as well as some private sponsors.
All users (or the appropriate funding agencies) share support for basic
technical services on the vessel equally, via a day-rate, with each paying a
share of the costs based on fractional usage of the vessel. The rates are
negotiated annually with the NSF Program Manager.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under
criterion two, providing infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel
and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic
research projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant
research program of NSF). The support of maintenance and operation of shared-use
instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential researchers.