* 1325054
* Investigating effects of aqueous speciation in 13C-18O clumping and its implications for paleothermometry
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2015
* Edwin Schauble, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2015
* USD 100,000.00

The recently established "clumped isotope" paleothermometer is based on the
Carbon 13 - Oxygen 18 bond abundance in carbonate minerals. Although this
technique is becoming more widely used, there are still many questions about the
underlying processes that control geochemical signatures in bio-minerals and
non-biologically formed minerals. This project will address several of these
outstanding questions. Investigators will compare results from theoretical
calculations and experiments to observations, including from slowly-grown
naturally occurring samples such as the Devils Hole speleothem and deep-sea
corals of variable mineralogy. This work should improve the ability to employ
clumped isotopes in surface and subsurface systems, and identify the limitations
of this technique.

This work will be highlighted in UCLA's annual Physical Sciences Outreach Day
that brings 2000-3000 members of the public to the campus and a few hundred
people to the exhibits. All of the participants in this project will also
conduct a mineral precipitation activity with school children as part of a
regular outreach program the PI runs. Support of this project will benefit an
early career PI who is establishing a NSF-supported state-of-the-art isotope lab
and is committed to recruiting, mentoring, and supporting outstanding early
career scientists from diverse backgrounds, thus furthering NSF's goals to
support underrepresented groups in the Earth Sciences.