* 1325225
* Collaborative Research:   Late Pleistocene paleoclimatology from soil carbonate pendants in the Colorado Plateau.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* David Marchetti, Western Colorado University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2017
* USD 106,287.00

This study will examine isotopic and geochemical records preserved in the
laminae of pedogenic carbonate coatings in soils in the Capitol Reef--Boulder
Mountain region of the Colorado Plateau. First, the team will check for
preservation of stratigraphic order in the laminae of coatings by microscopy,
high-resolution X-ray mapping, and Th/U age dating. Coatings that preserve an
intact stratigraphy will be micro-sampled for detailed Th/U age transects,
stable isotope analysis, and trace element analysis. The team will compare well-
dated profiles of stable isotope shifts from coatings collected at various
depths below the soil-air interface to reconstruct the timing and magnitude of
ecological and climatological changes that occurred over the measured time
interval. This study will evaluate the problem of discontinuities in the pendant
record which could be related to climate change on orbital time scales. Timing
and mechanisms of carbonate formation will be evaluated with in situ soil
moisture, respiration, and temperature measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Stable isotope analysis of modern and fossil pedogenic carbonate has advanced
the understanding of continental paleoclimatology, as well as documenting
worldwide ecological shifts. Most stable isotope studies of pedogenic carbonate
have sampled soil carbonate at a fairly coarse resolution; only a few have
studied the stable isotope record of soil carbonate coatings of the large clasts
within a soil horizon. This work will test thick, well-laminated, pedogenic
carbonate coatings for records of a meaningful paleoclimate signal in terms of
their stable isotope record (13C/12C and 18O/16O) when coatings preserve an
intact stratigraphy. If true, and there is some preliminary Th/U and stable
isotope data that supports this, then the world's deserts may contain a vast and
untapped quantitative archive of past continental climactic and ecological
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is a collaborative effort
between the University of Utah and Western State Colorado University. It will
enhance education opportunities for both a research institution and an
undergraduate institution, and its results will be incorporated into an
international course, taught each year at the University of Utah, using stable
isotopes as tracers in anthropology, ecology, forensics, geology, hydrology,
oceanography, and zoology.