* 1325612
* Collaborative Research:  Testing the link between climate and mammalian faunal dynamics in the early Paleocene record of the San Juan Basin, New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ross Secord, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2017
* USD 142,827.00

Collaborative Research: Testing the link between climate and mammalian faunal
dynamics in the early Paleocene record of the San Juan Basin, New Mexico

by

Thomas Williamson, New Mexico Museum of Natural History Foundation EAR-1325544
Ross Secord, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, EAR-1325612 Daniel Peppe, Baylor
University, EAR-1325552

ABSTRACT The Nacimiento Formation of northwestern New Mexico contains the most
complete, diverse, and longest record of early Paleocene mammal evolution known
anywhere in the world, spanning from about 65.8 to 62.2 million years ago. The
early Paleocene is of particular importance for understanding the evolution of
modern ecosystems because it includes the first mammal-dominated ecosystems that
appeared immediately following the end-Cretaceous extinction of non-avian
dinosaurs. This was a time when the world was warmer than now and the climate
appears to have been unstable. This study will test for a relationship between
climate and mammalian faunal change in the early Paleocene, and will provide a
better understanding of the role climate change played in the establishment of
the earliest mammal-dominated ecosystems. This project will test if mammals
responded to climate change during this critical interval of time by generating
a detailed climate record, including estimates of mean annual temperature and
precipitation from leaf-margin and leaf-area analyses of fossil leaves, and from
the study of ancient soils. This study will also reconstruct the ancient biomes
present at this time and the habitats within those biomes using stable carbon
isotopes from mammal teeth, and the types of depositional environments present
using sedimentology. These various proxy records will be compared to test for
correlations between the mammalian faunal record and changing climate or
changing biomes in the early Paleocene. Results from this study should be useful
for developing more accurate models for predicting the consequences of climate
change. This project will provide educational and research opportunities for
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, including Native American
students from New Mexico, which are greatly underrepresented in the sciences,
and "at risk" 6-8th grade students from Nebraska. The results of this research
will also be incorporated into a permanent museum exhibit at the New Mexico
Museum of Natural History and Science.