* 1325649
* Coastal SEES (Track 1):   Brine Discharge From Desalination Plants - Impacts On Coastal Ecology, Public Perception, and Public Policy
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Brent Haddad, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2018
* USD 550,842.00

Desalination of seawater accounts for a worldwide water production of about 70
million cubic meters per day. Despite the many benefits the technology has to
offer, there are concerns over potential negative impacts on the environment. A
key issue that has not been thoroughly investigated is the impact of effluent
discharge on coastal marine ecosystems. This project will provide quantitative
scientific assessment of the potential impacts of effluent discharge on coastal
ecosystems in California and assess how such data influences public perception
and public policy. The team of social and natural scientists has experience
related to coastal pollution, California coastal ecology, marine
biogeochemistry, toxicology, environmental policy and economics, water policy
and management, and utility-stakeholder communications. Established relations
with desalination facilities in California will ensure an integrative framework
for research on the human and environmental aspects related to the increasing
abundance of desalination facilities along the California coast, and contribute
to both securing freshwater resources and sustaining productive and healthy
coastal communities and coastal environments.

The objectives of this project are to (1) determine how effluent discharges from
facilities for seawater desalination by reverse osmosis affect key organisms of
the California coastal ecosystem with implications for ecosystem structure and
function, (2) describe the spatial extent of the effect for different discharge
schemes, and (3) evaluate how results from this and similar environmental impact
studies influence public perception and decision making regarding desalination
plant construction and operation. The project will combine in situ field
chemical and biological measurements, controlled laboratory experiments, and
assessments of how people and organizations interpret and use this data for
making environmentally sound and sustainable decisions. Field studies will be
performed at three different desalination plants to identify and quantify the
possible effects of stressors associated with effluent discharge on local biota.
Observed effects will be validated through controlled laboratory bioassay
experiments. The scientific results will be communicated to the general public
and decision makers to assess how scientific data is used by different
stakeholders.

This project is supported under NSF's Coastal SEES (Science, Engineering and
Education for Sustainability) program.