* 1325510
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Affective Forecasting Across the Lifespan
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Elke Weber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 12,880.00

Recent aging and forecasting literature gives plausibility to the idea that
changes in goal orientation, as well as errors in affective forecasting, may
differ across the lifespan. Yet despite these important suggestions from the
literature, little empirical research has directly compared experienced affect
and affective forecasting in older and younger adults, and none has examined
underlying mechanisms that may account for age differences in this domain. This
project clarifies the relationship between goal orientation, emotional
regulation, and affective forecasting, and explore whether this relationship is
consistent with the positivity effect found in elders' retention and memory for
emotional information. Specifically, three studies assess mediation of age-
related affective forecasting ability by emotional regulation and goal
orientation in adults between 18-90 years of age. The first two studies identify
the processes in which forecasts are constructed, and test the hypothesis that
if older adults tend to be more prevention-oriented than young or middle-aged
adults, their forecasts may be based on the motivation to avoid incurring losses
versus an orientation towards achieving gains. The third study builds upon the
findings from the first two studies by examining the role of age-differences in
affective criteria in the domain of temporal discounting, and will employ a
query order intervention, with the purpose of reducing the influence of
forecasting biases.

Affective variables play a major role in decision processes, and age differences
in emotional aspects of decision making have important implications for choice
outcomes. By understanding what components of affect dynamics lead adults across
the lifespan to make better decisions, results will provide directions for the
development of interventions that can improve the welfare of older adults.