* 1325022
* Collaborative Research: Defining the role of heterogeneous lithology in bedrock incision and terrace formation in the Buffalo National River, Arkansas
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2013
* Amanda Keen-Zebert, Murray State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 11/30/2013
* USD 302,444.00

This research will contribute to understanding how landscapes in low topography
settings respond to changes in base level (i.e. sea level). These processes are
central to interpreting spatial and temporal variation in sediment storage and
erosion and have implications for understanding soil loss, pollutant
sequestration in soils and floodplains, and flood attenuation over long
timescales. The results will also facilitate reconstructions of the changes in
the Earth's surface in the mid-continent of North America which can provide
baseline information from pre-European human landscapes with which to
contextualize modern human impacts and thus guide restoration and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the use of geochronology, field
observation, topographic analysis, and GIS we will investigate unresolved
problems in geomorphology regarding the impact of variations in lithology on
fluvial processes, specifically how lithology impacts bedrock valley and
unpaired terrace formation. This project seeks to bring together understanding
of processes at variable scales to determine the drivers of river incision in a
mid-continent setting south of the glacial limit and to determine whether
incision of the Buffalo National River valley has been driven by climate change,
base level fall, local processes operating at the scale of the meander, or a
combination thereof. The outcomes of this work will improve reconstructions of
past landscapes including changes in the hydrologic cycle south of the glacial
limit in North America, how bedrock rivers change over time, and how the
sedimentary record is created and preserved in caves and alluvial terraces.