* 1325181
* Sparsity: A Tractable Approach to Bounded Rationality, Applied to Basic Consumer Theory, Equilibrium Theory, and Dynamic Programming
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Xavier Gabaix, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 277,299.00

This award funds research in economic theory that develops a model of economic
decisions that takes into account bounded rationality. The PI will replace the
usual maximizing behavior assumed in standard economics with an alternative
assumption of "sparse maximizing". This results in a model that is tractable to
compute while reflecting basic psychological forces governing limited attention.
The PI then goes on to use this starting assumption in a variety of
microeconomic models. This includes deriving demand curves, determining the
outcome of simple exchange economies, and analyzing dynamic choices such as
consumption over the life cycle.

Specifically, the PI proposes a sparse max operation which generalizes the
traditional max operator used in economics. The agent builds a simplified model
of the world which is sparse, considering only the variables of first-order
importance. Her stylized mental model and her resulting choices both derive from
constrained optimization. The framework yields a behavioral version of many
pillars of economics, including the basic theory of consumer demand and
competitive equilibrium. The sparse max extends to dynamic contexts via spare
dynamic programming, a behavioral version of traditional dynamic programming.

The framework allows for the exploration of a number of concrete issues, such as
inattention to some variables like the interest rate, myopia, inertia in
portfolio choice, and inattention to rare events. The framework gives us a new
way to assess which parts of basic economics are robust to the assumption of
perfect maximization.

The project contributes to broader societal goals by developing a new approach
that may help policymakers better predict the effects of their actions on the
economy.