* 1325107
* Doctoral Dissertation Reseach in DRMS: From individual decisions to collective action for biodiversity conservation: Networked governance of private reserves in Colombia.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Karen Kainer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2015
* USD 46,951.00

Colombia is one of the most biodiverse countries in the world, and broader
societal participation is urgently needed to prevent ecosystem degradation,
extinction of irreplaceable endemic species, and fair distribution of natural
resource benefits. In rural Colombia, however, where biodiversity, ecosystem
services, and local livelihoods intersect, pervasive inequity and social unrest
has persisted for decades and challenged sustainable development progress.
Nonetheless, in the midst of those difficulties, some rural communities have
self-organized to integrate their livelihoods with biodiversity conservation.
Examples of those grassroots initiatives are the Networks of Reserves of the
Civil Society, known locally as "Redes de Reservas de la Sociedad Civil" which
emerged 20 years ago as a conservation and development initiative in the
Southern Colombian Andes and now boasts of more than 400 Reserves most of them
owned by small farmers. These reserves play an important role in protecting
biodiversity and ecosystem services, and many are officially considered part of
Colombia's National System of Protected Areas. This research explores the
factors that motivate farmers and rural landowners to strive for a balance
between conservation and rural development through those grassroots initiatives,
and to assess the effectiveness of these reserves in terms of conservation and
sustainable livelihoods.

Considering biodiversity and ecosystem services as common pool resources in
urgent need of sustainable management, the researchers focus on resource users
and the governance system, two components of the theoretical framework for
socio-ecological systems developed by the late Nobel Laureate, Elinor Ostrom.
This research explores both socio-economic factors, the farmers' psychological
characteristics, and personal social/professional networks. Elements of social-
psychology theories of Value-Belief-Norm and Self-determination are incorporated
to analyze decision making at the individual level. Social networks analysis are
used to understand how structural properties of land owners' informal and formal
personal networks influence social learning and participation on decisions for
natural resource governance.

This study will provide new insights from the under-represented perspective of
small rural landowners - information that can directly contribute to the design
of public policies that advance both biodiversity conservation and community
well-being. Improvement of rural livelihoods is vital to foster economic
stability, food security, and better and diverse sources of legal employment;
and ultimately, to advance the goals of social stability, national security and
democracy. Results from this research will provide new insights on the factors
that foster or hinder conservation and sustainable rural development.