* 1325128
* Collaborative Research:   Oxygen, Ecology and the Cambrian radiation of Animals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* David Johnston, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2015
* USD 68,223.00

Collaborative Research: Oxygen, Ecology and the Cambrian radiation of Animals

David Johnston, Harvard University Lisa Levin, Scripps Institute of Oceanography

The Cambrian radiation, during which essentially all major animal body plans
appeared in the fossil record ~540 million years ago, is one of the most
important evolutionary events in Earth history. In recent years, hypothesized
triggers for this event have focused on a rise in predation and increased levels
of oxygen in the world's oceans. We propose to test the linkage between these
hypotheses. We postulate that the high oxygen demand of carnivory (animals
feeding on animals) is the key linkage. The hypothesis outlines that carnivory
(animals eating other animals) was limited by low levels of atmospheric oxygen.
As the late Precambrian Earth transitioned to a more oxygenated state, this
lifestyle (carnivory) and ultimately the Cambrian explosion ensued. Here, we
will test both the biological and geological predictions of this hypothesis. The
biological prediction, that oxygen limits carnivory in animals, will be tested
by constructing and analyzing a database of published marine bottom dwelling
animal surveys, coding how each animal feeds, and examining how oxygen levels
and other environmental parameters affect feeding behavior. The geological
prediction, that oxygen increased near the Precambrian-Cambrian boundary, will
primarily be tested by generating sedimentary geochemical data (focusing on
iron, carbon and sulfur) from the spectacular Neoproterozoic stratigraphic
record of northwestern Canada in the Ogilvie, Wernecke and Mackenzie Mountains.
Together, these two tests of this integrative causal hypothesis for the Cambrian
radiation will provide new insight into this important geobiological event. This
grant provides funding to train two levels of researchers. First, the grant
provides funding for a post-doctoral scholar who will work between the Principal
Investigators at Scripps and Harvard to accomplish the goals of the proposal.
The post-doctoral scholar will also will work with the Center for Ocean Sciences
Education Excellence to deliver a filmed public lecture in the Perspectives on
Ocean Sciences series at the Birch Aquarium. These are widely distributed talks
(broadcast to 15 million homes; ~200,000 web views per year) and will be
instrumental in disseminating the results of the modern global ocean compilation
to the public and demonstrating how ancient oceans can inform responses to
modern oceanographic change. Second, two undergraduate students, one from
Harvard and one from an undergraduate-oriented institution, will gain both field
experience in northwest Canada and lab experience in sedimentary geochemistry
through this grant.