* 1325544
* Collaborative Research:   testing the link between climate and mammalian faunal dynamics in the early Paleocene record of the San Juan Basin, New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Thomas Williamson, New Mexico Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2017
* USD 120,471.00

Collaborative Research: Testing the link between climate and
mammalian&lt;br/&gt;faunal dynamics in the early Paleocene record of the San
Juan Basin, New Mexico &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thomas
Williamson, New Mexico Museum of Natural History Foundation
EAR-1325544&lt;br/&gt;Ross Secord, University of Nebraska, Lincoln,
EAR-1325612&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Peppe, Baylor University,
EAR-1325552&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The Nacimiento Formation of
northwestern New Mexico contains the most complete, diverse, and longest record
of early Paleocene mammal evolution known anywhere in the world, spanning from
about 65.8 to 62.2 million years ago. The early Paleocene is of particular
importance for understanding the evolution of modern ecosystems because it
includes the first mammal-dominated ecosystems that appeared immediately
following the end-Cretaceous extinction of non-avian dinosaurs. This was a time
when the world was warmer than now and the climate appears to have been
unstable. This study will test for a relationship between climate and mammalian
faunal change in the early Paleocene, and will provide a better understanding of
the role climate change played in the establishment of the earliest mammal-
dominated ecosystems. This project will test if mammals responded to climate
change during this critical interval of time by generating a detailed climate
record, including estimates of mean annual temperature and precipitation from
leaf-margin and leaf-area analyses of fossil leaves, and from the study of
ancient soils. This study will also reconstruct the ancient biomes present at
this time and the habitats within those biomes using stable carbon isotopes from
mammal teeth, and the types of depositional environments present using
sedimentology. These various proxy records will be compared to test for
correlations between the mammalian faunal record and changing climate or
changing biomes in the early Paleocene. Results from this study should be useful
for developing more accurate models for predicting the consequences of climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide educational and research
opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, including
Native American students from New Mexico, which are greatly underrepresented in
the sciences, and "at risk" 6-8th grade students from Nebraska. The results of
this research will also be incorporated into a permanent museum exhibit at the
New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science.