* 1325366
* Coastal SEES (Track I), Collaborative:   Sediment Supply in a Regime of Accelerated Coastal Erosion (SedS-RACE): Paleo-Perspectives, Anthropogenic Influences and Future Challenges
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Peter Rosen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 43,079.00

Coastal SEES (Track I), Collaborative: Sediment Supply in a Regime of
Accelerated Coastal Erosion (SedS-RACE): Paleo-Perspectives, Anthropogenic
Influences and Future Challenges

Christopher Hein, College of William and Mary Virginia Institute of Marine
Science Elizabeth Canuel, College of William and Mary Virginia Institute of
Marine Science Peter Rosen, Northeastern University Ju-Chin Huang, University of
New Hampshire

Coastal retreat and sediment supply have tremendous impacts on society,
infrastructure and the ecological functioning of coastal marine ecosystems.
These processes are also integral to a range of coastal policy issues since a
large fraction of the world?s population lives within 150 km of a coastline and
the supply of riverine sediment to coastal regions is decreasing globally. This
project addresses fundamental social- and natural- science questions surrounding
coastal erosion that arise in response to insufficient supplies of sediment in a
regime of accelerated sea-level rise and enhanced storminess. This will be
accomplished through an integrative investigation of the long-term sediment
sources, anthropogenic modifications and management strategies for a sandy
barrier coast that is currently undergoing both severe erosion and intense human
development. The focus of this study is the Merrimack River / Plum Island
(Massachusetts) barrier system. Both have undergone wide-ranging human
alterations that, combined with complex climate-change impacts, have
dramatically reduced fluxes of sediment from both fluvial and near-shore
sources. Results for the coastal community have been devastating, with
consequences that affect human populations on annual, decadal and centennial
timescales. This study will evaluate the relationship between the long-term
(millennial-scale) record of sediment from the Merrimack River and the stability
of Plum Island through the development of an 8000-year record of organic-
biomarker proxies to quantify relative changes in the contributions of fluvial
and shelf sources of sediment through time. It will then employ historical
records and datasets, the correlation of >60 years of coastal-process and
shoreline-mapping studies along Plum Island, and the development of down-core
geochemical proxy records of anthropogenic impacts on fluvial sediment delivery
to the coast, to detail the history of human modifications and evidence of
geological responses. Modern shoreline-erosion studies (e.g., shoreline mapping,
beach profiling, sediment sampling) will be used to monitor the short-term (1-2
yrs.) impacts of specific erosional events (storms) and management strategies.
This combined knowledge will then be used to determine the nature and degree to
which humans have altered natural sediment supplies and transport pathways and
develop feasible sustainable paths for management that balance natural
processes, societal needs and constraints, and communities? monetary and non-
monetary valuation of the river, barrier and associated ecosystems.

A unique product of this study will be the development of a 53-min PBS-style
documentary that will provide a transparent view into the complex social and
scientific interactions which inform the collective decision-making process
around coastal erosion. A detailed distribution and impact-assessment plan for
this film will allow it to serve as a unique and broadly-impactful education and
outreach tool. Additional outreach will include the incorporation of local
students and community members in beach monitoring efforts, coordinated policy
development with local towns, public lectures, and the development of a display
at a local National Wildlife Refuge that will focus on coupled human-natural
interactions in relation to the coastal erosion problem on Plum Island.
Additionally, it will provide interdisciplinary training for five students (1
PhD, 1 MSc, 3 undergraduate) both within and across the natural and social
sciences, and will support an early-career scientist.