* 1325874
* Coastal SEES (Track 1): Understanding the links between local ecological knowledge, ecosystem services, and community resilience
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Thomas Giambelluca, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 656,368.00

Human and natural systems are interlinked in complex ways. Understanding how
these social-ecological systems are and can be resilient poses one of the most
pressing problems of our world today. This is especially true for many coastal
communities, which are vulnerable to changes. The local ecological knowledge
systems developed over millennia have historically allowed residents of coastal
communities to be resilient to the weather extremes that can characterize
coastal communities. However, the complex patterns and processes involved in
these systems, and their potential to enhance resilience to climate change today
are poorly understood. This research is grounded in a conceptual framework that
integrates social-ecological resilience theory and methods, ethnobiology and
ecosystem service modeling. It draws on a combination of long-term existing
social and ecological datasets, new experiments, and state-of the art climate
and ecosystem service modeling in multiple sites to ask: (1) What are the
relationships between local ecological knowledge systems and social-ecological
resilience to change? and (2) How will different land and ocean uses affect
social-ecological resilience and ecosystem services in linked ridge-reef
settings, under different scenarios? This research involves an
interdisciplinary, international research team that crosses the natural and
social sciences and bridges the marine and terrestrial fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to have direct benefits to
society by enhancing local capacity in decision making to manage coastal areas
for sustainability, and contributing to policy development in resilience and
adaptation to climate change. It is integrated with interdisciplinary and
international educational and training activities for undergraduate and graduate
students, especially members of groups underrepresented in the sciences. It will
strengthen and extend an interdisciplinary cross-national network of researchers
and resource managers. The models produced will provide predictive value for the
management of Pacific Island coastal systems by identifying how ecosystem
services and social-ecological resilience can be maximized.