* 1325025
* A Linguistic Ethnography of the Global Trade in Indigenous Plants
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Paja Faudree, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 210,968.00

This project is a linguistic ethnography of how connections among people, words,
and things collectively shape global trade in indigenous plants. The research is
set in Oaxaca, Mexico, one of the most bio-diverse regions in the world; it is
also among the most linguistically diverse, with 16 language groupings and more
than a hundred linguistic variants occupying a region roughly the size of the
state of Indiana. Many of the region's plants have been used for centuries by
the state's indigenous peoples during religious medicinal rituals. Some have
recently become widely available on a global basis, sold worldwide by cyber and
other vendors. In most countries the sale and use of these plants remains legal,
and some of the most popular are now advertised by thousands of online videos
documenting users' experiences. Though biomedical researchers are interested in
the pharmaceutical and medical potential of such plants, some are also
increasingly criminalized due their ostensible side effects. While scientific
research on such plants is in its infancy, popular and journalistic discussion
of some have implicated them in such social ills as addiction to "harder drugs,"
suicide, and homicide. This NSF-funded research project analyzes this new global
trade, focusing on how the different practices and discourses people use to
interact with these plant saturate them with conflicting forms of value.
Methodologically, this project joins close analysis of both language use and
other forms of semiotic representation deployed in interactions involving the
plant with anthropological study of the history and political economy of these
emerging global commodity chains. This research has implications for a wide
range of other cases where formally local "things" sit at the intersection of
competing social agendas. In addition, as states around the country debate
banning these plants and other new botanical substances, this research has
significant policy implications as the first social scientific study of the
communities that have sprung up around these plants' use and sale.