* 1325114
* CAREER: Ionic Transistor Devices for Sensing and Controlled Actuation - An Integrated Research, Teaching and Community Outreach Program
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Vishnu Baba Sundaresan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 01/31/2017
* USD 239,626.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award focuses on the
development of a novel active material formed from integrating the ionic
properties of a bio-derived membrane and a conducting polymer membrane. The
scientific goal of this project is the development of a hybrid membrane that can
respond to low power electrical signal or low concentration chemical trigger and
perform electromechanical work using ambient chemical gradients. This hybrid
membrane, referred to as Bio-derived Ionic Transistor (BIT) functions as the
fundamental unit in sensing and actuation systems. A BIT device comprising a
conducting polymer and a bio-derived membrane (BLM with proteins) will be
fabricated, characterized using a coupled model and optimized into a robust
transistor. The scientific goal of this research proposal will be achieved by
addressing the following questions: What is/are the (i) limiting conditions
(geometrical, chemoelectrical, mechanical) for ion transport, (ii) relationship
between the output, gating signal and input (static, dynamic), (iii) open-loop
and closed-loop operation (transfer function, sensitivity, disturbance
rejection, stability and performance limitation) and (iv) fabrication
constraints and scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this CAREER
research project will lead to the development of a robust real-time sensing
array constructed using BIT devices that can detect chemical and bioelectrical
signals using commercially available proteins and be applicable in healthcare,
national defense and homeland security. This project will also lead to the
development of an artificial muscle using the chemomechanical properties of the
BIT device. This CAREER award will enable the PI to build an inter-disciplinary
research program in Polymer Mechatronic Materials, promote participation of
women in engineering, integrate this research work in to undergraduate and
graduate curriculum at Virginia Commonwealth University through Active Learning
and disseminate knowledge in this field to the general public and school
students in the Commonwealth through continuous engagements with the Science
Museum of Virginia at Richmond, Virginia.