* 1325480
* AF: Small: Metanumerical Computing for Emerging Architectures: Automated Embedded Algorithms for Partial Differential Equations on Multicore  Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Robert Kirby, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 09/30/2015
* USD 384,970.00

Computers were invented to automate tedious and error-prone tasks, especially in
the context of numerical calculations for scientific simulation. Given the
importance and difficulty of developing these simulations, it makes sense to
study whether computers can assist in their production as well. This project
focuses on the open-source project Sundance, which provides high-level syntax to
describe finite element methods (FEM) for the numerical solution of partial
differential equations, freeing users from the burdens of low-level programming.
This approach can reduce development time from months to days or even hours,
allowing scientists and engineers to get correct answers more quickly. Sundance
is useful software starting from a solid theoretical basis, where the structure
of finite element operators are derived and analyzed from software-based Frechet
differentiation of variational forms.

Via this domain-specific embedded language, Sundance users (domain scientistis
and engineers) can express and simulate nonlinear processes with little more
difficulty than linear ones; Jacobians are calculated internally and
automatically. This robust system automates not only standard simulations, but
also sensitivity calculations, eigenvalue problems, and PDE-constrained
optimization, all through the language of differentiation, providing a simple
gateway to efficient ``embedded'' algorithms for optimization and control.
Furthermore, in this project, Sundance will be extended to run on emerging
architectures such as multicore CPU and GPU machines. New low-complexity finite
element algorithms based on Bernstein polynomials will be developed and included
within Sundance to further exploit this new hardware. Thus, this project
represents concrete transformational contributions not only automating
mathematical software but in core numerical algorithms, broadening the circle of
domain specialists with access to leading-edge simulation technology.