* 1325098
* Effect of Low Concentrations of Arsenic on Microbial Iron Reduction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Thomas DiChristina, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

In natural environments, arsenite (As(III)) is not only more mobile but is also
more toxic than arsenate (As(V)) or organoarsenic compounds. Despite a wealth of
knowledge gained in the laboratory or aquatic systems displaying remarkably high
concentrations of arsenic, little research has been conducted on the effects of
low arsenic inputs to natural aquatic systems. Incubations with sediments from a
Georgia river revealed that low (< 10 micro M) but increasing As(V)
concentrations spurred increases in microbial iron reduction rates accompanied
by the secondary recrystallization of Fe oxides. In this project, the mechanism
by which low concentrations of arsenic affect anaerobic respiration on Fe oxides
by iron-reducing bacteria will be determined. It is hypothesized that As(V)
stimulates the energy generation process in iron-reducing bacteria by
substitution of phosphate by arsenate during phosphorylation of ADP. This effect
is postulated to result from the expression of phosphate transporters and their
regulators by iron-reducing bacteria in phosphate-limiting conditions. Finally,
the large impact of submicromolar As(V) concentrations on microbial Fe reduction
in natural environments is hypothesized to result from a catalytic cycle whereby
As(III) produced by microbial detoxification is rapidly recycled to As(V) via
chemical oxidation by Mn(IV) oxides present ubiquitously in natural
environments. A series of incubations with pure cultures of metal-reducing
Shewanella was designed to investigate in a well-controlled biological system
the main molecular and geochemical processes affected by small As(V)
concentrations using state-of-the art analytical and molecular techniques. This
study will simultaneously provide new information on Shewanella and a model for
what may occur in natural environments. This work will also provide novel
information on the genes and gene products affected by the addition of low
concentrations of As(V) in iron-reducing bacteria. While the influence of
mineral oxides on trace metal speciation in aquatic systems is well known, the
effect of trace metal concentrations on the transformation of mineral oxides is
not well recognized. This work will provide the first evidence that Fe
respiration is enhanced by a toxic compound and that the structure and
reactivity of Fe oxides is affected by these processes. As Fe oxides play a
fundamental role as scavengers of contaminants, this work will have
ramifications on the fate of other contaminants in aquaticsystems. Metalloids
are among the most toxic inorganic pollutants in aquatic systems but,
surprisingly, their presence in water reservoirs receives little attention as
their concentration is generally low. This study will demonstrate that even low
concentrations of a toxic metal affect these ecosystems by altering biological
and geochemical processes.