* 1325554
* Coastal SEES (Track 1), Collaborative:   Adaptive Capacity, Resilience, and Coral Reef State Shifts in Social-ecological Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Matthew Lauer, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2016
* USD 218,486.00

This project will assess resilience in a coral reef social-ecological system.
Over the last several decades, reefs around the Pacific island of Mo'orea,
French Polynesia, have consistently reassembled to coral dominance after being
impacted by major perturbations. Resilience to disturbance is a key component of
coastal sustainability, as it maintains the reefs in a state capable of
providing critical ecosystem services. The resilience of reefs in Mo'orea is
particularly striking, given that coral reefs in many regions have experienced
abrupt and potentially irreversible shifts from a coral dominated state, with
complex structure and a rich fish community, to a macroalgae dominated state
with fewer fish. This project will contribute to more sustainable management of
coral reefs by identifying pathways that confer resilience, highlighting
emerging vulnerabilities, and suggesting policy initiatives in areas such as
integrated coastal zone management and sustainable development planning. An
integrative social and natural science approach will be employed that addresses
place-based questions about resilience, sustainability and adaptive capacity of
coastal systems. A framework will be developed for addressing more complex
questions about the Mo'orea social-ecological system, and this will provide a
model for the integration of ecology and social science in other coastal
systems. Research results will be disseminated broadly through stakeholder
workshops, and graduate students will be engaged in all aspects of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the dynamics of state shifts are fundamental to
understanding the resilience and long-term sustainability of coral reef social-
ecological systems, the interplay between anthropogenic and ecological feedbacks
is poorly understood in these systems. Systems with high population densities,
widespread coastal development and intense resource exploitation typically show
declines in the critical adaptive capacities that underpin resilience to local
environmental variability. However, Mo'orea has maintained its resilience
despite rapid development. This project will explore how the complex feedbacks
in the Mo'orea coral reef social-ecological system maintain its capacity to
withstand large-scale ecological disturbances. The study will involve
interdisciplinary collaboration between social and natural scientists.
Anthropological fieldwork focusing on the human dimensions of coral reef use,
traditional governance, and indigenous ecological knowledge, will document how
local communities perceive, respond to, and manage changes in ecosystem state.
Ecological models will describe the dynamics of coral, algal and fish
communities, including the feedbacks that make these communities susceptible to
abrupt shifts in ecosystem state. These components will be integrated in a
systems modeling framework that includes feedbacks both within and between the
human and natural communities, quantitatively modeling how humans change their
behavior as a function of ecosystem state and how the ecosystem is affected in
turn by human activities. A key objective is to bridge the gap between data
collected by social scientists and the dynamic ecosystem models developed by
ecologists, as this is crucial to understanding the resilience and long-term
sustainability of coastal social-ecological systems
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under NSF's Coastal
SEES (Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability) program.