* 1325451
* OCE-RIG:  Novel approaches to better understanding the trophic role of small pelagic fishes and their critical link between the plankton and higher trophic levels
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Joel Llopiz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,809.00

Overview: Small, schooling pelagic fishes often represents a critical link in
how planktonic production reaches the upper trophic levels of ocean food webs.
Despite their ecological and economic importance, distinct gaps exist in our
understanding of the role these fishes play as consumers of zooplankton. This
study takes a multifaceted approach, employing four types of analyses in order
to better understand the feeding dynamics of six species of small pelagic fishes
in the Large Marine Ecosystem of the Northeast U.S. continental shelf.
Analytical techniques include detailed visual inspection of gut contents, bulk
and compound-specific (amino acid) stable isotope analyses, and DNA barcoding
techniques for identifying the otherwise unidentifiable prey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Because of their economic importance,
small pelagic fishes have received substantial interest and research attention
from fisheries agencies such as NOAA. This work, however, has largely focused on
either monitoring population sizes or examining the nature of small pelagic
fishes as prey for other important natural resources. But, being consumers
themselves, small pelagic fishes play a major role in determining when, where,
and how much planktonic production flows either towards fish and upper trophic
levels or is available for other processes, including export due to sinking. In
this project, the investigator will use novel approaches to study small pelagic
fishes not as a fishery resource, but as major consumers within planktonic food
webs. By gathering trophic-related data using techniques that will be applied to
each specimen, a larger picture of the top-down impact that small pelagic fishes
have on all or particular zooplankton taxa should emerge. The use of compound-
specific stable isotope analyses is of particular note, as this powerful
technique will afford the ability to examine variability at the base of the food
web, thereby providing insight into the bottom-up forces that influence these
important species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is
heavily geared toward involving many young and future scientists from
underrepresented groups in research activities. At least eight undergraduates
will participate on research cruises, to assist with sampling efforts. Two
undergraduate summer student fellows will assist in laboratory-based data
collection efforts, and will spend the summer in Woods Hole gaining research
experience and a sense of what a career in oceanography might entail. An early-
career lab assistant will gain valuable research experience by leading the
sample processing activities in the laboratory. Travel support to a national
meeting will allow one of the summer students or lab assistant to share results
from this study with the scientific community. In an effort to foster scientific
curiosity in local schools, the investigator will host students from East Boston
High School as they spend a day in Woods Hole visiting various labs, facilities
and attend presentations by the investigator and other scientists on careers in
oceanography. The students' teacher will also participate on one of the research
cruises, enabling her to share her experience with many other students.