* 1325881
* NeuroCultural Mechanisms of Choice Justification: A Cross-Cultural Imaging Genetics Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Justin Carre, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2016
* USD 383,920.00

Choice drives virtually all behavior and is one of the most studied phenomena in
psychology. The present research brings together three previously separate
bodies of knowledge to further illuminate the nature of choice processes, with a
particular emphasis on choice justification -- a phenomenon involving increased
preference for a chosen option and decreased preference for a rejected option.
The research involves a Gene X Situation X Culture Interaction Framework.
Although the present effort is ambitious, recent developments in three relevant
areas of research make the effort, not only possible, but also potentially
fruitful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From cultural psychological work we know that
choice justification is ubiquitous and, yet, the situations in which it occurs
vary systematically across cultures: Whereas European Americans (who tend to see
themselves as independent from others) justify choices they make for themselves,
Asians (who tend to see themselves as interdependent with others) justify
choices they make for their friends. From the neuroscience of decision-making,
we know that choice justification occurs at the mesocorticolimbic neural pathway
of reward processing. From genetics we know that the neural pathway of reward
processing is regulated closely by several dopamine system related genes. In
combination, these three bodies of literature add importantly to the current
view that choice making is neither static nor merely cognitive. Instead, choice
making is best conceptualized as an open, dynamic process that receives constant
input from genes, situations, and culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate
how choice justification depends on genes, situations (i.e., self vs. friend
choice), and culture (i.e., European American vs. Asian), the current proposal
involves one large-scale, cross-cultural imaging genetics study -- the first of
its kind. Both European Americans and East Asians who have either high or low
genetic profiles of dopamine signaling capacity will be recruited. They will be
scanned while making choices for themselves or for their friends. It is
anticipated that when choices are made for the self, choice justification as
revealed in activity in the ventral striatal area will be most pronounced for
European Americans and, moreover, among European Americans the effect will be
stronger for those with genetic profiles linked to high (vs. low) dopamine
signaling capacity. In contrast, when choices are made for friends, the choice
justification effect as revealed in the same ventral striatal region will be
most pronounced for Asians and, moreover, among Asians this effect will be
stronger for those with the genetic profiles associated with high (vs. low)
dopamine signaling capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If confirmed, the current
prediction regarding Gene X Situation X Culture interaction effects will support
the view that the study of human mind requires a multi-disciplinary point of
view. For example, neither genetics nor neuroscience can be neatly separated
from careful analysis of society and culture that provides the context for both
genes and the brain to operate. The current work will therefore contribute to
teaching, training and knowledge creation of several different fields.
Furthermore, the current work will be conducted by a multi-cultural and ethnic
group of researchers and research assistants with participants who have multi-
cultural and ethnic backgrounds. This work will therefore help educate and train
underrepresented groups of individuals in the biological and behavioral
sciences.