* 1326365
* Expanding International Microdata Access: Linked German Survey and Administrative Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Margaret Levenstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

This project maintains and expands international data sharing between the German
Institute for Employment Research (IAB) and US researchers. The principle is to
provide researchers with increased ease of access to confidential survey and
administrative data while maintaining data security by establishing a secure
connection between secure Research Data Centers or data enclaves which share
comparable standards with regard to data and confidentiality protection. The PIs
have piloted this approach with the establishment of such a data enclave at the
Michigan Center for the Demography of Aging at the Institute for Social Research
at the University of Michigan. This award builds on the pilot by supporting the
continued operation of the Michigan enclave and the expansion to other locations
in the US Research Data Center network, including locations at Cornell and the
University of California, Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data sharing
arrangement allows qualified researchers access to extremely rich German survey
and administrative data. The data can be linked, have a panel structure, and
cover all firms and employees in Germany (including the former East Germany)
from 1975 to the present. These data will be used in cutting-edge statistical
analyses that compare US and German labor markets, macroeconomic dynamics,
international trade, and industrial organization. The data are also useful for a
wide range of methodological research. The project also contributes to graduate
education; the ease of access to the German data means that graduate students
can practice advanced data analysis skills in a practical way.