* 1326679
* Workshop:  Durability of Polymers and Polymeric Composites: Current Challenges and Future Prospects; March 6th-7th 2013, Monterey, California
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Valeria LaSaponara, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 01/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

Polymers and polymeric composites are appealing for many engineering
applications, from parts of aircraft, civil infrastructures, to retrofitting
nuclear reactor containment concrete structures, etc. One of the main issues in
utilizing polymeric based structures is associated to their durability under
combined mechanical loadings and hostile environmental conditions, such as
temperature fluctuations and diffusion/reactions of various substances through
these structures. These complex loadings will cause material degradation at
different scales, and eventually lead to structural failure. This workshop on
"Durability of Polymers and Polymeric Composites. will be part of the NIST's and
Underwriters Laboratories" workshop on "Service Life Prediction of Polymeric
Materials: Vision for the Future". The NSF workshop consists of two sessions and
discussion panel. There will be twelve speakers from academic, national
laboratories, and industry. In addition, a poster-session given by graduate
students is integrated as part of the overall workshop. The goal of this
workshop is to bring together national eminent researchers who are actively
working in the field of durability of polymeric engineering materials. They will
share recent developments in modeling and experimental understanding/assessment
of the degradation and life prediction of polymers and polymeric composite
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are still many unresolved scientific
issues on understanding the failure mechanisms in polymeric based structures
under constant exposure to hostile environments and complex mechanical loading.
The interaction between national and international scientists and manufacturers
present at the NIST workshop is expected to have tremendous impact in resolving
current durability issues in many engineering applications. The outcome of this
meeting is to address some of the current challenges and identify common
research priorities in durability of polymers and polymeric composites. This
meeting will also open opportunities for US researchers in academia to
collaborate with researchers from national laboratories and industry partners,
for further enhancing current methods in predicting life performance and
degradation in polymers under various loading histories. This workshop also
promotes the participation of women and under-represented minorities.