* 1326167
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Local Oceanographic Processes on Adelie Penguin Foraging Ecology Over Palmer Deep
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* William Fraser, Polar Oceans Research Group
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 333,984.00

The application of innovative ocean observing and animal telemetry technology
over Palmer Deep (Western Antarctic Peninsula; WAP) is leading to new
understanding, and also to many new questions related to polar ecosystem
processes and their control by bio-physical interactions in the polar
environment. This multi-platform field study will investigate the impact of
coastal physical processes (e.g. tides, currents, upwelling events, sea-ice) on
Adélie penguin foraging ecology in the vicinity of Palmer Deep, off Anvers
Island, WAP. Guided by real-time surface convergence and divergences based on
remotely sensed surface current maps derived from a coastal network of High
Frequency Radars (HFRs), a multidisciplinary research team will adaptively
sample the distribution of phytoplankton and zooplankton, which influence Adélie
penguin foraging ecology, to understand how local oceanographic processes
structure the ecosystem.

Core educational objectives of this proposal are to increase awareness and
understanding of (i) global climate change, (ii) the unique WAP ecosystem, (iii)
innovative methods and technologies used by the researchers, and (iv) careers in
ocean sciences, through interactive interviews with scientists, students, and
technicians, during the field work. These activities will be directed towards
instructional programming for K-16 students and their teachers. Researchers and
educators will conduct formative and summative evaluation to improve the
educational program and measure its impacts respectively.