* 1326399
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Behavioral Responses to Wealth Shocks: Evidence from Sweden
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Raj Chetty, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 12/31/2014
* USD 15,007.00

How do workers prepare for retirement after an unexpected change in their
financial situation? How do sudden wealth changes affect earnings and health
before and after retirement? Do people work more and become more stressed after
unexpected losses in their portfolios? Do people spend down new-found wealth
quickly, or do they save it? To what extent do people help each other out in the
family? This study addresses these questions empirically with three novel
research designs on Sweden's complete population registries. The project is the
first to use this data for this purpose, a singular opportunity for any major
developed economy in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main design uses
capital gains calculated from exceptionally detailed portfolio data in the
universe of Swedish tax returns. Riskier assets should generate higher average
returns, safer investments lower ones, but realized returns above or below these
risk-specific levels constitute unpredictable shocks to one's wealth and
savings. Auxiliary designs use sharp cutoffs in pension and inheritance tax
policies as clear shocks to wealth. All designs lead to investigations of
outcomes like the age of retirement, health and well-being, as well as what one
earns, consumes or saves. Even more, the causal effects of wealth on labor
supply or consumption can also be documented for family members -- a very
important channel which has never been possible to study using the complete
family network of an entire country before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
advances our understanding of how human decisions change with wealth. Both the
nature of the data and the shocks investigated surpass previous investigations
using surveys: The effects are established in a much broader population, with
more precise data (on earnings or consumption), and, in particular, on novel
outcomes (like health). Most importantly, the rich data does not only offer
precision, but also novel research designs with greater internal validity, i.e.
clean comparisons of situations where the variation in wealth is close to
random.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fact that this work can analyze negative shocks
to wealth makes it stand out from prior (or concurrent) work on lottery winnings
or inheritance. It is particularly important to establish whether people react
to losses differently from commensurate gains. Also, people can think about
changes to their savings unlike windfalls of equal size. Moreover, the study is
among the first to properly take into account spillover effects where help can
be important within the family, viz. "private insurance" of savings or health. A
study with equally reliable data on the basically complete network of families
in a country is an important advance in itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
results can have broader implications. For instance, if retirees are much
healthier with some extra wealth, more powerful retirement saving schemes might
look justified. On the other hand, if wealthier people leave work more easily, a
means-tested retirement age might raise welfare. If family help still seem
prevalent even in a generous welfare state, both policy proposals and other
empirical studies can be expected to make bigger efforts to take such spillover
effects into account. The wider research and policy community also cares about
people responding to incentives depending on whether they or their family
members are more or less wealthy.