* 1326951
* Information, Risk, and Economic Policy: A Dynamic Contracting Approach
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Noah Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 268,939.00

Abstract Proposal No: SES - 1326951 Principal Investigator: Williams, Noah
Title: Information, Risk, and Economic Policy: A Dynamic Contracting Approach

This project studies the implications of asymmetries of information in dynamic
relationships. In particular, the investigator applies relatively new continuous
time contracting methods to study issues in economic policy, risk management,
and firm and financial intermediary dynamics. The first area of study is optimal
unemployment insurance over the business cycle. The project follows the previous
literature in analyzing the moral hazard problem resulting from unobservable job
search effort. While most of that literature has focused on constant job finding
rates, these vary substantially over the business cycle. Further, unemployment
insurance systems typically include extended benefits during recessions. This
project analyzes optimal unemployment insurance when workers put forth
unobservable search effort and the economy may alternate between expansions and
recessions. The next area of research considers the implications of unobservable
risk-taking behavior. One aspect of the recent financial crisis was that some
firms seemed to take on excessive risk, surprising both regulators and
shareholders once the actual extent of liabilities was uncovered. The
investigator develops a model where a manager faces a classic moral hazard
problem, where effort on the job is indistinguishable from random shocks. In
addition, the manager can take unobservable actions which yield current certain
payoffs, but expose the firm to larger risk. For example, the manager could sell
insurance against unlikely events, pocketing the insurance premiums but exposing
the firm to large liabilities if the event occurred. The project shows how
standard pay-for-performance contracts, which are typically beneficial in the
case of moral hazard, may lead the manager to take on excess risk. The
investigator then develops optimal contracts which provide incentives to both
put forth effort and to manage risk. The final area of research focuses on long-
term financing contracts. Because of the recent economic experience, financial
frictions are at the forefront of much current research. However most existing
models use short-term contracts, and have had difficulty in generating
significant amplification and propagation of shocks. However with long-term
contracts, the value of the relationships among borrowers, lenders, and
intermediaries changes over time, and changes in these values may lead to more
persistence in the propagation of shocks. The project shows how contracts
propagate shocks among households, firms, and financial intermediaries, and give
rise to interesting firm and intermediary dynamics. This project has
implications of direct importance in policy discussions. For example, the
application on unemployment insurance is directly aimed at a policy question of
current relevance. During the most recent recession, unemployment insurance
benefits in the US have been extended several times as labor market conditions
have deteriorated. This research determines the optimal structure of
unemployment insurance benefits over the business cycle, and analyzes the
potential gains from reforming the existing system. The other applications touch
on policy questions as well, addressing issues at the heart of the recent
financial and economic turmoil. The project on financing contracts directly
analyzes financial frictions and the role of intermediaries, which were crucial
in the financial crisis. The hidden risk application focuses on one channel
which may have contributed to the severity of the financial crisis, as many
banks incurred large losses due to excessive exposure to risk. In addition to
the current work analyzing incentives to manage risk, future work in the project
will look more closely at regulatory and policy responses to encourage risk
management.