* 1326635
* Collaborative Research:  Novel Approaches Toward Estimating the Causal Impact of Wealth
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* David Cesarini, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 96,863.00

The effect of wealth on behavior is of substantial interest to policymakers. For
example, many important public policies -- such as changes to retirement
systems, property taxes, or lump-sum components of welfare payments -- often
involve transfers of wealth. Moreover, the costs and benefits to income
redistribution depend on exactly how people respond to changes in their wealth.
Therefore, understanding how (and by how much) people respond to changes in
wealth is important for predicting and evaluating a wide range of public
policies.

Despite a rich literature studying the effects of wealth on a large number of
economic and non-economic outcomes, there remains little consensus on the
importance and magnitude of wealth effects in a wide variety of settings. This
lack of consensus is likely a result of the substantial practical challenges
associated with credibly estimating wealth effects. This research tries to
improve our understanding of the causal effects of wealth on a wide range of
behaviors and outcomes by studying three large populations of Swedish lottery
players. Because prizes are assigned at random, this makes it relatively
straightforward to produce credible estimates using the well-accepted and
uncontroversial framework of a randomized controlled design.

The projects described in this research outline are all based on the analysis of
three recently collected samples of Swedish lottery players, comprising more
than three million individuals. With the help of Statistics Sweden, the players
have been matched to population-based administrative records containing annual
information about employment, earnings, health, and a number of other variables
(with most of the variables available annually beginning in the late 1970s).
Besides information on the lottery players themselves, the data also contains
information on the players' spouses, partners, and children. Overall, the
combined data set has several unique advantages. First, there are minimal biases
due to attrition or non-response since the players have been matched to
population-wide administrative data. Second, because of the large sample size,
the data can be used to investigate differences across many different
demographic groups. Lastly, there is significant variation in the amount of
prizes awarded, which means that it is possible to estimate non-linear effects
of the prizes. In total, the data contain 13,000 individuals who were randomly
assigned more than the average annual income in Sweden and another 1,500 who
were randomly assigned more than ten times the average annual income.

The assembled data will be used for three separate research projects. The first
project examines how wealth shocks impact labor earnings, spousal labor supply,
retirement behavior, social insurance take-up, and occupational switching. These
outcomes span a wide range of interesting labor market effects that one might
expect to observe in response to unexpected increases in wealth. The information
on spousal earnings will enable separate estimates of wealth effects by
individual and by household, which may also shed light on economic models of
decision-making within the household. The second project explores how wealth
impacts a rich set of proxies for health, such as cause of death, drug
prescriptions, and hospitalizations. The findings from this project will
hopefully provide an important step toward resolving a long-running debate in
social science about the extent to which the strong socioeconomic gradient in
health reflects the causal effect of wealth on health.

The third project explores the effect of wealth on political participation (such
as voter turnout and nomination for political office) as well as political
attitudes. This project is highly interdisciplinary in nature and should be of
considerable interest to both political scientists and economists. While
existing research in political science and economics has documented a strong
correlation between socioeconomic status and political participation, the
interpretation of these results remains controversial. The rich data and
credible research design in this project will hopefully result in
uncontroversial estimates of the effect of wealth on a number of different
measures of political participation and political attitudes.