* 1326433
* Direct and Indirect Impacts of Credit Scoring for Small and Medium Enterprises
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Dean Karlan, Innovations for Poverty Action
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 383,448.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Direct and Indirect Impacts of Credit Scoring
for Small and Medium Enterprises&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: SES -
1326433&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Dean Karlan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lack
of access to finance remains one of the core challenges to small firm growth in
low- and middle-income countries. Many small and medium enterprises (SMEs) have
high returns to capital but if banks cannot identify these borrowers, they may
restrict lending or misallocate funds, limiting production and employment
growth. Many low- and middle-income countries do not have credit bureaus or
other effective public systems that aggregate information valuable for
screening, further exacerbating the challenge of identifying high return
borrowers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While a lack of adequate financing may
constrain the expansion of individual firms, the provision of credit to a single
business is likely to have spillover effects on other firms and on consumers.
Firms operate in a web of competitors and suppliers, and these businesses will
also be affected by credit that is provided to a single loan recipient. For
example, standard economic theory suggests that competitor firms will see
decreased demand when competitors gain access to credit. At the same time,
increased demand for supplier inputs can lead to increased upstream
profitability. Classic theories of economic development stress the importance of
these linkages in the takeoff to development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
uses a randomized controlled trial methodology to evaluate the impact of
providing credit to SMEs, examining both the direct effects on recipient firms
and the indirect spillover effects on competitors and firms linked to treated
businesses through supply chains. A large development bank in the Philippines is
implementing a new credit scoring system at 45 branches across the country. The
new system will process all SME loans and assign a credit score to each loan
applicant. Credit scores falling in a certain range below the cut-off for
automatic loan approval will be randomly approved or denied. The randomized
design generates exogenous variation in access to credit among SME loan
applicants, enabling us to measure the impact of credit on firms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important and innovative aspect of this evaluation is
its focus on spillovers across firms. The project will measure vertical
spillovers by surveying firms in the supply chains of loan applicants, and
exploit variation in the number of firms receiving credit in different
industries and markets to measure horizontal spillovers on firms competing
directly with treatment and control businesses. Identifying competitor and
supply chain markets and the horizontal and vertical interactions of sample
firms constitutes a new approach to the study of firms in low- and middle-income
countries. The findings are highly policy relevant. Evidence that providing
credit to one firm has positive market spillovers, perhaps though increasing
competition or allowing suppliers to invest more, would provide a strong
justification for increasing access to credit. On the other hand, if gains to
the firm receiving credit come entirely at the expense of losses to its
competitors, then subsidized credit would accomplish little, suggesting that the
gains from microcredit may be overestimated.