* 1326584
* School Choice with Control and Bayesian School Choice
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* M Bumin Yenmez, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 182,999.00

This award funds research in the economic theory of matching mechanisms. The
goal is to develop new methods that can be employed to solve existing
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The so called "school choice problem" has
recently been tackled by a number of economic theorists. The problem is
motivated by decisions made by a number of public school districts in the US to
adopt new systems for assigning students to schools. Traditionally, a 'boundary
system' sets geographic boundaries and all students inside the boundary attend
the same school. In a choice system, families have the opportunity to submit a
list of preferred school assignments to a central clearinghouse. That
clearinghouse then matches students to schools; the set of rules that the
clearinghouse uses to go from preference lists to assignments is called a
matching mechanism. The PIs are developing new mechanisms that can be used in
two different real world situations. First, they develop a mechanism that can be
used when assignments must take into account not just family preferences but
also district-wide diversity goals. Second, they develop a mechanism for cases
where families do not just list their preferred schools from most preferred to
least preferred, but are also able to state just how much they want their most
preferred school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two technical components to the
research. The PIs propose a general approach to diversity concerns that admits a
number of specific policies as special cases. The PIs construct choice rules
that take the diversity objectives into account and study when these choice
rules satisfy substitutes, irrelevance of rejected students and the law of
aggregate demand; all of which are crucial for the deferred acceptance algorithm
to produce a stable matching have desirable properties. The second component
incorporates incomplete cardinal information in the school choice problem by
considering students with private valuations for schools. Students can have
different ordinal rankings of schools while some schools can be more popular
than others. In this setting, the research demonstrates that the Boston
mechanism does not always result in a higher social welfare than the deferred
acceptance algorithm. The project also includes research to uncover the general
structure of these mechanisms and to analyze the Bayesian assignment game,
another category of school choice problem.