* 1326783
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Protecting the Coastline - Optimal Coastal Inundation Adaptation Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Kent Messer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/2015
* USD 13,860.00

Recent years have seen considerable damages to coastal communities along the
eastern coast of the United States from violent storms and related coastal
inundation events. Scientists predict that these events will likely increase due
to sea level rise and greater ocean temperatures. This damage can be minimized,
and in some cases prevented, through public investment in coastal
infrastructure. However, issues associated with property rights and risk
perception may make it difficult for government planners to design an effective
infrastructure system. Thus, public policy in this area tends to be quite
difficult and has resulted in a patchwork of protective measures that have left
some coastal areas less protected than they would otherwise be with an
integrated system of protections. The coordination policies recommended by
traditional economic theory fall short in this case because of a combination of
non-linear, spatially-explicit hydrological processes involved in generating the
damages caused by storm surge and inundation, as well as possible behavioral
inefficiencies due to the complexity of the decision environment. This research
uses economic experiments to investigate policy tools for use in coastal
infrastructure planning in the case where direct government action is not
feasible. This research seeks to identify voluntary mechanisms that can
effectively protect coastal areas by creating ?smart? incentive structures
sufficient to create integrated coastal protections. Building upon the
techniques of experimental economics, mathematical programming, game theory, and
hydrologic modeling, this research will address the question, "How can incentive
mechanisms be designed to create an effective coastal protection system through
voluntary action of coastal landowners?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the wake of
recent large coastal hurricanes, many coastal states have become keenly
interested in exploring adaption and implementation strategies for coastal
protections. For instance in the mid-Atlantic, Delaware, New Jersey, New York,
and Connecticut, have all recently established bodies to investigate potential
vulnerabilities and adaptation responses to sea level rise. One of the
challenges expressed by these agencies is the coordination of responses among
independent local authorities and landowners. This research will adapt "Smart
Market" techniques that have been successfully applied to address issues in
other arenas, such as the development of utility and transportation
infrastructure. These approaches can establish a market-like exchange
environment, while also accounting for spatial and informational issues that are
usually external to traditional markets. By testing alternative policy
structures in the experimental economics laboratory with human participants and
direct financial incentives, this research will provide key insights into the
question of what policies will be most effective in coordinating local decision
makers given the physical and environmental dynamic of storm surges and sea
level rise in coastal areas.