* 1326378
* ABI Innovation: Building and sharing molecular visualizations with Molecular ViewBook
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Janet Iwasa, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 07/31/2014
* USD 432,350.00

The University of Utah is awarded a grant to develop new software tools that
will allow researchers to create and share accurate and dynamic visual molecular
models of molecular processes. As we gain a deeper understanding of the
complexity and dynamics of molecular mechanisms, the need for modeling tools
that will synthesize diverse molecular and cellular data becomes more urgent. 3D
animation software offers an attractive solution to this need, but has been
adopted by only a small number of researchers due to the steep learning curve
for most 3D graphics applications. This project seeks to enable researchers to
create dynamic visualizations of the molecular processes they study, and to
share these visualizations with others in the research and educational
communities. The Molecular ViewBook project is broken into two major components.
First, the 3D Molecular Toolkit, a suite of free software tools that will allow
users to start creating molecular animations in an open-source animation
software package after viewing a short tutorial. The 3D Molecular Toolkit will
include modules that cover all aspects of molecular animation, including easy-
to-use tools to import and manipulate structural data, create conformational
changes in protein models, and dynamically build higher-order molecular
structures. The second component is the Molecular ViewBook website
(http://MolecularViewbook.org), a portal which will enable users to share their
animations and animation source codes with others. From the Molecular ViewBook
website, users can search for molecular animations that other users have
created, and modify these animations to add new
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular animations are
increasingly recognized and utilized as a powerful means to communicate complex
molecular mechanisms to a wide variety of audiences. In the past several years,
we have witnessed a large and rapidly growing interest amongst researchers to be
able to create animations. To aid in the dissemination of the Molecular
ViewBook, these investigators will conduct local and national workshops for
researchers. They will also introduce an Educational Portal that will target
biology educators and students at the high school and college levels, thereby
expanding our user community beyond the scope of the research community.