* 1326068
* Private Information, Liquidity, and Financial Crises
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Robert Shimer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 295,846.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Title: Private Information, Liquidity, and Financial
Crises&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: SES - 1326068&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Shimer, Robert&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop and explore
theoretical models of private information in financial markets. In many
situations, the seller of a financial asset, such as a mortgage-backed security,
may have information about the asset's quality that is unavailable to potential
buyers. For example, a mortgage securitizer may be affiliated with the company
that originated the mortgages that underlie the security. In this case, an
investor who is considering purchasing a mortgage-backed security from the
securitizer will be aware that the seller may have soft information about the
homeowners' characteristics. Since this soft information affects the seller's
willingness to sell, it will also affect the investor's willingness to purchase
the security and hence the functioning of the mortgage market.&lt;br/&gt;The
starting point for this research is an analysis of an environment in which there
are gains from trade in financial assets. For example, a mortgage originator
needs to sell some of its mortgage portfolio in order to raise money for new
loans; or a mortgage securitizer needs to sell some of its existing securities
in order to raise money to purchase to new mortgage pools. A buyer would like to
purchase from a seller like this, with a strong intrinsic reason to sell. At the
same time, sellers may have private information about the quality of the assets
they own. A buyer would prefer not to purchase from a seller who is selling
because he believes he has a low quality asset. Buyers are unable to tell
whether a seller is selling an asset because the seller needs to raise funds or
because the seller believes the asset has a low quality.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary
research establishes that the seller's asking price gives the buyer some of the
seller's private information both about the asset's characteristics and about
the seller's characteristics. The key insight is that in markets with a shortage
of buyers, sellers can use their asking price as a costly signal. Sellers know
that the shortage of buyers is more acute, and so a sale is less likely, at a
higher price. Sellers who value holding onto their asset more, either because
they perceive that the asset has a higher quality or because they do not have a
strong intrinsic reason to sell the asset, are more willing to set a higher
price at the risk of failing to sell their asset. Buyers know this and are
willing to pay a high price to the extent that they expect to be compensated
with a high quality asset. In equilibrium, the extent of the private information
problem determines the shortfall in the number of buyers and hence the
illiquidity of the market. More precisely, the equilibrium depends on the joint
distribution of two types of private information: sellers' perception of asset
quality and sellers' intrinsic reason for sale.&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical
environment generates a rich set of empirical predictions. For example,
identical assets may trade at different prices, with the price dependent on the
owner's characteristics. On the other hand, heterogeneous assets may trade at
the same price, so the price only imperfectly reveals an asset's quality. Some
investors may simultaneously buy and sell assets in an effort to take advantage
of their private information.&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical model suggests two
notions of a crisis that leads to a breakdown in financial intermediation. The
first involves a change in fundamentals. Sellers may get bad information about
the quality of the assets in their portfolio. For example, a decline in house
prices may increase the default risk for mortgage-backed securities that
previously appeared to be safe. Alternatively, sellers may realize fewer
investment opportunities, which lowers the gains from trade. For example, a
decline in house prices may reduce the demand for new mortgages, moderating
sellers' need to sell assets for cash. Both of these shifts imply that it is
more likely that a seller is selling an asset because the seller has bad
information about the asset, worsening the adverse selection problem and
potentially leading to a collapse in trade.&lt;br/&gt;The second notion of a
crisis involves a shift in behavior without a change in fundamentals.
Preliminary research establishes conditions under which multiple equilibria can
exist, with each indexed by the number of buyers in the market. Sellers pricing
incentives are always determined by their desire to signal the quality of their
asset. In an equilibrium with fewer buyers, sellers are perversely induced to
set higher prices for their assets, which in turn drives out the buyers. This
type of crisis may occur because of contagion which carries a crisis from one
market (mortgage-backed securities) to another (securities backed by auto
loans). &lt;br/&gt;The solid theoretical foundation that this research project
will develop should be important for understanding and quantifying the
importance of private information in financial markets. This in turn will be
useful for evaluating the potential impact of politically feasible policy
responses to a crisis and for formulating an optimal policy response