* 1326996
* Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Promise, Progress, and Priorities Workshop, Arlington,  VA, July 11-12, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Jason Nicholas, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2014
* USD 49,797.00

1326996&lt;br/&gt;Nicholas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFCs)
are uniquely capable of improving the efficiency of today's hydrocarbon-based
economy while simultaneously enabling a transition to a carbon-neutral energy
economy. Aspects which support this contention are 1) the highest possible
combined heat and power efficiency (90%) of any energy conversion technology, 2)
gravimetric energy densities comparable to internal combustion engines and ~5x
higher than the best Li-ion batteries, 3) gravimetric power densities comparable
to the best Li-ion batteries and ~3x higher than internal combustion engines, 4)
the co-generation of high-quality waste heat that can be used for water-heating,
space heating, or the production of additional electricity, and 5) an ability to
use either hydrocarbons (gasoline, propane, natural gas, etc.) or hydrogen as a
fuel. Unfortunately, SOFC research and development efforts have suffered from
technical challenges, funding scarcity/inconsistency, and a lack of public
awareness. The objective of this proposal is to organize a SOFC Promise,
Progress, and Priorities workshop that will allow representatives from academia,
industry, and government to exchange ideas on how to best advance SOFC
technology, through a series of moderated discussions and completion of various
technology assessment tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives will be met
by convening federal officials, corporate representatives, and academic SOFC
researchers for a workshop at the Westin Arlington Gateway Hotel in Arlington,
VA from July 11-12, 2013. Jason Nicholas of Michigan State University is the
primary Organizer for the Workshop. The workshop will engage the 36 invited
participants and 14 general participants in poster presentations, review panels,
committee meetings, and open discussions. Workshop conclusions will be
disseminated through the publication of an open-access, peer-reviewed workshop
summary article and by the online posting of committee reports, constituency
whitepapers, and the workshop summary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
will have a broad impact by advancing a technology capable of improving the
nation's environmental quality, economic sustainability, and national security.
The workshop will result in improved awareness of the unique benefits of SOFCs
by the public and the scientific community. The workshop will also improve the
participation and impact of women and underrepresented minorities in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics fields by having these individuals serve
on high-visibility panel reviews and as committee chairs/co-chairs.