* 1326524
* Toward Improved Understanding of Rapid Intensification (RI) of Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Yuqing Wang, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 361,322.00

The rapid intensification (RI), which involves interactions between the inner
core dynamics and the large-scale environment and among different spatial and
temporal scales, is still one of the least understood phases of a tropical
cyclone (TC). Previous studies have already shown that the rapid formation of a
warm core in the upper troposphere is the key to the RI onset of a TC. In this
study, processes that lead to the rapid formation of the upper-tropospheric warm
core in TCs will be explored through on idealized and real-case simulations and
diagnostic and budget analyses using cloud-resolving models. In particular, the
following three scientific questions will be addressed: 1) Given favorable
tropical ocean conditions, is the intensification rate of a TC externally or
internally determined and can an environmental flow or synoptic-scale forcing
increase the intensification rate that a TC could have without these forcing? 2)
How do the three-dimensional (3D) structure (including the size) and intensity
of a TC vortex determine the efficiency of the upper-tropospheric warming and
thus the intensification rate of the TC itself? 3) How are convective bursts and
hot towers triggered and how do they lead to the upper tropospheric warming over
the storm core prior to and during the RI?

To answer these questions, we will use the TC model (TCM4) developed by the PI
and the advanced Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model developed at
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) to conduct a series of idealized
and real-case simulations and perform diagnostic and budget analyses to verify
our hypotheses, identify the physical mechanisms responsible for the RI.

Intellectual Merit: Results from this research will improve our understanding of
the dynamics of the RI of tropical cyclones and factors that determine the
potential intensification rate of a TC.

Broader Impacts: The research will lead to a set of parameters/factors that
determine the potential intensification rate of tropical cyclones. This will
contribute to improved ability to predict TC intensity change. Results from this
research will also demonstrate what parameters of the three-dimensional
structure of the initial TC are critical to the intensity prediction by
numerical models, thus potentially leading to improved prediction of TC
structure and intensity. In the course of this project, a female graduate
student will receive training in the science of TCs, especially in the area of
TC dynamics and modeling.