* 1326940
* Multilateral Trade Bargaining: Theory and Evidence from the GATT Bargaining Records
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Robert Staiger, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2018
* USD 457,854.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: SES - 1326940 &lt;br/&gt;Title: Multilateral
Trade Bargaining: Theory and Evidence from the GATT Bargaining
Records&lt;br/&gt;NSF Program: ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Staiger, Robert W.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the WTO's decade-long
Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations on the ropes, understanding the
nature of trade bargaining has never been more important for the world trading
system. At the same time, the availability of large-scale field data from any
real-world bargaining setting is highly unusual, and it creates an important
opportunity for research that illuminates the practice of bargaining more
generally. For both of these reasons, the WTO's recent release of tariff
bargaining records for the first four GATT multilateral negotiating rounds
presents a major research opportunity for economists. This research project will
transform the GATT bargaining records into a form that is accessible for
researchers, and begin the process of using the data in combination with
institutional features of the GATT/WTO to develop and test theories of
bargaining and evaluate alternative bargaining protocols for possible
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GATT/WTO tariff negotiations display several
notable features. First, these negotiations are a form of barter, whereby
governments accept commitments on their own import tariffs in exchange for the
reciprocal tariff commitments of their principal trading partners. Second, for
each round a specific bargaining protocol is adopted, with explicit rules for
the timing of events, the kinds of interactions expected and the exchange of
information among participants. And finally, though it is a multilateral
institution, for the most part the GATT/WTO has adopted a bilateral approach to
multilateral bargaining according to which reciprocal negotiations (over
tariffs) occur on a voluntary basis through time between pairs of countries,
with the results of these bilateral negotiations then "multilateralized" to the
full GATT/WTO membership by a non-discrimination requirement that tariffs abide
by the most-favored nation (MFN) principle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first four
GATT rounds spanned the years 1947-1956, involved more than 800 pairs of
bargaining countries and resulted in over 65,000 agreed tariff cuts. In each of
these rounds, the tariff negotiations took the form of simultaneous bilateral
bargaining between pairs of countries over multiple tariff lines, all subject to
the potential externality associated with the MFN principle. For each bilateral
country pair, the bargaining records include the sequence of tariff requests,
offers and counter-offers, and the eventual tariff commitments that were agreed
(or a statement that agreement could not be reached). The writings of the time
emphasize trade bargaining challenges in the early GATT rounds that have obvious
counterparts in modern times: addressing the existence of preferential tariffs
(as embodied in the commonwealth trade practices of the United Kingdom), dealing
with asymmetries in the tariff levels across negotiating countries (stemming
from newcomers to the bargaining table in a given round), approaching the
potential bargaining externalities associated with MFN (with techniques such as
the principal supplier rule and tariff concessions split across bargaining
partners), and confronting the possibility of major bargaining failures (as for
example the failure of the UK-U.S. bilateral in the Torquay Round). After
converting these bargaining records into research-ready form, this project will
use the data to begin to evaluate questions ranging from whether preferential
trading arrangements create stumbling blocks or building blocks for multilateral
trade liberalization, to whether tariff asymmetries pose difficulties for
negotiations, to how countries deal with potential bargaining externalities, to
what explains bargaining failure. The project will also show how, under certain
conditions, the bargaining data can be used to recover the underlying political
preferences of the participating governments and construct the complete-
information efficiency frontier, against which the outcome of actual GATT rounds
can be judged and the performance of counter-factual bargaining protocols can be
assessed.