* 1326819
* Parametric and nonparametric regressions on spot volatility
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jia Li, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 255,562.00

This research project develops new estimation and inference tools for
continuous-time semimartingale models sampled at high frequency. The
semimartingale model is the most general model for asset prices that precludes
arbitrage opportunities and, as a result, has been the workhorse model in modern
asset pricing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual merit of the
proposed activities is the development of new nonlinear regression methods with
the latent volatility process of a semimartingale as a regressor. The volatility
process measures the intrinsic variability of the semimartingale. The methods
will allow researchers to investigate the statistical relationship between
economic variables and the volatility process without imposing strong
assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity can be divided into
three sections. The first section concerns a baseline vector nonlinear
regression model involving the volatility. The estimation is performed in two
steps. In the first step, the latent volatility process is recovered from high
frequency data in a model-free fashion, and in the second step, the regression
model is estimated via the generalized methods of moments (GMM). The statistical
property of this procedure is studied. These tools allow the user to explore how
the volatility process drives other economic variables and to make statistically
formal statements. An empirical application is included for illustrating the use
of the method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second section extends the first section
by allowing the regression model to be possibly misspecified. This extension
sheds light on the robustness of the estimation method in a realistic setting in
which the regression model is only considered as an approximation of the true
model. The analysis on misspecified models facilitates the comparison and
evaluation of competing models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third section
introduces a new regression framework which can be applied to perform nonlinear
projection of the sample path of a latent volatility process onto that of
another volatility process. In financial applications, the method can be used to
explore how volatilities of multiple assets co-vary with each other.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the motivating examples in the proposed activity are
those of financial models, the methods developed in this project are valid for
generic semimartingales. Besides economics and finance, semimartingales have
also been used in biological, chemical, and electrical applications, where high
frequency data are also available. One can hope that some of the statistical
methods developed here can find applications in these fields.