* 1326927
* Management and Operations of the JOIDES Resolution as a Facility for the International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP)
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,09/30/2024
* Gary Acton, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Johnson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 570,939,785.00

The International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) serves to advance basic
research in the marine geosciences and is supported by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) and more than 26 other international partners. IODP builds on a
legacy of scientific ocean drilling exemplified by the Deep Sea Drilling Project
(1969-1983), the Ocean Drilling Program (1985-2003), and the multi-drilling
platform Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (2003-2013).&lt;br/&gt;Ocean drilling
is used to examine processes ranging from changes in the Earth's climate to the
rifting and drifting of continents. Drilling is the primary tool for sampling
sediment and crustal rock from the 70 percent of the Earth?s surface covered by
oceans, and is the only technique for sampling anything more than a few meters
deeper than the ocean floor. The new IODP commenced October 1, 2013, utilizing
the new science plan Illuminating Earth?s Past, Present, and Future
(http://www.iodp.org/Science-Plan-for-2013-2023/) based on planning by over 600
international scientists. The plan identifies four themes for initial emphasis
in the new IODP: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Climate and Ocean Change: Reading the
Past, Informing the Future &lt;br/&gt;2) Biosphere frontiers: Deep Life,
Biodiversity, and Environmental Forcing of Ecosystems &lt;br/&gt;3) Earth
Connections: Deep Processes and Their Impact on Earth?s Surface Environment
&lt;br/&gt;4) Earth in Motion: Processes and Hazards on Human Time Scales
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific accomplishments in the previous ocean drilling
programs and the potential for future scientific discoveries envisioned in this
new Science Plan were reviewed in the National Research Council report
Scientific Ocean Drilling: Accomplishments and Challenges (2011)
(http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=13232#toc). The NRC found that "Each
of the four themes within the Science Plan identifies compelling challenges with
potential transformative science that can only be addressed by scientific ocean
drilling." The report noted the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program's scope and
method of research as an example of best practices in international scientific
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;The refit of the JOIDES Resolution through the MREFC
account in 2006-2009 greatly improved the drilling capabilities of the vessel,
with a number of new drilling depth records subsequently set and substantial
improvement in core recovery and quality. The depth to which the drillship can
obtain high-resolution climate records in core has doubled, expanding the
ability to examine Earth's climate history in detail. The scientific
capabilities have also been enhanced, with addition of a new microbiology lab, a
new data management infrastructure with significant cyber-infrastructure
upgrades, a 25% increase in core processing area and berths, and new or enhanced
scientific analytical instruments in every shipboard laboratory. Vessel and
drill rig reliability have proven robust, with virtually 100% facility
availability during operations.&lt;br/&gt;The JOIDES Resolution, Chikyu, and
Mission-Specific Platform (MSP) drilling platforms will continue to be provided
to IODP by NSF, Japan, and the European Consortium for Ocean Research Drilling,
respectively. The new science plan draws upon lessons from previous programs to
build a streamlined multi-platform international program based on cooperation
rather than integration. IODP planning for JOIDES Resolution operations is
conducted under a Facilities Board, and management and funding for JOIDES
Resolution operations will occur independently of the other IODP drilling
platforms. The JOIDES Resolution Facilities Board (JR FB) is led by a member of
the science community and made up of scientists and governmental representatives
of nations contributing to JOIDES Resolution operations, as well as
representatives of the JOIDES Resolution science operator. The Facilities Board
is advised by the Science Evaluation and Environmental Protection and Safety
Panels. The JR FB and its advisory panels will be utilized for proposal review
by other science operators in IODP, and are supported by a new IODP Science
Support Office under a Cooperative Agreement to the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography at the University of California, San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;This
Cooperative Agreement (CA) provides financial support for Operations Management
of the Drilling Vessel JOIDES Resolution for the International Ocean Discovery
Program to the Texas A&amp;M Research Foundation, and is intended to cover an
initial five year period beginning on July 1, 2014. A CA is being used because
of 1) the increased level of involvement NSF expects to have with the Awardee
and its principal subawardees and subcontractors in managing facility operations
in a tightly constrained budgetary environment; 2) the wish to move facility
management to the standard NSF model; and 3) the principal relationship between
NSF and the Awardee is to carry out a public purpose, rather than acquiring
property or services for the direct benefit of the Government. &lt;br/&gt;The
JOIDES Resolution will operate under a leasing subcontract between the Texas
A&amp;M Research Foundation and Overseas Drilling, Limited (ODL), the vessel
owner. ODL is owned entirely by Siem Offshore, incorporated in the Cayman
Islands. For FY2015, this subcontract has provisions for 8 one-year extensions
by the science operator, requiring only 6 months of advance notice to renew for
another year. The day rate during these yearly extensions is fixed, increasing
only by a balance of the Consumer Price Index- All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) and
the Employment Cost Index (ECI) indexed to June 1, 2005, as determined by the
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. This contract structure and low indexed day
rate ($60,950/day as of June 1, 2005, when commercial drill ships are currently
about $300,000- $700,000/day) substantially reduces financial risk to NSF, and
allows for yearly opportunities to terminate the drilling subcontract at low
cost.&lt;br/&gt;Technical and budgetary risks to NSF will be further reduced by
(1) using a proven facility under an existing drilling contract with known
vessel lease costs, (2) obtaining regular, annual program contributions from
international partners through non-binding Memoranda; (3) encouraging the
Awardee to pursue third party work with private entities that would pay for the
use of the vessel, and 4) conducting annual reviews by external panels of the
Awardee's overall performance.&lt;br/&gt;NSF will retain ownership of
invaluable, actual core and core samples to ensure proper stewardship for future
use by scientists. The JOIDES Resolution will operate under the existing June,
2008 Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement (valid through June, 2028;
http://www.nsf.gov/geo/oce/envcomp/IODP_USIO_Final_PEIS.pdf and
http://www.nsf.gov/geo/oce/envcomp/IODP_USIO_Final_PEIS_Appendices.pdf ) and the
June 30, 2008 NSF Record of Decision regarding the United States Implementing
Organization's Participation in the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (Federal
Register, v. 73, n. 126, p. 36919;
http://www.nsf.gov/geo/oce/envcomp/IODP_USIO_PEIS_RODv3.pdf ). JOIDES Resolution
operations will be indemnified under 42 U.S.C. 1887 and 10 U.S.C 2354,
contingent on the Awardee maintaining high levels of insurance
coverage.&lt;br/&gt;A Program Review will be held prior to completion of the
initial period and the results will guide a decision to re-compete or renew the
CA for a second five year period. Fundamental to this Review is the Decadal
Survey of Ocean Sciences, being conducted under the auspices of the National
Research Council, with delivery of its report expected in May, 2015. This Survey
will define priorities for the next decade, including an analysis of the current
portfolio of investments in infrastructure and science. These priorities will
factor in any decision to re-compete, renew, or terminate the CA.