* 1326659
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: A Study of the Efficiency Mechanism of Pooling Systems and Social Capital in Fisheries
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Mihoko Tegawa, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2014
* USD 19,782.00

Co-management has been recognized as important in successfully governing common
pool resources, including coastal fisheries. Fishery co-management, where
fishermen collectively manage the fishery as a group, is garnering much
attention, for example the the New England groundfish fishery's sector
allocation scheme. One of the key characteristics of fishery co-management is
the self-imposed rules and practices by the group that aims to achieve certain
management goals. This researach focuses on one such practice, a pooling system,
in which harvesters share catch and/or profits among members of the group. In
Japan case studies have shown that pooling systems work well, but there is one
problem: theoretically, pooling system cannot be effective due to the incentive
to free-ride on other members' fishing effort. This study looks at how two
mechanisms -- social capital and effort coordination -- may overcome the free-
riding problem. Social capital refers to attributes such as trust, reciprocity
and cooperation in human relationships. Effort coordination includes fishing
ground rotation and joint marketing. This research empirically examines the
inter-relationships of these mechanisms through surveys and experiments in at
least twenty Japanese fishing communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides a deeper understanding of how one management tool, namely pooling
systems, may be applicable for regulators and stakeholders in US fisheries and
other similar common pool resources. This new knowledge helps US fisheries to
achieve both conservation of resources and economic efficiency of resource use
especially in fisheries that are not able to employ effective regulations or an
individual catch-share system. Furthermore, the results may show how these
management tools can be applicable in developing countries as well as advanced
industrial democracies. Eventually, this new knowledge will benefit society by
contributing to both a better economy and a healthier environment.