* 1326986
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Effects of Property Rights on Labor Allocation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Mark Rosenzweig, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2014
* USD 62,985.00

This project theoretically illustrates and empirically tests the causal effects
of property rights institutions on households' labor allocation decisions and
other market outcomes. In particular, the project focuses on rural China, where
land is collectively owned and frequently reallocated among households under the
Household Responsibility system. The project argues that the tenure insecurity
arising from such a land-holding system may have led households to sub-optimally
allocate labor to off-farm employment, discouraged the development of the land
leasing market and the agricultural labor market, and negatively affected rural
labor's income and productivity. In order to identify these effects, the project
relies on a natural experiment brought about by a legal change in China in 2002,
which prohibits all land readjustments by village officials throughout farmers'
30-year term of land usage. By exploiting the cross-village variation in pre-
reform land tenure security, the project attempts to isolate the causal effects
of the property rights reform in a model with both time and village fixed-
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the project investigates the
motivations for villages to conduct periodic land reallocations despite the
potential efficiency loss. Three alternative hypotheses on the potential
benefits of frequent land reallocations are generated from the project's
theoretical framework: substitution for dysfunctional land and labor markets,
income redistribution, and social insurance. The project will test between these
hypotheses by relating the characteristics of the village, its residents, or its
government officials with the village's specific pre-reform land reallocation
policies. Based on these results, the project will use the same method described
in the previous paragraph to further examine the effects of the land
reallocations on other socioeconomic outcomes, such as on income volatility or
inequality across households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Last but not least, the
project studies the collective institutional decision-making process in Chinese
villages. In examining villages' decision over when to reallocate land, the
project attempts to answer two questions. First, do individual households take
the long-term effects of tenure insecurity into consideration when they decide
on when to reallocate land, or are their decisions overwhelmingly dominated by
personal short-term interest? Second, if each household is fully rational, do
they tend to reach collectively rational decisions that are optimal for the
group?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances our understanding of
development economics in several ways: First, it is one of the first that
identifies the causal effects of property rights on households' labor decisions,
especially in a rural context. Showing the effects of property reforms on
households' participation in land-leasing and labor markets, the project also
improves understanding on the market formation process of developing countries.
Second, it is the first project that attempts to seriously evaluate the non-
efficiency-related outcomes of property reforms. By illustrating and identifying
the potential redistribution and social insurance values of collective
ownership, the project allows more comprehensive evaluations of various property
rights institutions, and also sheds light on why community-based ownership of
land, despite its efficiency costs, is still so prevalent among many developing
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the examination of villagers'
collective choice in land reallocation policies also supplements previous
studies of group rationality, especially in the context of institutional design
and choice. This provides information and insights to policy makers on the
design of future property rights reforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the
findings of the project also contribute specifically to the debate on whether
China's huge rural labor surplus, which has shaped the country's comparative
advantage in trade and spurred its rapid growth over the past 30 years, has
reached a limit. By providing evidence that excessive labor could still be
trapped inefficiently in the agricultural sector due to land tenure insecurity,
the project suggests that China can further increase labor mobility and unleash
its labor potential through property rights reforms. Such findings inevitably
have important implications for the economic standings and the development
strategies of both China and her trade partners. However, the project also
cautions policy-makers about the potential costs of such reforms, and suggests
that property reforms be preceded by the development of alternative social
safety networks for the rural population.