* 1326812
* Nonparametric Identification and Estimation of Bargaining Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Antonio Merlo, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 448,320.00

Bargaining theory has flourished in the past thirty years. The original model of
bargaining between two players who alternate in making offers and counteroffers
has been extended in a number of directions allowing for more general
negotiation protocols and more than two players. The development of the
theoretical literature has gone hand in hand with, and for a large part has been
motivated by, the broad range of applications of bargaining models. These
include labor, family, legal, housing, political, international and medical
negotiations. The increased availability of data on the outcomes of such
negotiations, as well as on the details of the bargaining process, has also
stimulated a surge in empirical work, where casual empiricism has progressively
led the way to more systematic attempts to take strategic bargaining models to
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two bargaining frameworks that have been extensively
studied in theoretical and empirical applications are the stochastic sequential
bargaining model, and bargaining with uncommon priors. In the model of
stochastic sequential bargaining, the surplus to be allocated (or the "cake")
and the bargaining protocol (i.e. the order in which players can make offers and
counteroffers), are allowed to evolve over time according to a stochastic
process. This feature makes the model flexible (it provides a unified framework
for a large class of bargaining games). It also rationalizes the occurrence of
delays in reaching an agreement, which are often observed in actual
negotiations. The stochastic bargaining framework has been used in a variety of
empirical applications that range from the formation of coalition governments in
parliamentary democracy, to collective bargaining agreements, to corporate
bankruptcy reorganizations, to the setting of industry standards in product
markets, and to sovereign debt renegotiations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models of
bargaining with uncommon priors also rationalize the occurrence of delays in
reaching an agreement, and represent a fast-growing area of both theoretical and
applied research. In these models, players have different expectations regarding
the consequences of failing to reach an agreement, which is a plausible scenario
in several bargaining situations. For example, bargaining models with uncommon
priors have been used to study the process of dispute resolution in medical
malpractice litigation or the incentives of firms to sign broad cross-license
agreements as well as the duration of broad cross-license negotiations in the
semiconductor industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of the importance of
bargaining models in economic applications, little is known about whether the
structural elements of these models or the bargaining outcomes in counterfactual
environments can be identified and estimated without imposing parametric
assumptions. The proposed research will contribute to the literature on the
estimation of bargaining models by providing positive results in the
nonparametric identification and estimation of stochastic bargaining models
where players are risk-averse and have heterogeneous discount factors, and of
bargaining models where players have uncommon priors. The unifying theme of this
research is that both classes of models may explain the occurrence of delays in
reaching an agreement and are relevant empirically, as in many applications risk
aversion, heterogeneity in the discount rate of time preference, and excessive
optimism are likely to play an important role in determining the timing and
terms of negotiation agreements.