* 1326781
* Health Risks, Health Technology, and Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Harold Cole, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2019
* USD 440,640.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: SES - 1326781&lt;br/&gt;Institution: National
Bureau of Economic Research Inc &lt;br/&gt;NSF Program:
ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Cole, Harold&lt;br/&gt;Title: Health
Risks, Health Technology, and Public Policy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the U.S. as
well as in other industrialized countries there has been a large secular
increase in life expectancy. At the same time the share of income, measured as
gross domestic product, devoted to expenditures on health-related goods has
increased substantially, and the relative price of medical goods has been
rising. This project develops a novel class of theoretical models to jointly
explain these observations, and to study to what extent they are shaped by
public policies. In the model individual health investments of households and
research and development (R&amp;D) choices of firms in the health sector jointly
determine the long-run health distribution and the rate of technological
progress in the health services sector. These factors in turn will shape long-
run growth of incomes and welfare in society. This theoretical model, and with
parameters informed by the data, is then used as artificial laboratory to
evaluate the consequences of fundamental reforms in public social insurance
programs, specifically the social security and Medicare programs in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;A key novel feature of the model is the explicit endogenous
treatment of technological progress in the health sector. According to the
hypothesis advanced in this project changes in longevity lead to increased
demand for health goods, which channels activity towards the medical sector. The
resulting technological progress which is directed towards the medical sector
yields new treatments and drugs, therefore stimulating demand for new health
goods which in turn improve longevity. This core mechanism is embedded into a
complete model of the macro economy in which individuals differ by age, income,
health, and wealth, and make medical investment choices over the life cycle.
These in turn determine their health and longevity. Household demand of health
services induces R&amp;D investments by health sector firms, which in turn
determines the speed of technological progress in that sector. Part of the
output from this project is the development of software that computes
numerically the economic equilibrium emerging from the interaction of households
and health production firms in this model with endogenous growth and rich
household heterogeneity. &lt;br/&gt;To insure that the theoretical model
delivers an accurate description of real-world household behavior on the micro
household level the crucial parameters governing household earnings and health
outcomes are estimated using household survey data containing information on
individual labor incomes and health. The so empirically informed theoretical
model is then put to use to answer three sets of applied and directly public
policy relevant questions. First, it is evaluated whether the model provides a
quantitatively accurate explanation for the three joint macroeconomic facts
motivating the analysis: longer life expectancy, a rising health expenditure
share and a larger relative price of medical goods. Second, it is used for the
evaluation of different policy options (e.g. increasing taxes, reducing
benefits, or delaying benefits) to keep Medicare and Social Security financially
viable in an aging U.S. society. Finally, it is employed to study the impact of
health care policies that limit the pricing of pre-existing health conditions by
insurance companies and policies that mitigate the impact of changes in
household health status on labor earnings.