* 1326661
* Making the Dynamics of Social Learning Visible
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Abhijit Banerjee, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 424,445.00

The central role of social networks in the transmission of ideas and information
is widely recognized. People hear of things from their friends, pass them on to
other friends and may continue to receive the same message multiple times from
yet others in their network. This is often how people learn about jobs and
health practices, but it is also how groups can become fixated on highly
implausible ideas and rumors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds research
that uses an integrated approach to study how people learn information from
their friends, neighbors, and colleagues. The goal is to answer two key
questions. First, who are the best people within a network to inform if we want
the information to reach the right people? Second, suppose a set of people are
initially informed of the correct fact or infected with the wrong idea. How far
would the information or idea reach without becoming diluted or distorted?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to answer the first question we need to be able
to identify the structure of the social network. Identifying network structure
is usually achieved by surveying the residents of a community and asking them
about all their connections along every possible dimension with everyone else in
the community. This is prohibitively expensive for most communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award funds research on the use of a different
methdology for identifying networks. Members of the community are invited to
participate in a simple field experiment. By observing people's stategies and
performance in the field task, the researchers will be able to infer the paths
of information flow through the network. Knowing who talks to whom is not enough
to predict patterns of learning. We also need to know of how people combine
information from different sources--do they, for example, keep track of the
source of the information? What happens if they get the same report twice from
the same person? Are some sources weighted more than others? The second part of
the project determines how people actually process new information they receive
from community sources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Finally, to test the model the
research team will use it to predict the best way to inform people about an
actual new product. They will then measure whether their optimal strategy does
better than random distribution of information. This part of the research will
be conducted as a randomized control trial. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research
will create two new data sets, one based on the field experiment in 75
communities and the other based on the same choice task carried out in an online
lab, where the team can place individuals within a constructed social network.
Crucially, in the lab experiment, communication is unrestricted and individuals
have an access to a free text-chat interface. The first allows us to test if the
inferred network is the same as the actual network ) as well as study a field-
based opinion formation process. The second allows to observe the exact time
structure of learning (who talks to whom first and what does she learn from that
conversation), which is key in building and testing different models of learning
(though both data sets will be used for the tests). The research team will test
two different models against these data: the standard DeGroot model as well as a
new model called a Partial DeGroot model, which is similar in spirit to the
DeGroot model but has quite different long-term learning properties. They also
plan to examine Bayesian learning on graphs. The final validation exercise will
be contacted as an RCT comparing random seeding of information with a seeding
that makes use of the learning games from our project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The project will provide rigorous empirical evidence to test theories of how
individuals learn. If successful, the result will be a low-cost methodology to
infer network structure and a metric by which to measure its efficacy. Better
understanding of how information is passed, how beliefs are formed, and why
people sometimes arrive at the wrong beliefs, is key to designing better
policies.