* 1327694
* Thin-Film Compound Semiconductor Photovoltaics April 1-5, 2013. To be Held Moscone West Convention in San Francisco, CA.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2013
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;Symposium C: Thin-Film Compound Semiconductor Photovoltaics
will be held at the 2013 Spring&lt;br/&gt;Meeting of the Materials Research
Society. Thin film photovoltaics have demonstrated high&lt;br/&gt;light-to
electricity conversion efficiencies and are leading candidates to provide lower-
cost&lt;br/&gt;energy due to potential advantages in manufacturing and materials
costs. The topic has great&lt;br/&gt;importance for the materials research
community to further its contribution to the increased&lt;br/&gt;urgency in the
US and globally for developing alternative energy sources. The specific
goals&lt;br/&gt;of the symposium are to present and disseminate significant
recent advances in the understanding&lt;br/&gt;of these materials and devices
and to help develop a diverse and active community
including&lt;br/&gt;established researchers and young scientists to further
technical progress in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;The symposium brings together a wide range of experts in research on
thin-film photovoltaics&lt;br/&gt;including twelve internationally recognized
invited speakers along with students and other&lt;br/&gt;young scientists. There
will be sessions on many different aspects of the technology and&lt;br/&gt;a
range of different materials needed for production. Synergies between different
materials,&lt;br/&gt;processing approaches, and characterization methods will be
highlighted. This range of technical&lt;br/&gt;presentations along with a
symposium organization designed to foster open discussion will&lt;br/&gt;help
further scientific progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the symposium target two different impacts. First,
the technical content&lt;br/&gt;will further the potential of thin-film
photovoltaics to contribute to US and global energy&lt;br/&gt;and environmental
needs. Second, an emphasis on developing a broad, collaborative
research&lt;br/&gt;community with a specific focus on the educational
development of students and early career&lt;br/&gt;researchers and their
incorporation into this community will help develop the next
generation&lt;br/&gt;of scientists needed to meet our research needs.