* 1327768
* IBSS: Understanding Long-Term Effects on Children in Economic Distress
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Marianne Page, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2018
* USD 913,496.00

This project focuses on understanding the long term effects on children who grow
up under conditions of economic distress. We will focus initially on
establishing the long term health and labor market impacts of growing up during
an economic downturn, and will then focus on understanding potential mechanisms
that may operate through physical and mental health. The project emphasizes co-
operative interdisciplinary exploration of the pathways by which economic
resources affect child development, and will harness multiple datasets (such as
the American Community Survey, the Medical Expenditure Survey, The Family
Transitions Project and the California Families Project) multiple research
methods, (such as linear probability analyses, "fixed effects" analyses, latent
variable structural equation modeling) and multiple disciplinary perspectives
represented by economics, psychology and sociology.

Given that the United States is in the process of slowly recovering from the
largest recession since the Great Depression, this project will have broad
impact through its clear policy relevance. While the impact of business cycles
on adult outcomes is being thoroughly documented, we currently know very little
about how they affect the well-being of children. It is natural to assume that
the impacts of economic booms and busts must also spill over onto the next
generation's long-term success, yet this is largely uncharted research
territory. The project's intellectual impact lies in the development of a more
holistic approach to understanding the connection between economic resources and
child development. The disciplines of economics, psychology and sociology are
currently attempting to understand this relationship from completely different
angles and in nearly total isolation. The lack of interdisciplinary interaction
has created disciplinary voids that produce incomplete understanding of the
range of impacts children experience. The project will form a foundation for a
network of researchers who are not simply informed about related inquiries that
are taking place in other disciplines but who are able to fully incorporate that
understanding into more comprehensive research approaches that ultimately yield
deeper knowledge about the interrelated impacts of economic downturns. This
network will include both faculty and graduate students, who will be trained
through both direct immersion in the research projects, and intensive
interdisciplinary mentoring and coursework. Finally, the project will enhance
the infrastructure of research, as it will involve putting together a new
historical employment series, which will be made publicly available to all
interested researchers through the principal investigator's website. This
project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social
Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.