* 1327233
* EAGER: Effect of Dimensionless Particle Weight on Maximum, Minimum, and Critical State Void Ratios
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Bruce Kutter, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2016
* USD 99,691.00

This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award provides funding to test
two hypotheses regarding the effect of dimensionless particle weight on maximum,
minimum, and critical state void ratios. It has been established that van der
Waals attractive forces between sand particles are approximately equal to the
particle weights for very fine sands. For silt-sized particles van der Waals
attractive forces can be much greater than the particle weight. The general
hypothesis (Hypothesis 1) of this research is: if the attractive forces between
soil particles are significant compared to the weight of the particles, the
attractive forces will affect the densification and resultant void ratio of the
particles. A more specific hypothesis (Hypothesis 2) is that the dimensionless
particle weight, Wa = (particle weight)/(attractive force), can be used to
characterize the importance of attractive forces with respect to their effect on
void ratio and densification. These hypotheses will be tested by a series of
experiments that vary the dimensionless particle weight while measuring the
maximum, minimum and critical state void ratios of a selected idealized soil
(glass spheres) and a real silica sand. The dimensionless weight due to van der
Waals forces will be varied by 3 methods: changing the particle size, changing
the pore fluid (air or water), and changing particle weight by spinning the soil
in a geotechnical centrifuge.

If the general hypotheses (Hypothesis 1) is proven true, then the maximum and
minimum void ratios (common ASTM index tests used to calculate the Relative
Density of soil) measured in the laboratory in earth's gravity would not be
directly applicable to soils in other g-fields (e.g., geotechnical centrifuge
model tests). It follows that the Relative Densities reported for hundreds of
valuable geotechnical centrifuge test programs may need to be corrected or re-
interpreted. If the specific hypothesis (Hypothesis 2) proves correct, a method
for correcting or performing the re-interpretation may be illuminated. This
project's work on this aspect of particle size effects could reshape our general
understanding of the effect of particle size on the strength and dilatancy of
geomaterials; this understanding is of fundamental importance in design of
foundations for buildings, bridges and other infrastructure.