* 1327657
* NRI: Large: Collaborative Research: Complementary Situational Awareness for Human-Robot Partnerships
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2020
* Russell Taylor, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,228,609.00

This work will advance human-robot partnerships by establishing a new concept
called complementary situational awareness (CSA), which is the simultaneous
perception and use of the environment and operational constraints for task
execution. The proposed CSA is transformative because it ushers in a new era of
human-robot partnerships where robots act as our partners, not only in
manipulation, but in perception and control. This research will establish the
foundations for CSA to enable multifaceted human-robot partnerships. Three main
research objectives guide this effort: 1) Real-time Sensing during Task
Execution: design low-level control algorithms providing wire-actuated or
flexible continuum robots with sensory awareness by supporting force sensing,
exploration, and modulated force interaction in flexible unstructured
environments; 2) Situational Awareness Modeling: prescribe information fusion
and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) algorithms suitable for
surgical planning and in-vivo surgical plan adaptation; 3) Telemanipulation
based on CSA: Design, construct, and integrate robotic testbeds with
telemanipulation algorithms that use SLAM and exploration data for online
adaptation of assistive telemanipulation virtual fixtures. This research also
includes investigation of previously unaddressed questions on how sensory
exploration and palpation data can be used to enable online-adaptation of
assistive virtual fixtures based on force and stiffness data while also taking
into account preoperative data and intraoperative correction of registration
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will restore the situational
awareness readily available in open surgery to minimally invasive surgery. This
will benefit patients by enabling core technologies for effective and safe
natural orifice surgery or single port access surgery. The societal impact of
the proposed work on these two surgical paradigms is reduced pain for patients,
shorter hospital stay, improved cosmesis and patients' self image, and lower
costs. We also believe that CSA will impact manufacturing where its future will
require people and robots working together in a shared space on collaborative
tasks. Also, the same concepts of CSA apply to telemanipulation in constrained
and unstructured environments and the proposed research has direct relevance to
robot-human partnerships for space exploration. To ensure this broader impact
will be achieved, an advisory board has been assembled with experts from
medicine, manufacturing and aerospace. Finally, the PIs will facilitate
collaboration in the medical robotics research community by making our software
and hardware designs available on-line and using commercial-grade hardware
available at multiple institutions.