* 1327553
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expert Knowledge of Nuclear Materials and the Development of Atomic Energy Agency Policies
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Joseph Masco, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 17,829.00

Under the supervision of Josephe Masco at the University of Chicago, Anna
Weichselbraun will examine the International Atomic Energy Agency, the 'sole
arbiter in the regulation of global nuclear technology,' in its production of
legitimacy and communication of 'technical independence.' Making and performing
technoscientific expertise lies at the heart of this independence and associated
bureaucratic authority, and the research design carefully crafts its questions
to probe those spheres of activity and their documentary trails. Through a
10-month ethnographic study at the International Atomic Energy Agency, a
linguistic analysis of 150-200 documents including annual reports, safeguards
statements, information circulars, general conference documents, and press
releases, and interviews with members and interactional analysis of their
consensus-building activities, the Co-PI will identify and document the
processes whereby IAEA staff work to obtain internal techno-legal consensus and
international political consensus among governing bodies like the UN and its
member states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project lies at the intersection of
cultural anthropology and science and technology studies. This interdisciplinary
research will produce a better understanding of the unique and powerful role the
IAEA plays in international politics and policy and contribute a nuanced view
into the nuclear industry and its regulation. The results will be disseminated
to practitioner, policy, and academic audiences.