* 1327992
* IBSS: Societal, Economic, Technological, and Legal Implications of Personalized Face Composites
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Eyal Peer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2019
* USD 623,946.00

This interdisciplinary research project will focus on the use of personal
information for targeted and hidden persuasion as well as the technical,
economic, and social implications of such covert marketing strategies. The
researchers use the term "visceral targeting" to refer to techniques through
which data about individuals is collected and then employed to covertly
influence preferences, attitudes, and choices, without the individuals having
knowledge of having given explicit consent for these practices. Realms within
which visceral targeting may be practiced include purchasing decisions of
consumers, voting intentions of citizens, and disclosure behaviors of social
network users. This project will concentrate on the use of face composites in a
personalized and targeted manner. Personalized face composites can be created by
collecting images of an individual's face (or images of friends or family
members) from a variety of sources (such as social networking sites) and then
digitally combining those images with facial images of third parties. The result
is a composite facial image which individuals may no longer recognize, but which
may still evoke strong affective and emotional reactions. These techniques may
be used for implicit persuasion and targeted marketing, to influence individuals
in ways that are both highly individualized and unlikely to be detected. For
example, a consumer might be shown an ad containing a personalized face
composite, created using photos the consumer has made publicly available online,
with the aim of influencing that consumer's preferences toward a product. These
marketing techniques have recently been made possible by advancements in
computer science, statistics, and data mining and by the increasing amount of
individual information now available across online social networks and other
online resources. The researchers will use a series of behavioral experiments to
investigate the technological feasibility of such visceral marketing techniques,
and they will conduct as set of complementary studies to examine related
surrounding societal, economic, and legal implications of this
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visceral targeting techniques like personalized
face composites may appeal to some groups, such as marketing companies, and be
alarming to others, such as privacy advocates or members of the general public.
This project will assess the actual feasibility of these techniques and their
potential effect on people's attitudes and behaviors in various domains,
including consumer behavior, personal opinions, and disclosure behavior. The
project will examine the underlying psychological mechanisms that might explain
the effects of such visceral targeting techniques as well as the computational
applicability of such techniques. This project will provide new perspectives,
information, and insights visceral targeting for a broad range of scholars and
practitioners, including, sales executives, regulators, policy makers, and
society at large. This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary
Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.