* 1327561
* IBSS-Ex: SBP: RUI: An Interdisciplinary Approach for Increasing Female Involvement and Achievement in STEM
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jeremy Bailenson, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 249,852.00

This project addresses the persistent underrepresentation of women in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields by developing and testing
the efficacy of an interdisciplinary intervention aimed at increasing female
involvement and performance in STEM. A recent report from Georgetown University
forecasts that 51% of all STEM occupations will be computing-related by 2018.
However, a worsening gender gap pervades computing fields, both in the number of
undergraduate degrees awarded and in employment. Research suggests that one
reason for these gaps is that women often find themselves threatened by the
potential to confirm negative stereotypes associated with their gender, often
termed "identity threat." Drawing on an implicit theory perspective, which
distinguishes between a growth mindset (believing human attributes can be
cultivated) and a fixed mindset (believing human attributes cannot be changed),
this project tests a process model designed to overcome the potentially
deleterious effects of identity threat, and thus increase the sense of belonging
and performance of females in computer science. The research is grounded in the
well-supported idea that individuals with growth, relative to fixed, mindsets
tend to remain confident and persevere when challenges arise and ultimately
perform better. The investigators explore a novel method for encouraging a
growth mindset that integrates (a) psychological theory regarding student
feedback, (b) pedagogical research on strategies that help students handle
challenging tasks and (c) virtual technologies, which can be particularly
powerful learning tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary contributions of this
work are threefold. First, the findings could be applied to the development of a
globally competitive work force in STEM fields by helping to increase the
involvement of women. Second, the potential intellectual benefits include
developing new methods to foster growth mindsets that can be adapted and
integrated into any discipline concerned with increasing representation of
underrepresented and/or negatively stereotyped groups. Further, the results
could contribute to a variety of disciplines (e.g., communication studies, the
learning sciences, computer science) invested in understanding how virtual
technologies can provide unique learning opportunities. Third, this research
will engage undergraduate students in cutting-edge interdisciplinary research.
These students, the majority of whom are female and/or minorities, will gain
valuable experience in the research process, preparing them for doctoral studies
in a scientific discipline. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition