* 1327316
* GOALI: Next-Generation Energy-Efficient Minimum Quantity Lubrication Deep Hole Drilling
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* Steven Skerlos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2018
* USD 347,904.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research
project investigates an environmentally benign minimum quantity lubrication
(MQL) technology, aiming to eliminate cooling system in production in order to
enable cost-effective, energy efficient manufacturing, for drilling of the
compacted graphite iron, a difficult-to-machine material in light-weight
automotive powertrain applications. Drilling is the most common process in
powertrain manufacturing but challenging with MQL due to tool wear and hole
geometrical error caused by excessive heat and chip clogging. Specifically, this
research will explore the feasibility of adding cooling capability to form the
next-generation MQL to overcome this challenge. Cooling will be achieved by
Joule-Thompson effect when high-pressure gas expands to the atmosphere at the
cutting edge. Two gas sources, supercritical phase of carbon dioxide and
compressed air, are selected for study because of their superior cooling
capability. This research develops a drilling thermal model to quantitatively
describe the cooling effects on the drill bit and workpiece, respectively, under
a variety of conditions to allow predicting temperature distribution during
drilling. Tool wear and workpiece distortion models will also be established
based on the drilling thermal model. Upon selection of proper MQL conditions for
drilling, a life cycle assessment will be performed to quantify the energy
saving and sustainability of this new technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
results will provide knowledge and understanding to develop the next-generation
MQL for industry. Elimination of the flood cooling system can create significant
savings in manufacturing operations. This research can also benefit industries
where MQL is applicable. The GOALI project features a long-term and close
collaboration between Ford Motor Company's Advanced Manufacturing Technology
Development and University of Michigan, through which practical research with
industry partnership and the technology implementation can be realized. It will
also positively impact the engineering education by providing opportunities for
students in the plant environment.