* 1327414
* Student Travel Support to Attend the 2013 Gaseous Electronics Conference, September 30 - October 4, 2013; Princeton, NJ, USA
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Mikhail Shneider, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 06/30/2014
* USD 10,000.00

The Gaseous Electronics Conference (GEC) is the leading international conference
in the science and technology of LTP (Low Temperature Plasmas) combined with
collision physics (CP). The conference has been the venue of the first
presentations on world leading developments in investigations of LTP and CP
topics including lighting and lasers, plasma materials processing of relevance
to the semiconductor and photovoltaics industry, and plasma application in
biomedicine. The invited speakers represent the world's leading scientists in
these fields. The future of any field depends upon attracting bright young
people. The GEC has a strong tradition of encouraging and promoting student
participation. The GEC has an enviable reputation of being the first conference
that many of the leading members of the community presented their first research
results as graduate students. This award pays partial travel support for PhD
students to attend and present the results of their work at the meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal include the
opportunity for young scientists to attend one of the most important conferences
in their field. They will have the opportunity to observe first-hand the
scientific and cultural diversity of the field, and establish what will
hopefully be career long collaborations with their international counterparts.
The GEC makes a special effort to support graduate students who are women and
underrepresented minorities.