* 1327315
* Ice Drilling Program Office
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2020
* Mary Albert, Dartmouth College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Paul Cutler
* 10/31/2020
* USD 22,173,505.00

Albert/1327315&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support to the Ice
Drilling Program Office (IDPO) and Ice Drilling Design and Operations (IDDO)
group to provide community leadership in ice drilling research and development.
The goal is to enhance communication and information exchange related to ice
coring and drilling science and technology and to establish activities in
collaboration with the science and engineering community that will contribute to
new discoveries in climate and environmental science that are important to
society. Through collaboration with the IDDO and the science community, new
technology needs will be identified, plans will be developed to acquire this
technology and the existing drills that are available will be provided to
scientists to support their research, along with drillers (when needed) who have
the expertise to operate the drills. The intellectual merit of this project
relates to the importance of ice cores and boreholes through the polar ice
sheets that have led to many important discoveries and have revolutionized
climate science. These discoveries have also had important impacts on policy and
thus also have societal relevance. Continued U.S. scientific leadership in this
area depends critically not only on the support of scientists doing this
research but also on the continued support to the engineering community for
technology development activities. International collaboration and cooperation
in ice coring and drilling through the International Partnerships in Ice Core
Sciences (IPICS) is also critical for sustaining drilling expertise and
development of innovations in drilling technology. The broader impacts of this
effort include the importance of the effective planning, coordination , and
execution of ice drilling projects defined by the science community to meet
long-range science goals. These programs will include a diverse range of
students and other personnel who will go on to careers in science, engineering,
and technology and who will contribute in various ways to discoveries with
societal relevance. The education and outreach programs of IDPO will foster
diversity through a partnership with the American Meteorological Society that
will expose a network of faculty from minority institutions and community
colleges to the field of ice coring and drilling science and engineering. As
part of this program the faculty will be given the tools they need to provide
their students with cutting-edge lessons and insight into inspiring careers in
science and engineering. IDPO outreach efforts will sustain the pipeline of
scientists and engineers by continuing to support activities and programs of the
Association of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) and will advance public
literacy by humanizing the face of climate science by promoting interviews of
science community members on mainstream media and television shows. This award
will have field work in both Greenland and Antarctica.