* 1327359
* Some Contributions to Sampling Theory with Applications
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Malay Ghosh, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2016
* USD 160,185.00

This project will develop methods for small area estimation. Small area
estimation generally requires the use of models, either explicitly or
implicitly. These model-based estimates can differ widely from the direct
estimates, especially for areas with very low sample sizes. While model-based
small area estimates are very useful, one potential difficulty with these
estimates is that when aggregated, the overall estimate for a larger
geographical area may be quite different from the corresponding direct estimate,
which is usually believed to be more reliable. One way to avoid this problem is
the so-called "benchmarking approach," which amounts to modifying these model-
based estimates so that one gets the same aggregate estimate for the larger
geographical area. This research project will develop a general two-stage
Bayesian benchmarking procedure using a single model. With this approach, for
example, the state per capita income estimates would be benchmarked to the
national per capita income estimate and the corresponding county estimates to
the benchmarked state estimates without requiring two separate models. The
researcher will develop Bayesian pseudo-empirical likelihood for estimating
finite population distribution functions and the corresponding population
quantiles. The approach will be extended to estimation of the population
distribution function in the small area context where the goal is the same but
for which one needs individual estimates for local areas, often involving very
small sample sizes. This makes it necessary to "borrow strength" through linking
models based on auxiliary information available from censuses or other
administrative records. The third component of the research involves inference
under informative sampling based on copula models. The copula model to be
considered in this project allows dependence in modeling the selection
probabilities in terms of the observed outcomes. This is in contrast to the
currently available method, which assumes independence in this modeling.

The methods to be developed from this project have multiple applications and
will be of value to a broad range of survey researchers. In particular, the
research on two-stage benchmarks will be of relevance for many of the Federal
statistical agencies. The work on empirical likelihood, with particular emphasis
on estimation of small area poverty indicators, is an extremely timely topic.
Finally, the research on informative sampling will be of value to researchers
across many fields, including epidemiology and economics.