* 1327093
* EAGER: Toward Large Scale Manufacturing and Engineering of Two-Dimensional Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Pulickel Ajayan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 06/30/2015
* USD 129,413.00

The objective of this program is to develop a robust and scalable vapor phase
based manufacturing and engineering strategy to produce wafer-scale high quality
MoS2 atomic layers, a highly promising 2D semiconductor, and their in-plane
hybrids with graphene and h-BN towards high performance and extremely compact 2D
electronic devices. A systematic quality evaluation procedure including
structural, electrical and mechanical characterizations will also be
established, followed by detailed device characterizations to provide critical
feedbacks for the manufacturing and engineering process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to realize the potential of
large scale manufacturing and rational engineering of several emerging 2D
materials for future 2D electronic device applications. It is very exciting to
be able to control the domain shapes and sizes of several in-plane
heterostructures through atomic layer engineering. In fact, with the appropriate
selection of atomic layers of materials with different electronic properties,
entire devices could be engineered and fabricated within a single atomic layer,
bringing a completely new dimension to device technologies and representing a
truly transformative advancement for future
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are promoting
interdisciplinary research and educational efforts integration from physics,
chemistry and engineering communities in the next decade. Graduate students
and/or post-doctoral fellows will be positively impacted as they will be
undertaking important research assignments in this project. Cross-boundary
educational efforts, due to the nature of this research, would be strongly
encouraged to train talents who would contribute to scientific discovery and
engineering innovation in this emerging field in US.