* 1327767
* Support for U.S. Participation in the 2013 Canadian-American-Mexican Graduate Student Physics Conference (CAM2013); Waterloo, Canada; August 15 - 18, 2013
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Amy Flatten, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 11/30/2014
* USD 26,960.00

This award provides support to the American Physical Society (APS) for
conference planning and student travel to participate in the joint Canadian, US,
and Mexican physical societies' graduate student conference (CAM2013), to be
hosted by the University of Waterloo in Waterloo, Canada, from August 15-18,
2013. The scientific program will include plenary talks by invited scientists in
physics sub-disciplines such as Quantum Computing, Particle and Accelerator
Physics, Theoretical Physics, Earth and Atmospheric Physics, Atomic/Molecular
Physics and Material Physics. The plenary sessions will be followed by
contributed talks from the students. There will be two panel discussions titled
"Collaborating Across Borders," and "Doing Physics in Times of Austerity,"
highlighting CAM2013's goal to foster international physics collaboration. A
student poster session will round out the scientific program. All student
participants will present their research in either a contributed talk or poster
session. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By bringing together scientists and students in
an informal setting, the conference will also enable students to explore and
discuss career options available to young physicists. Through special topical
and technical sessions, students will have the opportunity to gain a broader
view of physics beyond their own classrooms and research laboratories. The
meeting will generate scientific exchange among the student participants,
promote international collaborations among young scientists within the North
American continent, expose graduate students to sub-disciplines in physics
beyond their individual research areas, and promote interdisciplinary research
within the sub-disciplines. The meeting's organization is carried out by the
students. Overall, it will provide excellent training for next generation of
researchers in the U.S.