* 1327317
* The 7th USA-China Chemical Engineering Conference, Beijing, China, Ocotber 14 - 18, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Norman Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2014
* USD 30,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yang, Ralph T.&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1327317&lt;br/&gt;Title: The
7th USA - China Chemical Engineering Conference, Beijing, China, October 14 -
18, 2013&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will provide funds for individual
travel grant awards to U.S. speakers, authors of papers, and particularly young
academic participants to ?The 7th USA-China Chemical Engineering Conference,? to
be held in Beijing, China, on October 14-18, 2013. The $30,000 will provide for
approximately 30 partial travel grant awards to U.S. speakers, authors of
papers, particularly young academic participants at the Conference. Travel
awards will be made based on the following considerations: (1) scientific or
technological merit of the speaker/participant; (2) professional qualifications
relative to age and position; (3) institutional and geographical distribution.
All awards will be made in full compliance with the Civil Rights Acts of 1964.
NSF travel policies with respect to U.S. air carriers will be
followed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
theme of the conference is: "Opportunities and Challenges of Chemical
Engineering: Frontiers of Chemical Engineering and Future Development of the
Chemical Industry." The Conference is co-sponsored by Chinese Academy of
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science, the Chemical Industry &amp; Engineering
Society of China (CIESC), and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers
(AIChE). The purpose of the Conference is to provide a forum for U.S. Chemical
Engineers to meet their counterpart in China to discuss the latest advances,
exchange research ideas and discuss opportunities for
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Global issues such as new and renewable energy sources, clean fuels,
sustainability and the environment will be among the focal points of discussion.
These should be beneficial to the U.S. participants and lead to the development
of new research ideas and collaborations. The direct face to face communication
will facilitate development and expansion of the potentially vast markets in
China as well as Asia for U.S. chemical products.