* 1327658
* CDI-Type I: Collaborative Research: High-Dimensional Phase-Space Subdivisions for Seismic Imaging
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2013
* Lexing Ying, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2013
* USD 67,856.00

This award supports a research program aimed at designing mathematically-
informed computational tools for processing large, high-dimensional seismic
datasets that display directional structure along lower-dimensional manifolds.
The progress that occurred over the past few decades in seismic imaging has
largely ignored growing data-related complications, such as coherent noise,
multiple scattering, irregular acquisition geometries, and simultaneous
acquisition. Computational harmonic analysis provides solutions to these
problems by formulating optimization problems that leverage sparsity in a
transformed domain. These tools can however not be relied upon for very large
scale inversion tasks, because they are not computationally advantageous in such
regimes. This project revisits the mathematical underpinnings of multiscale
directional transforms with a view toward designing low-redundancy, high-
dimensional architectures that should be competitive for even the most data-
intensive inversion scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moore's law of exponential
increase in computing performance is not often matched by exponential progress
in the computational sciences. The culprit is the lack of scalability of
mainstream algorithms: the size of problems that can be solved grows more slowly
than hardware capabilities. In increasingly many applications, the input of
mathematicians is needed to help engineers and applied scientists rethink the
design of numerical codes to avoid this curse of scalability. This project is an
effort to take a step back and introduce new algorithmic ideas for seismic
imaging, the discipline concerned with imaging the subsurface of the Earth.
Seismic imaging is the energy sector's main predictive tool for hydrocarbon,
water, and geothermal energy prospection. It is at the heart of monitoring
techniques for reservoirs and carbon sequestration experiments. It has proved
useful to geophysicists who debate the geological composition of the Earth's
mantle. High-resolution seismic imaging is also starting to enable the Army and
the Air Force to detect IEDs. All these remote imaging problems have by now
become formidably complex computational questions that our generation will be
responsible for solving.