* 1327695
* Scientific Program Overview (SPO):  Plains Elevated Convection at Night (PECAN)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Tammy Weckwerth, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

The PECAN campaign is envisioned as a multi-agency project (NSF, NOAA, NASA,
DOE) designed to advance the understanding of continental nocturnal warm-season
precipitation. PECAN will focus on nocturnal convection in conditions with a
low-level jet and a stable boundary layer with the largest Convectively
Available Potential Energy located aloft. The findings should be applicable to
other continental regions with nocturnal thunderstorm maxima. PECAN has four
research foci: i) Nocturnal convective initiation; ii) Bore disturbances; iii)
Nocturnal mesoscale convective systems (MCSs); iv) Prediction of nocturnal
convection. PECAN will be conducted across northern Oklahoma, central Kansas and
into south-central Nebraska from 1 June to 15 July 2015. The PECAN campaign
calls for three aircraft with the NSF-University of Wyoming King Air and the
NASA DC-8 probing the pre-convective environment and the NOAA P-3 observing the
dynamical and microphysical characteristics of MCSs. The project design includes
the NCAR S-POL radar and several mobile and fixed scanning Doppler radars. A
unique aspect of the experimental design is the integration of a wide variety of
profiling systems into a fixed and mobile PECAN Integrated Sounding Array (PISA)
including Differential Absorption Lidars, Doppler lidars, and Raman lidars,
multi-channel microwave radiometers, infrared spectrometers, and acoustic
systems. Each of the 10 proposed PISA units will be highly complementary in
their capability to profile wind, temperature, water vapor, and aerosols. PECAN
proposes supplemental radiosonde soundings from National Weather Service and DOE
sites associated with their Southern Great Plains measurement
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;It is well
established convection is most common after sunset across the Great Plains in
summer, and much of the resulting precipitation falls from MCSs. Considerable
scientific debate, however, exists in the literature as to the dynamical
mechanisms that initiate, organize and maintain this nocturnal convection.
Recent modeling and observational case studies have shown that nocturnal
convection in this stable, low-level jet environment frequently triggers bores,
undular bores and solitary waves [hereafter referred to as bores]. These bores
are associated with intense upward net parcel displacements (e.g., 0.5-1.0 km)
in the lowest ~3 km, which destabilizes the nocturnal environment. While
idealized modeling studies suggest that bore lifting can maintain convection in
the presence of a nocturnal stable layer, little observational evidence exists
for any feedbacks between this lifting and the organization, intensity,
initiation and maintenance of nocturnal systems. PECAN will be the first modern
campaign designed to examine bore structure and these potential feedbacks, which
distinguishes it from other campaigns that have studied deep convection in the
central USA. Since the generation and structure of these disturbances depends on
the details of the MCS cold pool and storm-relative flow patterns, PECAN will
address the dynamics and microphysics of nocturnal MCSs as well as the
initiation and prediction of nocturnal convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The PISA measurement approach makes PECAN particularly well
suited to testing the national goals outlined in "Observing Weather and Climate
from the Ground Up: A Nationwide Network of Networks" (NRC 2009), "When Weather
Matters: Science and Service to Meet Critical Societal Needs" (NRC 2010) and the
follow-up workshop on in the US, Thermodynamic Profiling Technologies (Carbone
et al. 2012) and Canada. The project has considerable educational involvement
through graduate students and potential links to REU programs. The broader
impact of PECAN is also driven in large part by poor prediction of nocturnal
convection coupled with their importance to hydrology, energy and agriculture
and the public safety risk of MCS severe and hazardous weather. PECAN research
will impact the nation's forecasting and numerical weather prediction
capabilities through collaborative efforts between the academic community and
NOAA's National Severe Storms Laboratory. The effort is highly relevant to
NOAA's goal to assess the increasing dependence of storm-scale prediction on
numerical modeling, as in the Warn on Forecast Initiative. The project will
assist in developing and applying space-based remote sensing, weather prediction
and climate modeling through NASA participation.