* 1327466
* REU Site:   Interdisciplinary research in a diverse Appalachian ridge and valley ecosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 01/22/2013,08/31/2015
* Rita Fincher, Samford University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2015
* USD 240,000.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Samford University that will provide research training for 12 students, for 9
weeks during the summers of 2013-2014. The program focuses on multidisciplinary
research to study interactions in complex systems ranging from the molecular to
the landscape scale in a diverse Appalachian ridge and valley ecosystem at Oak
Mountain State Park (OMSP) near Birmingham, AL. There are a wide range of
potential student projects, involving both field and laboratory research, to
address questions in ecology, population biology, botany, geography, plant
chemistry, molecular biology, cell biology and pathogenesis. Mentors are from
the Departments of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Chemistry, Geography,
and Pharmacy at Samford University. REU students have access to a wide array of
individual labs, core facilities (e.g., electron microscopy, LC-MS, cell
culture), and the unique OMSP research facility. Students are expected to
perform full-time research and to participate in weekly workshops on ethical
conduct in research, data analysis, professional communication skills, career
opportunities, and the graduate school application process. In addition to the
research process, students will participate in professional development
activities, and field trips. Discussions with mentors, experts, and fellow
students will help participants compare complex biological and biochemical
interactions across research topics. Students are selected based on academic
record, professional goals, and potential for outstanding research. Outstanding
undergraduate students who have limited opportunities to participate in research
at their home institutions and students from underrepresented minority groups
are particularly encouraged to apply. Students are tracked to determine their
continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the
lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the program
will be assessed by various means, including an REU common assessment tool. More
information is available by visiting www.Samford.edu/REU, or by contacting the
PI (Dr. Malia Fincher at rmfinche@samford.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Betsy Dobbins
at egdobbin@samford.edu).