* 1327611
* Ionizable Residue Interactions in Tilted Transmembrane Helices
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Roger Koeppe, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2018
* USD 684,485.00

This project addresses fundamental gaps in understanding the consequences of
ionization and dynamics for the biological function of proteins in lipid-bilayer
membranes. Solid-state magnetic resonance experiments will provide crucial
benchmarks for the validation and integration of theory, computation and
experiment. The experiments will employ a novel ?host? peptide design, in which
minimal numbers of chemically distinct aromatic amino acid residues serve to
position a tilted transmembrane helix near a ?tipping point? in lipid bilayer
membranes. Within this context, the systematic incorporation of specific
ionizable (potentially charged) ?guest? residues will provide important new
insights concerning ionization behavior and protein-lipid molecular interactions
that are essential for the biological functions of many classes of membrane
proteins. In addition to fundamental insights about lipids and proteins, the
project will advance the understanding of molecular mechanisms that may govern
the functioning of potassium channels, acetylcholine receptors and integrins,
among other membrane proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will extend
longstanding commitments to community outreach and early involvement of
undergraduate students in cutting-edge research. An overarching goal is the
recruitment of new creative minds to lifelong careers dedicated to scientific
discovery, while at the same time broadening the base for participation of non-
traditional individuals and underrepresented groups in science. The project will
contribute and enhance the undergraduate research opportunities?beginning at the
freshman and sophomore levels. Additional efforts are devoted to the
coordination of a statewide infrastructure for undergraduate research in
Arkansas, a community Science Café and a protein virtual reality lab.