* 1327683
* A Science Support Office for the International Ocean Discovery Program
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Gee, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kevin Johnson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 12,918,813.00

The International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) will serve to advance basic
research in the marine geosciences and will be supported by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) and more than 25 other international partners. IODP builds on a
rich legacy of scientific ocean drilling pioneered by NSF in the 1960's with the
Deep Sea Drilling Project, which provided a test of the plate tectonic
hypothesis and a basic reconnaissance of deep sea sediments and crustal rocks.
This was followed in 1985 by the Ocean Drilling Program, which focused on
examination of Earth, ocean and climate processes. The current 26-member
Integrated Ocean Drilling Program commenced in 2003 and has served as an
expanded program of scientific ocean drilling based on "Earth, Oceans and Life:
Scientific Investigations of the Earth System Using Multiple Drilling Platforms
and new Technologies; Integrated Ocean Drilling Program Initial Science Plan,
2003 - 2013" (http://www.iodp.org/initial-science-plan).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program is
terminating as planned in September, 2013, ocean drilling remains an essential
capability in modern geoscience research and education and is used to examine
processes ranging from changes in the Earth's climate to the rifting and
drifting of continents. Drilling is the primary tool for sampling sediment and
crustal rock from the 70 percent of the Earth?s surface covered by oceans, and
is the only technique for sampling anything more than a few meters deeper than
the ocean floor. Thus, the new IODP will commence October 1, 2013, utilizing the
new science plan Illuminating Earth?s Past, Present, and Future
(http://www.iodp.org/Science-Plan-for-2013-2023/) based on the planning efforts
of over 600 international ocean and earth scientists. The plan identifies the
following four themes for initial emphasis in the new IODP:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate and Ocean Change: Reading the Past, Informing the
Future targets one of society?s most pressing questions?how will climate, the
ocean, and ice sheets respond to ongoing increases in greenhouse gases?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biosphere frontiers: Deep Life, Biodiversity, and
Environmental Forcing of Ecosystems will focus on exploration of deep life
within the subseafloor, where microbes isolated from the photosynthetic world
live at the limits of habitability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth Connections: Deep
Processes and Their Impact on Earth?s Surface Environment will examine the links
between surface, lithospheric, and deep Earth
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth in Motion: Processes and Hazards on Human
Time Scales addresses dynamic processes that occur on human time scales,
including those leading to and resulting from earthquakes, landslides, and
tsunami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The JOIDES Resolution, Chikyu, and Mission-
Specific Platform (MSP) drilling platforms will continue to be provided to IODP
by NSF, Japan, and the European Consortium for Ocean Research Drilling,
respectively, to address these science themes. The new science plan draws upon
lessons learned in the previous programs to build a much-simplified and
streamlined multi-platform international program based on cooperation rather
than integration. IODP planning for JOIDES Resolution operations will be
conducted under a Facilities Board rather than an integrated Science Advisory
Structure, and management and funding for JOIDES Resolution operations will
occur independently of the other IODP drilling platforms. The Facilities Board
(FB), already in place, is made up of scientists and governmental
representatives of nations contributing to JOIDES Resolution operations, as well
as representatives of the JOIDES Resolution science operator. The Facilities
Board is advised by Proposal Evaluation, Site Characterization, and
Environmental Protection and Safety Panels, and will be further served by a Site
Survey Databank (SSDB). The FB and its advisory panels will be utilized for
proposal review by other science operators in IODP. This new management
structure has been developed and accepted by the International Working Group+,
composed of governmental and science representatives from countries planning to
participate in the new IODP. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IODP Science Support
Office, to be provided by the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the
University of California, San Diego, will provide logistical support for the
Facilities Governing Board and its advisory panels, manage and archive IODP
Proposals and oversee their external review, and manage the SSDB. This
Cooperative Agreement provides financial support for the IODP Science Support
Office, and is intended to cover an initial five year, three month period
beginning on July 1, 2013. A Program Review will be held prior to completion of
the initial period and the results will guide a decision to re-compete or renew
the Cooperative Agreement for a second five year period. The initial three
months of award represents a start-up period designed to provide overlap with
and ensure critical exchange of files and documents with IODP Management
International, Inc. before NSF Contract OCE-0432224 for the IODP Central
Management Office expires September 30, 2013.