* 1327314
* CAREER:  Linking Nanoscale and Macroscale Viscoelastic Responses of Cementitious Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Zachary Grasley, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 176,612.00

The overall purpose of both the educational and research components of this
CAREER plan is to foster an improved understanding of multi-scale material
behavior in the civil engineering community. The principal objective of the
research plan is to link the inherent, aging viscoelastic properties of the
nanometric, cement paste phases to macroscale viscoelastic response of portland
cement paste. The research plan will utilize an integrated experimental,
analytical, and computational materials science approach to model the inherent
aging viscoelastic properties of the nanometric phases of hydrating portland
cement. Subsequently, the aging viscoelastic properties of bulk cement paste
will be modeled using composite microstructural finite element models. The
principal objective of the education plan is to develop an ?analogy inventory?
for improved education of future civil engineers with analogies as teaching
tools of abstract multi-scale materials science concepts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research and education plan will ultimately
transform the way concrete is designed, resulting in safer, more sustainable
concrete infrastructure. The educational component will revamp materials science
curricula for future engineers so that they have an improved grasp of the
influence of nanoscale properties on macroscale behavior of engineering
materials, allowing the findings from multi-scale material research to be
rapidly adopted in practice. The framework developed for the creation of analogy
inventories will be applicable to alternative disciplines, ultimately affecting
engineering education as a whole. Additionally, the methodology developed in
this project for modeling nanoscale aging viscoelastic properties will be
applicable to several other fields of study including biomechanics and polymer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;