* 1327573
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Transformation of Gallo-Roman Culture
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Katherine Erdman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 11,709.00

Examining human behaviors in the past, particularly ritual activity, can provide
insight into ritual practices and religious beliefs today. Erdman's project,
under the guidance of Dr. Peter Wells, examines the role of ritual offerings as
devices for communicating with the supernatural world through their deposition
into sacred watery places in the Gallo-Roman Period (50 BC - AD
450).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A freshwater spring, known as the Source of the
Douix, in Châtillon-sur-Seine, France will be used as a focus for comparison to
other sites. The quantities of recovered votive offerings and the near
continuous use of the site over two thousand years contain data that can help to
answer the following questions: How are the objects deposited in sacred spaces,
particularly those in water, used as communicative devices? Do the types of
objects change over time, and if so, how can these changes be explained using
archaeological evidence? Evidence from the Douix will then be used for multiple
levels of comparative analyses, such as comparison to other local sanctuaries,
regional watery sites (other springs, rivers and lakes), and regional
sanctuaries associated with mother goddesses. Detailed presence/absence analysis
will record the types of objects at each location, the materials or media
represented, and the types of deities at each location. Through detailed
comparisons of such data, it will be possible to recognize patterns of offerings
from place to place, and such patterns will help illuminate the purpose of the
offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to applying a new approach and
perspective to archaeological material that is overdue for more advanced
interpretation, the intellectual merit of this study is its potential to
influence multiple disciplines through its focus on the material side of ritual
practices and religion. Looking at offerings as objects chosen for their
communicative value is an idea that has the potential to influence
archaeological and anthropological studies of religion from all periods and
locations. Examining offerings in this way may also contribute to studies of the
Classical world, Religious Studies, and Material Culture Studies. Preliminary
results of this study have already been disseminated to the archaeological
community at national and international conferences and in a recent book
chapter. Additional plans include the collaborative monograph about the site
which is already in progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research
will be disseminated to both local inhabitants and tourists via the Musée du
Pays Châtillonnais, thus having a significant broader impact. The collection
from the Douix is visited by thousands of visitors a year, but little
information is available to the public. The Douix represents a unique
educational opportunity for visitors to see the archaeological site and the
artifacts recovered from the spring as they are within walking distance from one
another. A better understanding of the ritual practices that took place at the
Douix, and the ability to interact with the spring and the collection, will
bring the past alive and will foster a stronger sense of heritage in this
archaeologically rich region.