* 1327008
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in economics: Examining the Impact of Hybrids on the U.S. Automobile Market
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Steven Berry, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 9,155.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: SES - 1327008 &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;NSF Program: ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Berry, Steven T.&lt;br/&gt;Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research in economics:
Examining the Impact of Hybrids on the U.S. Automobile
Market&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to determine the impact
of hybrids on the United States automobile market by answering two questions:
how much utility have consumers gained from the creation of hybrids, and as a
result, how has the composition of the overall U.S. vehicle fleet changed over
time?&lt;br/&gt;Hybrids, which currently make up a significant and growing
portion of the vehicle fleet, have received a great deal of attention in recent
years due to their relevance in alternative energy and environmental protection
policies. However, while hybrids have factored into discussions on the impacts
of gasoline taxes or fuel-efficiency standards imposed on auto manufacturers,
the analysis of the overall benefits of hybrids remains incomplete.&lt;br/&gt;By
using data which track the vehicle holdings of households across a ten-year
period, this project will estimate how the creation of hybrids have benefited
the nation as a whole, and how much welfare can be expected from further
technological advancements in the market. Specifically, the project looks at the
period of 1999-2009 and examines the release of the 2004 Toyota Prius and the
release of hybrids in general, both of which occur during the observed time. The
2004 Prius is particularly interesting, as it is the first commercially
successful hybrid in the United States, and has been the best-selling hybrid in
every year. By estimating how consumers might have purchased differently if the
Prius and other hybrids had not been available, the research can determine how
much value hybrids bring to the market.&lt;br/&gt;The datasets used for this
project have two distinct advantages over those used in most studies of the
automobile market. First, the data track the same households over time. Most of
the research done on automobile markets draw on multiple years of data, but take
a random sample of households from each year. Since each year of the data
contains a new set of households, each family?s unique unobservable tastes
(e.g., a love of fast, powerful cars; the resolve to ?drive a car into the
ground?) cannot be controlled for in the analysis. As a result, the effect of
these tastes merges with the effect of vehicle purchases over time. However, by
identifying and controlling for each household over multiple years, this project
can control for the tastes effect, isolating the vehicle effect as
desired.&lt;br/&gt;Second, while most datasets differentiate between vehicles at
the level of year, make, and model, the data used for this research also
differentiates between gasoline and hybrid trims. Many of the hybrids on the
market in the late 2000s are alternative trims of gasoline-powered cars, such as
the Honda Civic and Toyota Camry. With this feature in the data, hybrids can be
distinguished from other vehicles, making the proposed analysis
possible.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the new model used by the project allows past
purchases to directly influence current purchases, a feature not shared by
models used by the recent econometrics literature. Previously, estimates of
impacts to the vehicle fleet were only applicable ten or more years after the
impact, since all consumers needed to be given a chance to respond to the
change. By examining past purchases, the model in this project controls for
households? tendencies to hold onto cars for several years regardless of impacts
to the market, making forecasts two to ten years after the impact possible. The
usefulness of the new model is not restricted to the automobile market; it can
be applied to many durable-goods markets (e.g., appliances, computers).