* 1327047
* Technology, ecology and behavior of Oldowan hominins
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Thomas Plummer, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2017
* USD 377,510.00

Humans (Homo sapiens) are distinctive relative to other primates. They have
large brains and are behaviorally flexible, they eat nutritionally dense foods
that are difficult to acquire and are extensively shared, and they depend on
culturally transmitted information, including technology, for their survival.
This package of traits allows Homo sapiens to adapt to a wide variety of
habitats. Through excavation of ca. 2.0 million year old Oldowan archaeological
sites on the Homa Peninsula, Kenya, this project will document adaptability of
human ancestors under conditions of environmental variability.

While technology is a key component of the human adaptive strategy, the
adaptive versatility of earlier species of Homo, and the importance of
technology to their survival, has not been well-documented. This project
investigates the behavior and ecology of early Homo through the excavation of
primary context stone tool and fossil assemblages at the localities of Kanjera
South, Nyayanga, and Sare River on the Homa Peninsula. These localities date
between 1.7 and 2.0 million years ago, a significant time interval during which
archaeological sites spread across Africa, and the human ancestor Homo erectus
appears in, and ultimately disperses out of, the continent. These localities
preserve paleohabitats ranging from riverine woodland to open grassland,
evidence of small antelope hunting as well as scavenging of larger animals,
evidence of plant food acquisition (e.g., tubers), and technologically diverse
tool assemblages. This project provides an excellent opportunity to assess the
adaptability of early Homo, by ascertaining whether they employed specific
technological strategies and foraging behaviors in response to environmental
variability.

The project will expand our understanding of the evolutionary significance of
Oldowan behavior, and the time depth of hominin dependence on culture for
survival. The broader impact of this project includes the training of four
doctoral students from the USA, and one based at the National Museums of Kenya.
Four of these students are women, an historically underprivileged group in
science. Finally, this project strengthens international collaboration, by
bringing together researchers from the United States, the United Kingdom, Italy,
China, and Kenya.