* 1327148
* Workshop on Big Data: From Signal Processing to Systems Engineering; to be held at Arlington Virginia, March 21-22, 2013.
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Nikolaos Sidiropoulos, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 01/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The White House announced in 2012 the Big Data Initiative to mobilize the
research and development enterprise towards Big Data analytics for solving some
of the nation's most pressing challenges. Signal processing and systems
engineering communities can be important contributors to Big Data research and
development, complementing computer and information science-based efforts in
this direction. Recognizing the need to engage these communities, this workshop
aims to bring together experts from various fields to carve out the role that
analytical and experimental engineering has to play in Big Data research and
development. Such a workshop will be unique in emphasizing signal analytics and
systems engineering aspects of Big Data. Time is of essence, as the premise is
to engage the engineering community and help shape up research directions for
the next few years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will address key questions in big data analytics in engineering
disciplines. Topics of interest include multidimensional signal analytics that
build upon a signals and systems fabric, and systems engineering is sure to play
an important role in designing and deploying such large, distributed, fault-
tolerant systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will help engage engineering disciplines in Big Data research and development.
The discussion results from the workshop will have significant impact on the
research and development for big-scale engineering projects in the data-driven
information age, as well as the training and education for future engineers. The
workshop report will provide a useful resource for the scientific community and
general public.