* 1328270
* Attentional selection from natural scenes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Sabine Kastner, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 528,841.00

One of the great challenges of cognitive neuroscience is to reveal the neural
mechanisms underlying perceptual and cognitive processes that are utilized under
naturalistic conditions. Selecting an object from a cluttered environment such
as a natural scene presents a particularly complicated problem, since the exact
location of the object is often unknown, and an object has an almost infinite
number of visual appearances. Despite these challenges, the visual system has an
extraordinary capability to extract categorical information quickly and
efficiently from natural scenes (e.g. detecting cars when crossing a street).
However, little is known about the neural mechanisms related to such real-world
search. Dr. Sabine Kastner, Princeton University, will use complementary
methodological approaches, including psychophysics, functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), and electrocorticography (ECoG) to address this gap by
performing a series of three studies. Based on her recent findings, she
hypothesizes that categorical selection from natural scenes is mediated through
the formation of category-specific search templates, which are instantiated in
visual cortex to facilitate processing of matching objects, but are generated
through interactions with higher-order cortex. The goal of the project is to
characterize such attentional search templates with respect to (i) their source,
(ii) their temporal dynamics, and (iii) their featural or semantic
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selection of relevant information from
cluttered natural environments for further processing is one of the most
fundamental cognitive abilities for guiding behavior. This becomes strikingly
clear when the attentional selection mechanisms fail, such as in individuals
afflicted with attention-deficit disorder (ADHD), visuo-spatial hemineglect,
which is often observed following stroke, and schizophrenia. Therefore, progress
in understanding the neural mechanisms underlying attentional selection is
essential. The project will shed light specifically on how we select visual
information under the endlessly variable conditions of our natural environments,
thereby transforming this area of research from laboratory conditions to the
real world. Dr. Kastner's research program offers training opportunities for
students at all levels of education including high school students. The project
will also serve Dr. Kastner's continued outreach to K-12 science education
through lectures and teacher collaboration as well her efforts to foster the
early careers of female scientists. Finally, Dr. Kastner will participate in the
big data sharing effort by making the data available to support efforts to make
use of real data in the teaching of STEM-related courses and to enable
participation in discovery science by those who would otherwise have no access
to such data.