* 1328816
* NRI: Large: Collaborative Research: Fast and Accurate Infrastructure Modeling and Inspection with Low-Flying Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Jerome Hajjar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 328,050.00

The goal of this project is to transform the efficiency, fidelity, and safety of
current critical infrastructure inspection methods by combining human judgment
with machine intelligence through the development of an autonomous robotic
inspection assistant. The proposed work utilizes small aerial robots, coupled
with three-dimensional imaging and the state-of-the-art in planning, modeling,
and analysis to develop safe and efficient, high-precision assessment of
structures. The key themes of the proposed work are: (1) rapid infrastructure
modeling and analysis of large complex structures via a small autonomous aerial
robot with 3D mapping capabilities; (2) immersive inspection and structural
assessment to combine shape and appearance into an integrated representation
amenable to structural health evaluation by an inspector; and (3) adaptive
aerial vehicle motion plans that seek to learn from the experience of human
inspectors and facilitate as autonomous inspection assistants. The proposed work
is exploring the role of humans in the entire cycle from deployment of flying
robots to registering data to the assessment. This project brings together
members of participating communities and is developing curriculum to engage
undergraduate and graduate students from robotics and civil engineering in the
proposed research.