* 1328230
* CAREER: Fast Algorithms for Oscillatory Integrals
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Lexing Ying, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 216,550.00

Many challenging computational problems related to high frequency wave phenomena
can be formulated mathematically as integral equations and transforms with
oscillatory kernels. The PI proposes to leverage the ideas of
multidirectionality and butterfly computation to develop fast and accurate
algorithms for oscillatory integral equations and transforms, with targeted
applications in acoustic and electromagnetic scattering, numerical wave
propagation, and reflection seismology. The proposed research activities
include: (1) fast and parallel algorithms for the $N$-body problems and the
boundary integral equations of high frequency acoustic and electromagnetic
scattering, (2) an optimal complexity algorithm for computing Fourier integral
operators with applications in high frequency wave propagation and seismic
migration, (3) an optimal complexity algorithm for sparse Fourier transform
where the spatial and Fourier samples are supported only on a low dimensional
manifold, and (4) an optimal complexity algorithm for partial Fourier transform
where the frequency summation is restricted to a spatial dependent domain. The
education part of includes the following components (1) mentoring students and
postdocs through participating the proposed research activities, (2) curriculum
development through developing a new course that focuses on the fast algorithms
in multiscale and multidirectional computation and publishing survey papers on
these topics, and (3) organizing summer schools and lecture series that aim to
present students with recent developments in computational
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through developing robust and accurate
numerical algorithms with optimal complexity, this research will significantly
improve our ability of understanding large scale physical problems of
oscillatory nature. The algorithms to be developed in the proposed research
activities will have direct applications in acoustic and electromagnetic
scattering, reflection seismology, and medical imaging. The PI will also work
closely with researchers from industrial and government laboratories to
disseminate ideas and deliver operational softwares for realistic challenging
applications. The development of a new generation of numerical algorithms and
softwares requires researchers to understand different aspects of computational
mathematics. The research and educational components will integrate together to
(1) help train a new generation of researchers who master algorithmic design,
mathematical analysis, and software development, and (2) promote the awareness
and interests in computational mathematics among undergraduates and
underrepresented groups (female and minority students).&lt;br/&gt;