* 1328688
* IBSS: Understanding the Dynamics of Local Health Systems in Developing Countries: Decentralization and Polycentric Governance Theory
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jane Menken, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 998,555.00

This interdisciplinary research project focuses on the institutional conditions
that shape the performance of local health systems in developing countries. The
problem motivating the project is the inability of health systems in many
countries to prevent extreme health disparities and human suffering.
Decentralization reforms that operate on the premise that local institutional
arrangements can provide public services better than central government agencies
are a ubiquitous response to these disparities. The problem is that theoretical
arguments for health-sector decentralization are underdeveloped, and empirical
results assessing whether reformed systems produce healthier communities are
mixed. The project will focus on explaining why some local health systems
perform better than others. The researchers will address this question by
developing and testing specific hypotheses about the ways governance structure
affects the performance of local health systems. The project has three
components. The researchers will draw on work in new institutionalism and
polycentric governance to develop a theory linking decentralization, behavior
patterns, and the performance of local health systems. They will collect time-
series, cross-sectional, and social network data for 250 local health systems in
Honduras, half of which have been decentralized to local organizations and the
remainder managed by the central government. The researchers will combine
existing longitudinal health data with socioeconomic and institutional data, and
they will implement original social network mapping, survey data collection, and
behavioral experiments with health system actors in the field. They will use
these data to test several hypotheses about the ways governance structure
affects health-system performance through changes in the behavior of local
organizations and individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate
evidence about the local and institutional factors that affect disparities in
the performance of health systems in developing countries. The questions
examined are of theoretical significance, because they address how public
policies affect societal outcomes through human institutions, as well as
organizational and individual behavior. By building theory, implementing an
innovative research design, constructing an original dataset, and employing
quantitative and qualitative analyses to test theory, the researchers will
contribute robust findings about the institutional conditions that drive
differences in local health-system performance as well as the effectiveness of
health-sector decentralization. The project will have immediate practical value
as countries around the world struggle to create policies for effectively
administering health systems and improving community health. Project findings
will provide policy makers, analysts, and donors with a deeper understanding of
the factors influencing health system performance, specific recommendations for
improving that performance, and an innovative set of methods to evaluate the
effectiveness of governance reforms. The results of this work will be relevant
to numerous other sectors, such as education, agriculture, and the environment,
where central governments have also transferred policy-making power to lower
levels of government. This project is supported by the NSF Interdisciplinary
Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.