* 1328503
* IBSS: The Influence of Short-Term Financial Incentives on Social Norms and Behaviors
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2018
* John Kerr, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 600,713.00

This interdisciplinary research project focuses on the effects of short-term
monetary incentives on social systems and on longer-term behavior. In many
nations, there is a movement towards incentive-based programs to promote
environmental conservation, vaccination, school attendance, and other socially
desirable behaviors, but most such programs are government-or donor-funded, with
budgets subject to political processes and availability of funds. This makes
them vulnerable to elimination, raising the question of what will happen to
behaviors afterward. Economic models that drive the design of such programs are
ill-equipped to address this question. Some evidence suggests that financial
incentives can undermine or "crowd out" other sources of motivation derived from
social norms, but the reasons are poorly understood. Although communication
science has the potential to explain the effects of social norms and other
psycho-social factors on behaviors, it has not incorporated the effects of
monetary payments. This project will integrate economic models and theories of
the influence of social norm to explain and predict the ways in which monetary
incentives influence social norms and behaviors. The researchers will base their
work in Sanjiangyuan, a Chinese region in southern Qinghai Province on the
Tibetan Plateau. They will use interviews and surveys with research subjects to
develop culturally specific quantitative measures of social norms and related
variables. They will conduct a series of field experiments to test the causal
linkages posited among communication, monetary incentives, social norms, and
behaviors, and they will translate theoretical and empirical results to offer
possible policy modifications for the design of incentive-based environmental
conservation programs in the study region and elsewhere.

This project will provide new information and insights that will advance basic
knowledge and help improve the design of incentive-based environmental
conservation programs through a better understanding of their effects. By
integrating elements of economic theory and communication theory, the
researchers will improve societal understanding of how financial incentives and
social norms interact to influence behavior. Results from preliminary
experiments demonstrate the advantages of incorporating constructs from both
economic and communication theories in explaining and predicting behavior. This
project has the potential to explain, predict, and overcome the motivation
crowding out effects of monetary incentives. The study region provides a
compelling social, ecological, and political system for addressing the study
hypotheses because of a strong existing conservation ethic among the Tibetan
people and the potential introduction of a large-scale payment-for-ecosystem-
services program. By helping project managers and policy makers understand how
motivation crowding out operates, this project will help make the next
generation of environmental incentive-based social programs be more effective.
This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and
Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.