* 1328505
* Potential Impacts of Prospective Climate Change on Groundwater Recharge in the Western United States
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2016
* Thomas Meixner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 19,010.00

Groundwater withdrawals in the western US are a critical component of the water
resources strategy for the region. Recharge estimation methods include water
balance accounting, groundwater modeling, remote sensing, observational methods
and environmental tracer analysis. This project will assemble a team of
investigators to synthesize current understanding of recharge in the West and
how it may respond to climate change in the coming decades. The synthesis will
build on previous work that quantified major aquifer systems within the United
States under the USGS-Regional-Aquifer-System-Analysis program. The synthesis
will (1) draw upon geographically targeted process-based studies of recharge
controls and their sensitivity to climatic forcing in various parts of the
region; (2) take advantage of recently available dynamically downscaled climate-
change projections; (3) meld process-exploring results from high-resolution
water balance studies and modeling analyses. These approaches will be used to
develop enhanced estimates of groundwater recharge (with estimated
uncertainties) and a detailed list of research needs will be developed for more
robust estimates of groundwater recharge across the region. This project is
cooperative with the USGS John Wesley Powell Center Science Board.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly advance regional knowledge
of the controls on groundwater recharge and the impact this has on regional
water sustainability for the US southwest. By synthesizing the state of
knowledge as well as the best methods of analysis and reanalysis, the project
will define new methods (and better estimates) of regional scale groundwater
recharge. The project will also significantly impact water resource and water
management strategy for the southwest by providing an improved basis for long
timescale analysis.