* 1328928
* IBSS: Cultural Evolution of Human Communication Systems: Investigating Linguistic Diversity and Social Change with Maya Hieroglyphic Writing
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mark Collard, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 829,086.00

This interdisciplinary research project will focus on the impact of linguistic
variation and social change on the evolution of ancient writing systems. Writing
is one of the most important inventions in human history. It not only enables
communication at much larger social scales than speech or sign-language, but it
also facilitates the spread of complex messages among individuals separated in
space and time. Writing also expands human memory, allowing for the accumulation
and transmission of large amounts of cultural knowledge across many generations.
These capabilities make writing one of the few truly transformative innovations
in human history. Despite the significance of this technology, the development
of writing and its impact on broader societal affairs remains poorly understood.
This project will be undertaken by an interdisciplinary team from linguistics,
art history, archaeology, and evolutionary anthropology. They will examine the
role of linguistic and social factors in the development of Classic Maya writing
(from roughly 250 to 900 AD), one of the best examples of a deciphered ancient
script. They will address a set of fundamental questions related to key
dimensions of ancient scripts: (1) the relationships between language evolution
and the development of written communication systems, (2) the technological
production of texts and the organization of scribal communities, and (3) the
social and historical contexts of ancient writing traditions. Within each of
these topics, they will evaluate a set of competing hypotheses by applying new
analytical techniques from the social sciences and evolutionary biology to the
Maya Hieroglyphic Database, a unique and comprehensive record of Classic Maya
writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce important new insights
into the relationships between cultural and linguistic diversity, population
dynamics, and the development of complex human communication networks. The
findings of this project will significantly refine basic understanding of the
evolution of Classic Maya writing in terms of how the production and
dissemination of texts and images influenced societal change. The project also
will demonstrate the value of a powerful set of analytical techniques for
studying the evolution of cultural traditions. A significant outcome of this
project is a comprehensive digital record of Maya hieroglyphic texts, which will
be made widely accessible on the Internet. This digital archive will appeal to
the general public and to a broader scientific community, including native Maya
speakers and indigenous scholars. New international partnerships among
universities and disciplines will promote teaching, training, and collaboration
among social scientists. The project will engage undergraduate and graduate
students from multiple disciplines in collaborative research and in the conduct
of new analytical techniques. Project findings and the data produced by the
project will enhance general capabilities to understand the impact of
linguistic, cultural, and historical factors on the development of human
communication systems, topic with considerable societal relevance. This project
is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences
Research (IBSS) competition.