* 1328157
* US-Latin American Workshop in Neuroendocrinology, Sao Paolo, Brazil
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Tao-Yiao Wu, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2015
* USD 49,890.00

This International workshop, being held in Sao Paolo, Brazil August 4-7, 2013,
is focused on the neuroendocrinology of stress. Neuroendocrinology is
fundamental to basic function and has implications in all aspects of life
including neuroscience, endocrinology and even immunology and microbiology. On a
broader scale, neuroendocrinology explains how an individual interacts in
society and with the environment. While there are significant number of
scientists studying neuroendocrine systems in the United States and in Latin
America, interactions between these two groups have lagged. Given the recent
advances in the field of neuroendocrinology, the goal of this workshop is to
facilitate a consortium of US and South American neuroendocrinologists who can
accelerate progress in this dynamic and growing area of science in the era of
the globalization of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The
objective of this workshop is to determine how the stress circuitry functions
normally, how it can become dysregulated in adulthood and what this
dysregulation means for health and disease. This workshop will focus on gaining
a better understanding of the neuroplastic changes in the brain during
development and adulthood in response to changing hormonal and environmental
conditions. The outcome of this workshop will provide future directions that
this burgeoning field should take. The questions will be addressed by describing
the results of studies using state-of-the-art techniques that include genetic,
epigenetic, molecular, biochemical and behavioral approaches.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This workshop is part of a longer term initiative to
establish collaborative interactions between US and South American scientists
and trainees. It is the added goal to give US students the benefit of an
international experience. This grant will fund US young investigators (graduate
students and investigators who are within 10 years of obtaining a PhD).
Competitively selected young investigators will also have the opportunity to
author a review article with senior mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
being co-funded by the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and NSF's Office of International and
Integrative Activities.