* 1328172
* IBSS-Ex: Comprehending and Regulating Financial Crises
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Gary Richardson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2016
* USD 249,928.00

This project focuses on how financial crisis is understood, how financial models
are constructed and deployed, and how regulators attempt to solve financial
crisis. It bears on fundamental dimensions of human behavior: How do market
actors, experts, and regulators understand financial markets? How do they
comprehend crises, and, consequently, what decisions do they make in the context
of existing political and institutional structures? Many researchers have tried
to pinpoint the causes of the financial crisis of 2008, to show how this
financial crisis resembled those that came before, or to identify the optimal
method for regulating financial institutions in wake of the crisis. Those
attempts are dissatisfying because they are limited to inquiry within one
disciplinary field. Our multidisciplinary approach engages natural and social
sciences and the humanities, and draws on the broadest possible base of
expertise and methods, including formal modeling, experimental research,
statistical analysis, case studies, historical analysis, and ethnographic
research. We focus on two central issues. First, we examine models of finance
and crisis by conducting: a) formal analysis of classes of probability
distributions used to represent returns; b) content analysis of confidence in
financial models, awareness of their assumptions, and notions of crisis in
popular and professional press; and c) experimental research evaluating how
confidence in models influences investment behavior. Second, we analyze
regulatory responses to crisis by conducting: a) an ethnography and
retrospective ethnography of regulation at the Federal Reserve Bank of NY and at
federal regulatory bodies located in Orange County, California; and b) a case
study of the Securities and Exchange Commission?s response to the 1987 and
2007/08 crashes in the context of broader economic history of financial
regulation in the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finance is potentially one of the
most powerful tools for advancing the common good and national interest. As the
recent years have shown, when financial models and regulatory models go awry,
the consequences are severe and born by all sectors of society. This research
will contribute both to knowledge and to policy debates about financial
regulation. The project will produce several scholarly articles and a scholarly
monograph intended for a multidisciplinary audience. The project will also
result in training of a number of graduate and undergraduate students in
sociology, anthropology, economics and philosophy of science, and expose them to
a broad interdisciplinary collaboration that helps to overcome the tendency of
"silo thinking" in relation to this crucial issue of the apprehension of and
regulatory responses to crisis. The researchers have experience in bringing
their scholarly work to broader audiences and will use the forums and platforms
they have used in the past to promote their findings beyond academic audiences.
This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and
Social Sciences Research (IBSS).