* 1328545
* IBSS-Ex: The Adaptive Nature of Adult Literacy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Wai-Tat Fu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project focuses on the way adults with varying
age and cognitive profiles choose what to read in order to learn when they have
access to multiple sources of text. The contemporary science of literacy faces
challenges from rapid changes in the nature of both reading and the reader. As
literacy moves into electronic environments, learning rarely is characterized by
steady, linear progress through a textbook or given set of texts. Rather, it is
increasingly dependent on the learner's ability to effectively navigate through
multiple sources of information that self-regulates the flow of information. At
the same time, the population is rapidly aging, and longer lifespans as
associated with longer workspans, with the need for expanding skill sets placing
more demands on lifelong literacy. In this exploratory study, the researchers
will seek to understand how reading processes operate in contemporary ecologies
of literacy. The project is grounded in theories and methods from the
psychological, education, and computer sciences. Much is known about the
psychology and neuroscience of reading in terms of the cognitive processes
underlying how meaning is constructed from the printed word, but missing from
this perspective is the ecology of reading in which individuals must choose what
to read. This gap is addressed through the use of computer science approaches in
the study of web browsing, which consider how learners explore information
sources. These approaches neglect the processes through which mental
representations of meaning are created through the encounter with particular
texts, however. This project's researchers will start with the assumption that
in authentic ecologies of literacy, individuals both explore (search, navigate,
forage) and exploit (read) particular texts for various purposes, including
information gathering. Their emphasis will be on "reading in the wild" -- on how
these different phases of literacy interact and influence one another in complex
ecologies of literacy. A range of computational, experimental, and naturalistic
methods will be used, including studies of how individuals learn about a topic
through exploration on an electronic tablet, where they select buttons with
content cues to reveal sentences that provide information about the topic.
Patterns of choice, timing, and memory performance will be measured to build
models of exploration and information uptake (exploitation). This research is
will probe exploration as an adaptation that plays a domain-general role in
cognition, augments learning by increasing efficiency of information uptake, and
affords the opportunity for learners to achieve a match between text and
cognitive resources.

Models of learning in complex text environments are needed to guide
instructional design in new reading ecologies, especially among adults for whom
literacy engagement is primarily self-guided. This project will enrich
theoretical understanding of reading as a complex learning and problem solving
skill needed by people of all ages. It will develop a measurement and modeling
approach to study how people read when confronted with multiple options through
the use of data from electronic tablets that will allow the direct assessment of
literacy behaviors. The project also will involve graduate and undergraduate
students from educational psychology, computer science, and engineering in order
to enhance interdisciplinary education and training opportunities in literacy
science. This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral
and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.