* 1328567
* IBSS: The Interrelated Development of Language and Technology
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2014,01/31/2019
* Xiaoping Hu, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 355,112.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine how language and
technology, two defining human characteristics, are related to one another. The
project will place emphasis on the development of human technology from early
evolutionary transitions, such as stone tool-making and expansions of diets and
habitats, to more recent transformations, such as agricultural, industrial, and
information revolutions, in order to enhance basic understanding of these
patterns of ever accelerating change, including the origins of language. The
investigators will test the hypothesis that language is a special case of a more
general capacity for complex, hierarchically structured, goal-oriented behavior
evident in technology by integrating archaeological and neuroscience methods to
investigate possible functional, anatomical, and evolutionary connections
between language and tool-making. By investigating possible neural overlap
between language and tool-making, the project will test major evolutionary
hypotheses and promote integration between neuroscience and anthropology by
developing new and broadly applicable methods for studying complex, naturalistic
behavior. This project will pursue the hypothesis that hierarchical structure is
a unifying principle in human cognition, crossing behavioral domains that are
traditionally conceived as distinct. Project findings will have the potential to
powerfully impact perceptions of the nature and origins of human intelligence.

To address questions regarding how language and technology are related to each
other, this project will focus on the evolutionarily relevant, archaeologically
visible behavior of stone tool-making. Louis Leakey commented that stone tools
represent a form of "fossilised behavior" that can be used to make inferences
about the evolution of human dexterity, cognition, and cultural transmission
processes. The Early Stone Age accounts for roughly 90 percent of human
prehistory, covering a time period from roughly 2.6 million years to 250,000
years before the present. The development of stone tools encompassed a
technological progression from simple stone chips to skillfully shaped tools as
well as a nearly three-fold increase in brain size. It is likely that many
distinctive aspects of modern human brain structure and function evolved during
this period. In order to study this proto-typical human technology using the
modern methods of neuroscience, the investigators will teach experimental
subjects to make Paleolithic tools. Cognitive, behavioral, and
neurophysiological aspects of the learning process will be investigated using
functional brain imaging, eye-tracking, the annotation and analysis of video-
recorded tool-making action sequences, and archaeological analyses of the actual
tools produced. Drawing on formal language theory, the researchers will develop
new methods for describing the syntactic structure of these natural action
sequences and for measuring their hierarchical complexity. Manual parsing of
action sequences by expert observers will be compared with the data-driven
segmentation of action streams based on the eye-movement patterns of research
subjects in order to produce a robust consensus. These methods of "action
syntax" analysis will be generalizable to other complex behaviors and will
enable the direct comparison of hierarchical structure, information processing,
and brain function across linguistic (story listening) and tool-making (action
observation) behaviors in this study. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.