* 1328201
* Student Support for Recomb 2013
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Mona Singh, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2014
* USD 7,000.00

RECOMB2013: 17th International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular
Biology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RECOMB Conference Series
(http://www.recomb.org/) was founded in 1997 by Sorin Istrail, Pavel Pevzner,
and Michael Waterman to provide a scientific forum for theoretical advances in
computational biology and their applications in molecular biology and medicine.
Previous RECOMB conferences have been held annually in North America, Europe,
and Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RECOMB 2013 is the seventeenth in a series of
well-established scientific conferences bridging the areas of computational,
mathematical, statistical and biological sciences. The conference features 6
keynote talks by preeminent scientists in life sciences, including Scott Fraser
(USC and Caltech, Imaging), Takashi Gojobori (Japan, comparative genomics),
Deborah Nickerson (U Washington, Exon sequencing), Nadia A Rosenthal (Monash
University, Australia, Stem cell), Chung-I Wu (U Chicago, evolutionary
genomics), and Xiaoliang Sunny Xie (Harvard, single molecule). The conference
will also feature 32 state-of-art scientific presentations selected from 167
submissions. The topics cover essentially every aspect of computational biology
and bioinformatics, plus emerging areas such as molecular imaging and single
molecule sequencing. There will also be 5 highlight talks selected from 47
submissions that are published in year 2012 up to 02/10/2013, plus about 200
poster presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference attracts research
contributions in all areas of computational molecular biology, including but not
limited to: molecular sequence analysis; recognition of genes and regulatory
elements; molecular evolution; protein structure; structural genomics; analysis
of gene expression; biological networks; sequencing and genotyping technologies;
drug design; probabilistic and combinatorial algorithms; systems biology;
computational proteomics; structural and functional genomics; information
systems for computational biology and imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The many
events at RECOMB provide an excellent way for students to be exposed to new and
exciting research areas, and learn of cutting-edge advances in their own
research areas and beyond. Furthermore, students will have ample opportunity to
meet leading researchers in both informal and formal settings. Thus, the
attendance of RECOMB2013 will benefit the students greatly for their career
development.