* 1329649
* CPS: Breakthrough: A Cyber-Physical Framework for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Guided Magnetic NanoParticles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Constantinos Mavroidis, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,999.00

This project investigates a new type of cyber-physical system (CPS), comprising
magnetic nanoparticles in a fluidic environment such as human tissue whose
motion is controlled by a computer via a magnetic field. The research aims to
develop computational and experimental tools to perform the dynamic modeling,
closed loop control and experimental validation of such a system of
nanoparticles under guidance and observation using a magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) environment. The envisioned CPS infrastructure is composed of a new
computational platform to perform 3D simulation, visualization and post-
processing analysis of the aggregation and disaggregation process of magnetic
nanoparticles within a fluidic environment like the small arteries and
arterioles or fluid-filled cavities of the human body. It also includes the
development of robust control algorithms for the guidance of a swarm of magnetic
nanoparticles in a MRI environment. Experimental validation is to be performed
in clinical MRI scanners and in customized laboratory test-beds that generate
controllable magnetic fields able to move magnetic nanoparticles in fluidic
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential applications of this basic
research include nano-robotic drug delivery systems, composed of a system of
magnetic nanoparticles guided by MRI scanners for targeted drug delivery in the
human body. The project integrates education through participation of graduate
and undergraduate students in the research, and involvement of the PI and
graduate students in several outreach activities for students in high and middle
schools.