* 1329619
* CPS: Breakthrough: Robust Team-Triggered Coordination for Real-Time Control of Networked Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 463,607.00

The aim of this project is to lay down the foundations of a novel approach to
real-time control of networked cyber-physical systems (CPS) that leverages their
cooperative nature. Most networked controllers are not implementable over
embedded digital computer systems because they rely on continuous time or
synchronous executions that are costly to enforce. These assumptions are
unrealistic when faced with the cyber-physical world, where the interaction
between computational and physical components is multiplex, information
acquisition is subject to error and delay, and agent schedules are asynchronous.
Even without implementation obstacles, the periodic availability of information
leads to a wasteful use of resources. Tuning controller execution to the task at
hand offers the potential for great savings in communication, sensing, and
actuation. The goal of this project is to bring this opportunity to fruition by
combining event- and self-triggered control ideas into a unified approach that
inherits the best of both models. The key conceptual novelty is for agents to
make promises to one another about their future states and warn each other if
they later decide to break them. The information provided by promises allows
agents to autonomously determine when fresh information is needed, resulting in
an efficient network performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networked cyber-physical
systems are transforming the way society interacts with the physical world.
Advances in this field are extending the range of human capabilities in an
increasing number of areas with high societal and economic impact, such as smart
energy, intelligent transportation, advanced manufacturing, health technology,
and the environment. This project contributes to the science and technology of
cyber-physical systems by developing a novel principled approach for networked
systems to operate efficiently and cope with the sources of uncertainty present
in real-word applications. The potential benefits are real-time operation in a
wide range of application domains of cooperative cyber-physical systems with a
superior level of efficiency and robustness than currently possible. The project
promises to contribute to the training of a new generation of engineering
students at UC San Diego with the skills necessary to deal with this type of
multi-faceted systems and applications. The plan includes undergraduate student
involvement in research, graduate supervision and curriculum development,
outreach to high-school students, retention of minorities in STEM disciplines,
and broad dissemination activities.