* 1329890
* Elucidation of Alkene Metabolism in Two Sulfate-Reducing Isolates Via Metabolite Profiling and  Transcriptomics
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Amy Callaghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 831,944.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Anaerobic bacteria and archaea play key roles in
biogeochemical cycling, the biotransformation of pollutants, and in both
subsurface production and oxidation of methane, an important biofuel. The past
30 years of research have yielded novel mechanisms by which anaerobes activate
hydrocarbons in the absence of oxygen. However, there is still a great deal to
be learned regarding the enzymes catalyzing reactions in the requisite
biochemical pathways. Alkenes are ubiquitous hydrocarbons derived from both
natural and anthropogenic sources. Although more reactive than aromatic
hydrocarbons and alkanes, little is known regarding the biochemistry of
anaerobic alkene biotransformation. This project aims to elucidate the
fundamental mechanisms of microbial activation and degradation of alkenes in two
model strains of sulfate-reducers, Desulfatibacillum alkenivorans AK-01 and
Desulfococcus oleovorans Hxd3, by coupling transcriptomics with metabolite
profiling. The bacteria are not only model organisms for anaerobic hydrocarbon
degradation, they are also two of only three sulfate-reducing, hydrocarbon-
utilizing microbes (the other is the archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus) for which
complete (i.e. closed) genome sequences are available. The project will shed
light on the novel biochemistry of anaerobic alkene activation and degradation
by a class of microorganisms that is both environmentally and economically
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Alkenes are widely
present in the environment, and are generated from both natural and industrial
processes. These chemicals are economically and environmentally important. This
project aims to increase understanding of the activation and biotransformation
of alkene substrates and environmental contaminants with similar structures, as
well as the biochemistry and physiology of the relevant organisms involved in
biogeochemical cycling, bioremediation, and biofuel production. As part of this
project, research activities will be integrated into the education of high-
school, undergraduate, and graduate students by providing laboratory research
experience and mentoring. Students will be trained in aspects of molecular
biology, anaerobic cultivation and monitoring of microorganisms, metabolite
profiling, microbial ecology, and "omics". Research will be incorporated into
existing department courses, and future efforts are aimed toward developing a
"Nucleotide Sequence Analysis" class that integrates the project's omics
datasets into classroom learning, with the long-term goal of implementing a
Biotechnology program at the University of Oklahoma. Educational outreach to the
community will be coordinated through the K-20 Center for Education and
Community Renewal, which partners faculty and graduate students with K-12
teachers and students and collaborates with over 800 Oklahoma schools and
industrial partners to enhance learning across all educational levels. Goals to
integrate diversity into NSF programs, projects and activities will be achieved
through the McNair Scholars program, which prepares undergraduate students from
underrepresented ethnicities for doctoral studies through research opportunities
and activities. Efforts to disseminate project results and enhance scientific
and technological understanding will be achieved via participation in the OU
Annual Student Research and Performance Day, Science Café of Norman, and
BioBlitz! Oklahoma.