* 1329285
* Polymerase Dynamics at the Replication Fork
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Charles McHenry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 11/30/2016
* USD 510,000.00

Intellectual Merit. DNA replication is a central process important for
proliferation of all cell types. Because of highly conserved features, the
bacterium Escherichia coli provides a useful prototype to understanding
replication of all organisms. DNA replication proceeds bidirectionally on anti-
parallel duplex DNA at a branch point called the replication fork. Because of
this, one strand is synthesized as short fragments (Okazaki fragments) on one
strand (the lagging strand) at the fork. Since the replicase that synthesizes
DNA is highly processive, meaning that it can proceed long distances without
releasing, there must be a mechanism for triggering the lagging strand replicase
to release and recycle to the RNA primer for the next Okazaki fragment. This
research seeks to distinguish between two models for Okazaki fragment cycling.
The favored hypothesis is that synthesis of a new RNA primer provides a cycling
signal sensed by the DnaX complex that loads both a ring-like processivity
factor on DNA and chaperones the polymerase component of the replicase onto it.
The DnaX complex is also thought to chaperone the polymerase off of the old
Okazaki fragment and escort it onto the new primer, concomitant with loading a
new processivity factor and hydrolysis of ATP. Macromolecular interactions
responsible for this chaperoning reaction will be determined. The results of the
research will make a significant contribution to our understanding of the
dynamics of DNA replication and the role of this important process in the
maintenance of genome stability, not just in bacteria, but also in higher
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The project will involve
graduate and undergraduate students in the research. A laboratory module,
incorporating hands-on use of robotics equipment for screening for replication
mutants, will be implemented for an undergraduate biochemistry course, and
details of the module will be published, so that other universities will be able
to use it for their curricula. Such training will provide valuable exposure to
equipment and procedures commonly used in pharmaceutical and biotechnology
industries, but rarely made available in undergraduate classes, and thus may
increase the competitiveness of the students to obtain employment upon
graduation. The PI will disseminate fundamental knowledge on bacterial DNA
replication to the scientific and lay public through continued contributions to
an updatable online encyclopedia article published in collaboration with the
American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.