* 1329542
* Collaborative Research: Catchments and Coastlines--The Influence of Sediment Load and Type on Delta Morphodynamics and Deposits
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Doug Edmonds, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 06/30/2014
* USD 56,822.00

The various shapes of river deltas were thought to be dependent mainly upon
downstream processes, such as the wave- and tidal-power of the ocean basin and
the energy flux of the river, but recent work has suggested that upstream
controls, such as load and sediment type (i.e. cohesive vs. noncohesive
sediment) may also be a major factor controlling delta morphology. The PIs
propose a theoretical and field study of how sediment load and type,and thus
source terrain, control a delta?s planform morphology and internal stratigraphy.
A series of numerical experiments using Delft3D, a morphodynamic physics-based
model simulating 3D fluid flow and sediment transport, will extend the parameter
space of earlier work by varying sediment fluxes and grain size distributions of
a parent river subject to one flood wave per year.&lt;br/&gt;A final set of
experiments will include the effects of wave and tides. The numerical
predictions will be compared to cores, serial aerial photography, bathymetry,
and ground penetrating radar datasets from modern deltas representing end-
members of the modeling results. Candidate deltas include Wax Lake and Mossy
deltas of Louisiana and Saskatchewan, and El Coyote fan delta on the western
coast of the Gulf of California, where already existing data will be
supplemented by limited fieldwork, Pleistocene shelf-edge deltas such as off
Apalachicola, FL, and ancient deltas such as the Cretaceous Ferron and Panther
Tongue deltas of Utah. A better understanding and predictive capability of delta
planform and stratigraphy could improve our ability to predict coastline
evolution in the face of changes in sediment feed volume and type and changes in
the rate of creation of accommodation space due to global and local sea level
rise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from This Study: The lead
PI?s involvement with the National Center for Earth-surface Dynamics will ensure
that this work will contribute to the science needed to restore the Mississippi
delta and reverse the trend of land loss. This work will also be the
dissertation topic and financial support for two graduate students and theses
for two undergraduate students. All students will benefit from exposure to a
problem requiring the integration of geomorphology, sediment transport,
hydrodynamics, and morphodynamic modeling.