* 1329381
* Collaborative Research: Epistemic Technologies, Crowdsourcing, and Molecular Biology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Hector Postigo, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 121,430.00

Overview

This is a collaborative STS research project on crowd sourcing in biology; more
specifically, the project examines the use of collaborative games and puzzles to
solve problems in biochemistry and molecular genetics, such as determining the
structure of a protein molecule using a protein-folding game (in this case,
FoldIt). Two such crowd-sourcing games, FoldIt and EteRNA, will be the focus of
this project. These games are research tools that harness the knowledge of
crowds, including those who are not professionally trained in biochemistry or
genetics as well as those who are; to ensure the widest possible user-base,
these technologies embed basic biochemical principles into their computational
function and leave to the users the task of playfully undertaking the trail and
error processes that are the essence of deciphering the three-dimensional
structure of a protein or a nucleic acid.

Intellectual Merit

The primary STS research goal is to examine the socio-technical architecture of
FoldIt and EteRNA to gain new knowledge about the emergent processes of crowd
knowledge and scientific discovery in networked computer gaming platforms.
Systems that bring together information communication technologies, game theory,
and scientific practice/knowledge with expert and non-expert know-how give STS
researchers a unique opportunity to study how technical systems designers create
a particular framework for understanding complex science, for communicating that
knowledge, and for incentivizing participation and scientific discovery. The
empirical component of the project is to characterize the socio-technical
elements of these platforms as they configure scientific knowledge,
communication and participation/play in their attempts to solve scientific
problems. The theoretical component will develop theories from the empirical
work that explain how the unique epistemological practices framed in these types
of systems translate into discovery and knowledge.

Broader Impacts

The results of this study will contribute to STS subfields that interrogate the
practice of science both in the laboratory and in a more public venue, such as
the online collaborative game platform. It also has the potential to contribute
to fields of communication, information studies, and game studies in its
theorizing about computer mediated communication, the politics of platforms, and
the role of gaming systems and practice as epistemological endeavors. The
findings are transferable to broader audiences such as game designers and
scientists whose communities will be able to use the findings to inform the
design of current and future crowd-science collaborative game platforms.