* 1329659
* EAGER: Exploring the Use of Synthetic Speech as Reference Model to Detect Salient Emotional Segments in Speech
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Carlos Busso, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 59,338.00

This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research aims to create neutral reference model
from synthetic speech to contrast the emotional content of a speech signal.
Emotional understanding is a crucial skill in human communication. For this
reason, modeling and recognizing emotions is essential in the design and
implementation of interfaces that are more in tune with the user's needs.
Starting from the premise that paralinguistic information is non-uniformly
conveyed across time, this study aims to identify emotionally prominent regions
or focal points across various acoustic features. The study explores a novel
approach based on synthetic speech to build reference models characterizing
patterns observed in neutral speech. These reference models are used to contrast
the emotional information observed in localized segments of a speech signal. The
study builds a synthetic speech signal that conveys the same lexical information
and is timely aligned with the target sentence in the database. Since it is
expected that a single synthetic speech will not capture the full range of
variability observed in neutral speech, the study explores approaches to produce
different neutral synthetic realizations. After creating a parallel corpus with
time-aligned synthetic speech, the study explores how well synthetic speech
captures the acoustic patterns and emotional percepts of neutral, nonemotional
speech. Then, a target signal from the database is compared with the properties
observed across the family of synthesized signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study presents a novel approach to build a robust emotion recognition system
that exploits the underlying nonuniform externalization process of expressive
behaviors. Algorithms that able to identify localized emotional segments have
the potential to shift the current approaches used in the area of affective
computing. Instead of recognizing the emotional content of pre-segmented
sentences, the problem is formulated as a detection paradigm, which is appealing
from an application perspective. These advances represent a transformative
breakthrough in the area of behavioral analysis and affective computing. The
proposed models and algorithms provide numerous insights to explore and extend
theories in linguistic and paralinguistic human behavior. Having established the
base infrastructure for this exploratory research, several new scientific
avenues will emerge that serve as truly innovative advancements that will impact
applications in security and defense, next generation of advanced user
interfaces, health informatics, and education. Furthermore, the scientific
methods are enriching venues for interdisciplinary training and mentoring for
undergraduate and graduate students.