* 1329089
* IBSS-Ex: Wealth, Wealth Inequality, and Marraige Systems
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Robert Boyd, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2016
* USD 249,153.00

This interdisciplinary research project focuses on relationships among wealth,
wealth inequality, and polygyny in three population groups (farmers,
horticulturalists, and foragers), with special emphasis given to addressing
different marriage systems among different cultures. Distribution of different
marriage systems has been a focus of anthropological investigation since the
discipline's birth, with explanations drawing on sex ratio, women's economic
contributions to production, social complexity, fraternal interest groups,
available habitats for expansion, and parasite loads. Given the importance of
marriage as an economic institution, economic explanations have come to
prominence. These explanations show an interesting convergence with ideas
developed by behavioral ecologists studying the distribution of polygyny in non-
human species. It is widely thought that polygyny will be more common where
material wealth is both more unequally held among men and more important to a
population's production and reproduction. While this intuition explains why
horticulturalists tend to be more polygynous than foragers, it results in a
paradox, because farmers, among whom material wealth is both more important and
more unequally distributed, are less polygynous than horticulturalists. The
project will draw on insights from demography, anthropology, and economics. The
researchers will combine ethnographic data with mathematical models of the
interacting dynamics of family structure and wealth disparity. The major
empirical component of this project entails estimating key model parameters
using individual-level data from 13 small-scale populations. The analyses of
data from these different sources will allow determination of the relative
strengths of these joint effects of different factors and provide a test of
possible resolutions of the polygyny paradox.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will contribute to basic understanding of the dynamics of disparities in wealth
and how they impact on the social structures. The resolution of the polygyny
paradox has implications for general knowledge about interactions between wealth
and family structure that extend beyond the small scale societies that the
project will study. Project results may help address a range of factors that
influence marriage dynamics in modern advanced societies, such as a tendency for
higher divorce rates and more socially acceptable forms of polygyny, such as
individuals having multiple spouses through a series of monogamous marriages
over time. The project also will advance the methodological use of mathematical
modeling, experimental techniques, and intensive analysis of individual level
data to address the trade-off between the depth of an ethnographer's individual-
level data and the power of cross-population comparisons. Broader impacts of
this project will include facilitation of interdisciplinary research across
economics, anthropology and evolutionary biology, special education and training
opportunities for a post-doctoral researcher, and annual meetings to advance the
use of advanced methodologies tested in this project among scholars in relevant
fields. This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral
and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.