* 1329283
* Access to Cooperative Education Programs and the Academic and Employment Returns by Race, Gender, and Discipline
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2013,09/30/2019
* Joyce Main, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 09/30/2019
* USD 304,757.00

A cooperative education program (co-op) in engineering is a partnership between
an academic institution and an employer designed to engage students in practical
engineering experience through rotations of full-time employment and course
study. Co-op employment provides students with discipline-relevant professional
experience and early entry into the engineering labor force while serving as a
recruitment tool for co-op companies. While much is known about the value of
cooperative education programs, relatively little is known about why there are
different rates of participation by race/ethnicity and how recruitment and pre-
screening practices influence the diversity of students who participate in co-op
programs. The objectives of this research project are to identify factors that
influence student access to cooperative education programs and to determine the
educational and employment returns associated with participation. Data include
comprehensive longitudinal academic student records from multiple institutions,
as well as surveys and interviews of students from a large research-intensive
institution. Research findings will lead to the development of strategies to
further enhance co-op recruitment and engagement of engineering students from a
broader range of backgrounds, interests, and experiences as a pathway to
increase the overall diversity of the professional engineering labor force.

This research is supported by the Research in Engineering Education Program of
the Engineering Education and Centers Division.