* 1329374
* BSF:2012139:Computing Structures Beyond Moore and von Neumann
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Eby Friedman, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 40,000.00

This project is funded as part of the United States-Israel Collaboration in
Computer Science (USICCS) program. Through this program, NSF and the United
States - Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
collaborations among US-based researchers and Israel-based researchers.
Computing systems are embedded in a wide variety of commercial applications,
driving the economy and transforming our society and culture. The next
generation computing systems are becoming severely limited by energy dissipation
constraints, due to the need for portability and ever increasing complexity.
These computer systems range in applications from battery operated personal
devices to large scale data servers servicing the internet. The primary
objectives of this project are to provide circuit and architectural design
technologies to fundamentally enhance this condition of energy constraints by
exploiting new magnetic technologies in the design of these computing systems.
Specifically, memristors will be exploited to develop advanced computing systems
that will use fundamentally less power while offering novel heretofore unseen
applications due to the inherent advantages of this burgeoning and exciting
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of memristors to maintain state
without energy will be exploited as a replacement for on-chip memory; for
example, DRAM and high speed cache, to greatly lower the energy requirements of
portable computing. Furthermore, due to the ability to easily integrate
memristors with CMOS, hybrid circuits and architectures will be developed to
provide novel computing structures that operate differently and advantageously
as compared to modern computing systems. The combination of these novel circuit
structures, computing architectures, and advanced magnetic technologies will
contribute to better understanding and exploitation of on-chip locality of
information while reinvigorating the slowing development of computing
technologies. Furthermore, improved portability will be attained while saving
energy and enhancing the environment.