* 1329470
* Collaborative Research: The Western Consortium for Watershed Analysis, Visualization, and Exploration (WC-WAVE)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Mary Jo Daniel, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,000,000.00

Mechanisms responsible for observed and projected hydrologic change in high-
elevation catchments are poorly understood, especially with respect to snowpack
dynamics, surface-water/groundwater linkages, and interactions with vegetation.
Idaho, Nevada, and New Mexico envision a Western Consortium for Watershed
Analysis, Visualization, and Exploration (WC-WAVE) whose overarching goal is to
advance watershed science, workforce development, and education with
cyberinfrastructure (CI)-enabled discovery and innovation. WC-WAVE has three
integrated components, with associated goals and
approaches:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Watershed Science: Advance understanding of
hydrologic interactions and their impact on ecosystem services using a virtual
watershed (VW) framework. Watershed scientists and students parameterize, run,
validate, and integrate watershed models; specify VW user requirements; and
provide feedback on the evolving CI platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Visualization and Data CI: Accelerate collaborative, interdisciplinary watershed
research and discovery through innovative visualization environments and through
streamlined data management, discovery, and access. The CI team develops, tests,
deploys and integrates the VW data and service platform components. CI
advancements provide a user-friendly VW platform that supports advanced
analysis, modeling, and visualization activities and is based on robust CI that
enables data preservation, data assimilation, and data and model
interoperability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Workforce Development and Education:
Engage university faculty and graduate students in interdisciplinary team-based
watershed research, and broaden undergraduate student participation in STEM
through modeling and visualization. The Consortium supports: graduate workforce
development through a series of institutes and research activities that provide
interdisciplinary training and workforce preparation; and two cohorts of diverse
undergraduates and their faculty mentors that acquire and use skills in modeling
and visualization to create education modules that can be incorporated into
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WC-WAVE collaborations and impacts are sustained
beyond the award via collaborative research projects; incorporation of data and
models in open-community-based data centers and code repositories; and CI
adoption by State programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Mountain watersheds provide a large proportion of water and
ecosystem services to communities in the intermountain west. Climate change
impacts affect the ability of watersheds to provide hydrological services such
as water storage, flow moderation, and water quality improvement. Interactions
among precipitation, vegetation growth, fire regime, soil moisture, runoff, and
other landscape properties create systems in which even subtle changes in
climate may lead to complex responses and cascading impacts. Integration of
creative observation and analytical strategies using advanced modeling
approaches and CI made possible in a virtual watershed framework is critical to
understanding and predicting complex responses to climate and hydrologic change.
WC-WAVE CI enables increased understanding of watershed dynamics in the western
US by allowing researchers to: easily acquire and integrate data, use an
integrated suite of models to discover processes linking components of the
hydrologic cycle, to identify environmental consequences of hydrologic changes,
and to visualize and interpret data and model results. The VW framework
capabilities will simulate watershed drivers and dynamics and lead to new
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Immersive virtual
reality environments provide platforms that foster interdisciplinary discussion
and creative insight into complex scientific questions and enable innovations
that result in groundbreaking discoveries. Further, developing three-dimensional
thinking skills is an important goal for science education. The Workforce
Development and Education program focuses on: (1) implementing an NSF IGERT-like
program that prepares graduate students to work in collaborative,
interdisciplinary teams to effectively address complex scientific issues, (2)
promoting undergraduate faculty professional development and preparing diverse
undergraduates for future STEM education and/or employment, and (3) developing
education modules that can be incorporated in undergraduate curricula. These
activities are leading to a workforce that is prepared to tackle STEM challenges
requiring interdisciplinary collaboration and computational thinking skills.