* 1329991
* CPS: Breakthrough: Statistical Model Checking of High-Dimensional Cyber-Controlled Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Mahesh Viswanathan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Sprinkle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 499,695.00

Cyber-physical systems are found in nearly every area of daily life:
transportation, energy, medical systems, and food production. Life and safety
frequently depend upon their correct operation. This project develops a novel
systematic framework and methods for understanding, designing, and controlling
complex coupled cyber and physical systems based on large-scale computation.
This is achieved by explicitly developing the connection between the
abstraction, modeling and verification frameworks of physics-based models and
those of discrete-transition systems. The approach is fundamentally new, based
on the unification of two recent developments: (1) new probabilistic tools for
simulating and analyzing high-fidelity physics-based models; and (2) statistical
model checking methods. In addition to analytical research, the project produces
methods and computational tools that can be used on a wide range of cyber-
physical systems, particularly those that are safety and performance
critical.&lt;br/&gt;There have been dramatic recent advances in probabilistic
computational techniques for purely physics-based models, treating them
computationally as Markov chains, and enabling efficient computation even for
high-dimensional systems. Simultaneously with these purely physics-based model
approaches, state-of-the-art methods for the verification of purely discrete-
state systems have been developed based on stochastic computational tools also
using Markov chains as the basis. This project connects these two independent
branches to yield a radically new approach for complex, high-dimensional cyber-
physical systems, based on the unifying concept of Markov models as an interface
between the cyber and physical domains. &lt;br/&gt;An integral part of the
project is a unified educational program aimed at addressing key bottlenecks in
the recruitment and development of female and minority students into engineering
and computer science. The educational program is developed around a new robotic
vehicle with complex fluid-structure dynamics, that is used in: (i) a week-long
residential summer camp for female high-school students on "Mechanics &amp;
Dynamics"; (ii)undergraduate research experiences for female and minority
students to facilitate the transition to graduate education; and (iii) an
experimental graduate course on verification of embedded systems.