* 1329091
* IBSS: Age Changes and Gender Differences in Spatial Abilities: Testing the Role of Mobility in Three Non-Industrial Societies and in the U.S.
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Elizabeth Cashdan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2019
* USD 999,871.00

This interdisciplinary research project will focus on determining how spatial
ability is affected by navigational experience and how spatial abilities differ
by gender and change with age. Previous research has observed that males
generally have larger geographic ranges than females across a wide range of
cultures, and males generally have done significantly better at some spatial
tests. Because large ranges pose navigational and spatial challenges, many
theorists have speculated that gender-related differences in mobility may
underlie gender-related differences in spatial performance. This project will
test three hypotheses that may explain the root causes of gender-related
differences in mobility patterns and evaluate how natural mobility, navigational
style, and spatial ability are related. Because there are large cultural
differences in age and gender-related patterns of mobility, this project will
include participants in communities in Tanzania, Namibia, and Ecuador that
subsist on foraging and small-scale farming, and it also will include
participants in the United States, where lifestyles are considerably different.
The researchers will assess mobility through the use of interviews and by
tracking subjects using GPS devices. They will assess navigational and spatial
ability through the use of cognitive tests adapted to make them broadly
applicable across cultures. The navigational data will based on both real-world
and virtual world tasks and will include both field and laboratory-based
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance basic understanding
of the factors that shape spatial performance as well as how it differs by
gender and across cultures. The project will test a number of hypotheses that
have been posited in hopes of relating spatial ability to different kinds of
experience. Because spatial skills are related to higher levels of performance
in mathematics and science, and women and minorities are underrepresented in
science, mathematics, engineering, and technology-related fields, greater
knowledge about the factors that enhance spatial thinking has the potential to
make scientific and technical education and related employment opportunities
more broadly accessible. The project will develop and disseminate assessment
tools that can be used with people of all ages and different cultures, including
non-literate populations, which should help improve spatial capabilities for
people in many different environments. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.