* 1329568
* Collaborative Research:  Developing Continental Paleoclimate Records from Soils Using Pedogenic Carbonate
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Ronald Amundson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2015
* USD 67,043.00

This NSF support will allow the investigators to complete the first critical
phase of what they think should be a detailed view into the climate of the mid
North American continent over the past hundred thousand years. This record comes
from arid soils of the Wind River Basin in Wyoming. The vast majority of high
resolution (~ hundred to thousand year time windows) past climate data comes
from oceanic sediments, and the chemical record provides information on the
temperature and volume of the oceans over time. While this record is very
important to understand how the Earth's climate has varied, and how past warm
periods can inform us how the Earth might respond to present greenhouse gas
increases, these records do not tell us directly what was happening on the
continents, and how climate patterns on land changed with global ocean changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is arguably only one "high resolution" land-based
paleoclimate record on land: the so-called Devil's Hole limestone accumulation
that formed by ground water in the desert of the California/Nevada border. The
oxygen isotopes in the limestone provide detailed changes in the land
temperature of the southern Great Basin over multiple glacial and interglacial
climates. To date, this remains arguably the most detailed land record on Earth,
and is formed in a very unique geological setting that is not found in many
other locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the past two decades, the
investigators have been studying the growth rings of calcium carbonate in Wind
River Basin soils. During this time interval, there has been a revolution in the
ability to study these growth rings in microscopic detail: lasers can volatilize
the minerals at a micron scale and new generations of mass spectrometers can
both determine the age of the mineral and its oxygen isotope composition (which
is a guide to the temperature and the source of rainfall in the region). They
have been able to collect multiple samples from the field, and through numerous
selection criteria, have found growth rings that are continuous over hundred
thousand year time scales. Six of these have been dated, and one has been sent
to the NSF SIMS isotope facility in Madison WI for preliminary oxygen isotope
analyses. The oxygen isotope data, when linked with the sample age, indicate
that these thin (~ 2 cm or less) growth rings span nearly two hundred thousand
years, and that the oxygen isotope pattern is likely temporally comparable to
that of Devil's Hole. The preliminary record shows both similarities and
dissimilarities to Devil's Hole (as might be expected for the distance between
the two locations), suggesting insights into the precipitation sources of the
mid-continent. Additionally, since desert (and carbonate bearing soils) cover
~20% of the Earth, the extension of this technique to a wide variety of
locations seems promising, opening new insights into the climate history of the
Earth's land surface over the last few glacial cycles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project requests the funds to support an advanced PhD
student for one year to (1) make two trips to the SIMS facility in Wisconsin to
collect carbon and oxygen isotope profiles on the remaining dated laminations,
(2) write a research paper on the results of the work, and (3) use the results
as the basis for a request for longer term support to expand the record to other
locations.