* 1329119
* Doctoral Consortium and Student-Author Travel for the PETRA'13 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2014
* USD 27,018.00

This is funding to support a doctoral consortium (workshop) of approximately 14
promising graduate students from U.S. institutions of higher learning, along
with 6 distinguished research faculty (4 of whom are women), to be held in
conjunction with the Sixth International Conference on Pervasive Technologies
Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA 2013), which will take place May 29-31
on the island of Rhodes, Greece. The PETRA Conference mission is to promote
interdisciplinary research that can improve the quality of life and empower
people with greater capabilities using pervasive ambient intelligent
environments. This is the only annual conference that brings together
theoreticians and practitioners from a wide variety of disciplines to focus on
the application of pervasive technologies to assistive environments. Innovations
to be presented during this year's conference include intelligent human sensing,
robotic devices to enable persons with disabilities, algorithms for data fusion,
new computer aided rehabilitation methods, therapy game development that
personalizes a game to an individual's needs, gesture recognition tools,
medication management, remote secure communications and data sharing, remote
health monitoring, and many other enabling technologies. More information about
the conference may be found online at
http://www.petrae.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Doctoral Consortium
are to increase the exposure and visibility of the participants' work within the
community, to help establish a sense of community among this next generation of
researchers, and to help foster their research efforts by providing substantive
feedback and guidance in a supportive and interactive environment from a group
of senior researchers. Student participants in the Doctoral Consortium will be
drawn from diverse communities including computer science, engineering,
psychology, social science, neuroscience, human-computer interaction, cognitive
science and communication. They will make formal 20-minute presentations of
their work and will receive feedback from a faculty panel; the feedback is
geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work is
positioned relative to other research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
The workshop faculty members will bring a wide spectrum of expertise, and
provide student mentoring and coordination. Doctoral Consortium attendees will
be asked to create and maintain a "digital workbook" where along with their work
they include feedback on papers they attended and observations that they
gathered (e.g., through meetings and discussions with conference speakers and
other participants) that will apply to and impact their work. Short papers on
the participants' work will be published in the Conference Proceedings (which
are included in the ACM Digital Library), and a summary report on the event will
be posted on the conference website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
PETRA 2013 Doctoral Consortium will bring together some of the best students,
researchers and practitioners in relevant fields, and will thereby afford the
younger participants a unique opportunity to gain wider exposure for their
innovative ideas while also receiving reinforcement for the importance and value
of conducting research with societal impact. The workshop will allow the junior
participants to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
colleagues. The organizing committee will make a concerted effort to attract
participants who are women, members of under-represented minorities, and persons
with disabilities. To further assure participant diversity, the organizers will
endeavor not to accept more than 2 students from any one institution, and in
addition the PI plans to ask her dean for separate funds to support 2-3
exceptional undergraduates to participate in the conference.