* 1329467
* Spin Labeling Insights into Hydration Effects on Macromolecular Flexibility and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gail Fanucci, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 518,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the understanding of the
role water hydration dynamics in modulating protein flexibility, conformational
sampling and biomolecular function. Water hydration is essential in biology and
is a critical factor for proper design of engineered materials containing
enzymes in biotechnology. The scope of work involves building an Overhauser
dynamic nuclear polarization (ODNP) spectrometer with concomitant design and
construction of resonators optimized for biological and materials based samples,
such that local diffusion dynamics of hydration water surrounding the materials
can be interrogated. Insights into the role of water hydration in macromolecular
flexibility will be revealed from combined NMR, EPR and ODNP investigations of
targeted systems. These include understanding how molecular crowding modulates
folding and dynamics in natively unstructured proteins, how mutations distal
from active sites in enzymes may influence hydration and hence conformational
sampling and dynamics, and how changes in water hydration are coupled to
transmembrane signaling of integral membrane proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The technical scientific training
in this research spreads across post-doctoral associates, graduate and
undergraduate students as well as high school students. The project specifically
targets recruiting underrepresented high school students into the University of
Florida's Summer Science Teaching Program. Three local high school teachers will
participate in screening and nominating two students each summer for this six
week research immersion experience. These activities would increase public
awareness of the scientific research process to communities where these types of
opportunities are rare. Other outreach includes training undergraduate students
when they enter college in their first year, over a three to four year time
period. These efforts are combined with participation in the Beckman Scholar's
and HHMI Science for Life programs.