* 1329248
* RUI:  Aggregation and Colonization Mediated by Bacterial   Surface Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Iruka Okeke, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 06/30/2018
* USD 536,235.00

Intellectual Merit Bacteria that can colonize multi-cellular organisms live in
or on their hosts as part of complex communities. They use specific surface
proteins to adhere to one another, and to host cells, to form a stable community
of bacteria that are not washed away. In this research, mentored undergraduate
students, will identify and characterize protein colonization factors and
determine how they interact with one another. Hra1 was previously described as a
member of the agglutinin family of outer surface proteins which by self-
association mediates adjacent bacterial cells to adhere to one another. Hra1
also mediates in vivo binding of Escherichia coli to eukaryotic cells and
specifically promotes colonization of nematode worm intestines in small
aggregates. There is preliminary evidence that suggests that a second protein,
Aap, prevents Hra1 mediated interactions. The inhibitory activity of Aap
provides a mechanism for restricting Hra1 mediated associations as bacteria
travel towards their intestinal niche. Once bacteria reach a suitable niche
however, Aap must be removed for colonization to ensue. This research, will
determine the mechanism for Aap removal and thus how Hra1 and Aap work together
to ensure that bacteria can bind and disperse in a manner that optimizes
colonization of nematode intestines. The project will also identify new surface
factors involved in intestinal colonization and determine how, if at all, they
interact with known surface proteins. In addition to identifying proteins
involved in binding among identical bacteria, the project will focus on
uncovering surface proteins that allow different species of bacteria to interact
with one another, as a first step to understanding community organization among
the many types of bacteria living within a single multi-cellular organism.

Broader Impact Bacteria are the most abundant life-forms on earth and colonize a
wide variety of living and non-living niches by mechanisms that are not very
well understood. This project will improve current understanding of how
communities of bacteria are established and persist within other organisms, as
well as add to knowledge on the structure and function of bacterial surface
proteins. The research required to address questions relevant to this project
will largely be performed by undergraduate students working at Haverford College
and overseen by a principal investigator, who teaches there. The project will
provide early opportunities for such students with the hope of increasing their
interest and retention in science. Four to eight students, including women and
other groups underrepresented in the sciences will be engaged in laboratory
research projects each year. Several dozen other students will be enriched by
course modules and classroom examples in courses that are developed and taught
by the principal investigator. This includes 20-40 students who will participate
in inquiry-based laboratory research courses each year that will expose them to
skills in microbiology, molecular biology and computational science.