* 1329780
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Distributed Asynchronous Algorithms and Software Systems for Wide-Area Monitoring of Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Frank Mueller, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop a distributed algorithmic
framework, supported by a highly fault-tolerant software system, for executing
critical transmission-level operations of the North American power grid using
gigantic volumes of Synchrophasor data. As the number of Phasor Measurement
Units (PMU) increases to more than thousands in the next 4-5 years, it is rather
intuitive that the current state-of-the-art centralized communication and
information processing architecture of Wide-Area Measurement System (WAMS) will
no longer be sustainable under such data-explosion, and a completely distributed
cyber-physical architecture will need to be developed. The North American
Synchrophasor Initiative (NASPI) is currently addressing this architectural
aspect by developing new communication and computing protocols through NASPI-net
and Phasor Gateway. However, very little attention has been paid so far to
perhaps the most critical consequence of this envisioned distributed
architecture "namely", distributed algorithms, and their relevant middleware.
Our primary task, therefore, will be to develop parallel computational methods
for solving real-time wide-area monitoring and control problems with analytical
investigation of their stability, convergence and robustness properties,
followed by their implementation and testing against extraneous malicious
attacks using our WAMS-RTDS testbed at NC State. In particular, we will address
three critical research problems "namely" distributed wide-area oscillation
monitoring, transient stability assessment, and voltage stability monitoring.

The intellectual merit of this research will be in establishing an extremely
timely application area of the PMU technology through its integration with
distributed computing and optimal control. It will illustrate how ideas from
advanced ideas from numerical methods and distributed optimization can be
combined into power system monitoring and control applications, and how they can
be implemented via fault-tolerant computing to maintain grid stability in face
of catastrophic cyber and physical disturbances.

The broader impact of this project will be in providing a much-needed
application of CPS engineering to advance emerging research on PMU-integrated
next-generation smart grids. Research results will be broadcast through journal
publications, jointly organized graduate courses between NC State and University
of Illinois Urbana Champagne, conference tutorials and workshops. Undergraduate
research for minority engineering students will be promoted via the FREEDM
Systems Center, summer internships via Information Trust Institute (UIUC) and
RENCI, and middle/high-school student mentoring through the NCSU Science House
program.