* 1329281
* A Biopsychosocial Model of Women's Departure From STEM Fields
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Chad Forbes, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 798,736.00

A recent analysis by the National Academy of Sciences revealed that there are
major leaks in the pipeline as women proceed in to the upper echelons of
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematic (STEM) domains. Dr. Chad Forbes
(University of Delaware) proposes one reason for this is that continuous
exposure to stereotype threatening contexts, i.e., stressful performance
situations where negative stereotypes about women's math ability are salient,
may initiate a biological stress response that enhances encoding and recall of
negative emotional memories associated with STEM domains. These memories
ultimately facilitate learned STEM aversions to undermine tactics people
normally employ to ensure perseverance in challenging domains. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Forbes and colleagues will conduct four
experiments on men and women who are highly identified with STEM domains.
Incorporating longitudinal, genotyping, and simultaneous EEG and startle probe
methodologies, these studies will assess how subcortical and cortical responses
to negative information encountered in stereotype threatening contexts predicts
women's memory for negative information (Study 1), STEM aversions (Study 2), and
ability to self-enhance in STEM domains (Study 3). Genetic polymorphisms known
to influence neural regulatory processes will be assessed as moderators of these
relationships. The final study will attempt to counteract women's basic STEM
aversions to motivate sustained engagement with STEM domains. Together, these
studies will identify key factors that both repel women from STEM domains and
promote their retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underrepresentation of women
in STEM fields has deleterious ramifications on the nation's economy, academic
and corporate diversity, national productivity, innovation and quality of STEM
products, services and education, and overall quality of life. Identifying ways
to increase the representation of women in STEM fields will have broad impacts
on future intervention programs, advancement in science, and prosperity of our
nation. By disseminating findings from these studies to hundreds of women STEM
majors and public forums, this project will create opportunities to educate
these groups about the deleterious consequences of stereotype threat on women's
STEM engagement and the dire need to promote their retention in STEM fields.
Furthermore, dozens of students, including women and underrepresented
minorities, will be trained in cutting-edge neuroscience methodologies and have
the opportunity to present findings at national and international conferences.
Finally, the project will generate a very large EEG and genetic database. Dr.
Forbes will contribute to the big data effort by making the data available to
support other coordinated NSF efforts that aim to make use of real data in
teaching STEM related courses, developing EEG-based source imaging methods, and
enabling participation in discovery science by those who would otherwise have no
access to such data.