* 1329875
* CPS: Synergy: Plug-and-Play Cyber-Physical Systems to Enable Intelligent Buildings
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* James Braun, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2017
* USD 994,936.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1329875 (Hu). Despite their importance within the
energy sector, buildings have not kept pace with technological improvements and
particularly the introduction of intelligent features. A primary obstacle in
enabling intelligent buildings is their highly distributed and diffuse nature.
To address this challenge, a modular approach will be investigated for building
design, construction, and operation that would completely transform the building
industry. Buildings would be assembled from a set of pre-engineered intelligent
modules and commissioned on site in a "plug-and-play" manner much like a "LEGO"
set but with added capability of (a) allowing for easy configuration and re-
configuration that can be integrated to provide delivery of thermal and visual
comfort, ventilation; (b) providing optimized controls in terms of overall
occupant satisfaction and energy efficiency and performance monitoring. The
primary goal of the research is to develop and demonstrate innovative concepts
for distributed intelligence along with a new paradigm for plug-and-play
building control that is a necessary precursor in enabling this transformation.
To accomplish these tasks, the investigators constitute a multidisciplinary team
with expertise from three engineering disciplines, namely Civil (Architectural),
Mechanical, Electrical and Computer Engineering. The intellectual merit of this
research lies in developing a unified approach that advances the engineering of
cyber-physical systems (CPS) for buildings by contributing to the following
fields: (a) modeling and identification of building subsystems and integrated
systems; (b) multi-agent system networks that enable distributed intelligent
monitoring and control of multi-zone buildings; (c) optimal control algorithms
for stochastic hybrid systems that can optimize the operation of buildings with
mode changes under uncertainty. These contributions will be integrated in
simulation and experimental platforms for multi-agent building system networks
to validate the developed algorithms and to provide a new CPS-based
technological solution to the control and optimization of modular buildings. An
initial knowledge/technology base will be provided for scalable, adaptive,
robust, and efficient engineering solutions for cyber-enabled building systems
that will transform the current building operation practice, enabling the next
generation of smart buildings with optimized comfort delivery and energy use.
The broader impacts of this project are: (a) Theoretical development of modeling
representations, algorithms, and simulation tools that will impact a number of
scientific communities, including Civil/Architectural, Mechanical and Computer
Engineering, Computer Science, and Operations Research. The proposed new
principles for heterogeneous multi-agent system networks, distributed
intelligence, and optimal hybrid control algorithms will have impacts in a
diverse range of fields outside of building systems such as power systems,
transportation systems, robotics, etc.; (b) Integration of the proposed
modeling, simulation, and experimental platforms into new teaching modules and
experiential learning activities that support the curriculum development in
three engineering schools and Purdue?s first year engineering program; (c)
Dissemination of research outcomes to the industry to open up a new horizon of
business and economy that would enable the growth of green and intelligent
buildings; (d) The creation of outreach and engagement initiatives that motivate
K-12 teachers and students in STEM learning and research, broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering, and motivate
undergraduate students to participate in research related to emerging CPS
topics.