* 1329562
* Support for Student Participation in the 2013 International Conference on Laser Spectroscopy (ICOLS); Berkeley, CA; June 9-14, 2013
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2014
* USD 5,000.00

The funding from this grant will be used to support US graduate students
attending the 2013 International Conference on Laser Spectroscopy (ICOLS), which
will be held in Berkeley, CA during the week of June 9-14, 2013. This
international meeting is the 21st in a series of biennial conferences at which
the world-wide community of atomic, molecular and optical (AMO) physicists
gather to present and discuss the cutting edge work from this broad, vibrant
research field. The conference is prestigious and well attended by the
luminaries of AMO physics (including several Nobel Laureates) and also by the
latest rising stars. The meeting centers around plenary invited talks and
several poster sessions, and spans the forefront fields of AMO science including
ultrafast optics, ultracold atomic gases, precision tests of fundamental
physics, molecular spectroscopy, quantum information, many-body quantum physics,
cavity optomechanics, and others.

The conference is particularly valuable for young scientists -- graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers. The gathering is typically smaller than
the other central meetings of the field, such as the APS DAMOP annual meeting
and the International Conference on Atomic Physics. As such, rising scientists
have greater access to the most influential scientists in the field, giving them
a chance to learn, to discuss physics at a high level, and to establish
relationships to further their scientific careers. This year's ICOLS also gives
students and postdocs access to the premier scientific institutions in the Bay
Area, particularly the University of California, Berkeley, and the Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory, both of whom are sponsoring receptions and open houses in
coordination with the meeting. NSF support of this meeting is thus a strong
contribution to graduate student and postdoctoral training, and also a strong
contribution to the advancement of AMO physics in the United States and
worldwide.