* 1329304
* Expert-Novice Framework to Support Student and Instructor Feedback on Design
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Heidi Diefes-Dux, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Design skills and knowledge are critical to all fields of engineering as
engineers design innovative solutions to meet the needs of today and tomorrow.
Developing students? design understanding and abilities is thus a critical
enterprise for the field of engineering education. However, a key ingredient in
the design learning process is the feedback that students receive on both their
design products and design processes. This engineering education research
project builds on the investigators? prior experiences with characterizing and
improving the feedback that instructors (as well as students themselves) provide
on engineering students? mathematical modeling work. In this project, the
investigators examine the differences that exist in the feedback provided by
expert design educators compared to newer design educators compared to students
(in peer review) to (1) characterize the form and substance of the feedback that
expert design educators provide to promote learning and (2) develop materials to
help students as well as less-experienced instructors learn how to provide
better feedback. These materials will first be used to help local (i.e. Purdue)
students and instructors to provide better feedback, and after assessing the
effectiveness of the materials, the investigators will share the materials
widely through publications and workshops to provide opportunities for other
educators to improve their design feedback skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
findings of this research will have impact across design education and enhance
the ability of faculty to create experiences that meet the attributes being
called for by engineering accreditation boards, the National Academy of
Engineering, and industry leaders in today's global economy. This project
overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through
preparation of an engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise.