* 1329224
* A Longitudinal Study of the Dimensions of Disciplinary Culture to Enhance Innovation and Retention among Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Thomas Martin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 435,623.00

This grant studies differences in disciplinary culture between undergraduates in
engineering and in other disciplines to better understand the relationship
between disciplinary cultural identity and academic outcomes of engineering
students. The goal of the study is to identify aspects of disciplinary culture
that are major factors in addressing issues that a critical for engineering
education in the future, such as innovation, creativity, and diversity. The
grant applies Hofstede?s dimensions of culture (power distance,
collectivism/individualism, femininity/masculinity, and uncertainty avoidance)
to explain how students develop skills to operate within a discipline and across
disciplines. Furthermore, the grant explores the relationship between
disciplinary culture and student recruitment and retention in engineering
programs, particularly with respect to underrepresented groups. The
investigators? prior work with interdisciplinary design teams indicates that the
dimension of uncertainty avoidance is especially critical: the ability to
tolerate and even embrace uncertainty supports innovative interdisciplinary
design practice. In addition, while many engineering students may be less likely
to tolerate uncertainty, those engineers who do embrace uncertainty may find
themselves alienated from engineering curricula. This pattern, in turn, may
impact diversity in engineering student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, the grant addresses five
research questions: 1) How do Hofstede?s dimensions of culture map to academic
disciplines? 2) What are the relationships between the dimensions of culture and
(a) student choice of major and (b) student success with a major? 3) How do
students change over time in their academic programs with respect to the
dimensions of culture? 4) What factors affect those changes, e.g., curriculum,
instructors? 5) Do the relationships in above show any variation by demographic
indicators, e.g., race or gender? To investigate these questions, the grant
includes a multi-university study that examines the dimensions of culture across
the university, and then follows the development of students within engineering.
The intellectual merit of the grant includes developing an actionable theory of
disciplinary culture that can support pedagogies of inclusive and collaborative
innovation. Despite widespread agreement that engineers for the 21st century
must be more creative and innovative, there has been little progress in
developing engineering pedagogies that support those goals. The results of the
grant can be used by engineering programs to better design curricula that
support innovation and creativity. The broader impacts include having a better
understanding of the role of disciplinary culture in recruiting and retaining
students, particularly with respect to groups that are currently
underrepresented in engineering. This grant informs the debate about the role of
engineering design in training U.S. engineers to meet the technical challenges
of the 21st century.