* 1329885
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: A Unified System Theoretic Framework for Cyber Attack-Resilient Power Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Makan Fardad, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2017
* USD 122,096.00

The electric power grid is a complex cyber-physical system, whose reliable and
secure operation is of paramount importance to national security and economic
vitality. There is a growing and evolving threat of cyber-based attacks, both in
numbers and sophistication, on the nation's critical infrastructure. Therefore,
cyber security "encompassing attack prevention, detection, mitigation, and
resilience" is critical in today's power grid and the emerging smart grid. The
goal of this project is to develop a unified system-theoretic framework and
analytical tools for cyber-physical security of power systems, capturing the
dynamics of the physical system as well as that of the cyber system. Research
tasks include: 1) Development of a methodology for impact analysis that includes
systematic identification of worst-case stealthy attacks on the power system's
wide-area control and evaluating the resulting consequences in terms of
stability violations and performance loss. 2) Development of robust cyber-
physical countermeasures, employing a combination of methods from system theory,
cyber security, and model-based/data-driven tools, in the form of domain-
specific anomaly detection/tolerance algorithms and attack-resilient control
algorithms. 3) Evaluating the effectiveness of the proposed impact modeling and
mitigation algorithms through a combination of simulation and testbed-based
evaluations, using realistic system topologies and attack scenarios. The project
makes significant contributions to enhance the security and resiliency of the
power grid and lays a scientific foundation for cyber-physical security of
critical infrastructure. Also, the project develops novel curriculum modules,
mentors graduate and undergraduate students including under-represented
minorities, leverages industrial collaborations, and exposes high school
students to cyber security concepts.