* 1329979
* CPS: Synergy: Foundations of Cyber-Physical Infrastructure for Creative Design and Making of Cyber-physical Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Mikhail Atallah, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,075,000.00

This grant provides funding for establishing the scientific foundations of a
product innovation process that can engage a vastly larger pool of talent to
generate new ideas and to create new cyber-physical products. The primary
objective is to address fundamental issues pertaining to natural interfaces,
behavioral modeling and secure knowledge sharing, with particular emphasis on
their integration. This objective will be achieved by pursuing the following
three aims: (1) reducing barriers to participation in product innovation through
natural interfaces between physical and virtual domains, (2) reducing barriers
to model-based engineering in community-based product development, (3)
overcoming information-related impediments to collaboration and information
sharing. The findings will be embodied in a proof-of-concept cyber-physical
platform for creative design and prototyping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this research hold promise for a new conceptualization of a cyber-physical
infrastructure, building on the developments in natural interfaces and
information security. The specific outcomes include: (a) well-founded methods
for 3D design support of cyber-physical products, and their software embodiment
in a natural user interface, (b) techniques and middleware to support model-
based engineering in virtual community-based product development, and (c)
techniques and protocols for minimum disclosure interactions, quality of inputs
assurance, provenance and integrity, and usage control for virtual design and
making of cyber-physical products. The proposed research will advance the state
of the art in shape creation, product design and manufacturing, and secure
design coordination. Validation of the concepts in an educational context will
benefit the engineering curriculum by exposing students to emerging ways of
designing and making cyber-physical products. Over the long term, the research,
education, and dissemination efforts conducted in this project will facilitate a
paradigm shift where cyber-physical design and manufacturing using natural
interfaces, secure behavioral modeling and knowledge sharing in communities will
become a part of our nation?s creative design and manufacturing capacity.