* 1329815
* RUI: Acid and Base Stress in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Joan Slonczewski, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2017
* USD 496,500.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: &lt;br/&gt;Acid and base, as measured by pH, are important
to promote and/or control bacterial growth and survival in all environments,
from soil and water to the human skin and intestine. Microbes form acids during
food production, and acids are important food preservatives. Acid and base
influence microbial production of biofuels and pharmaceuticals. Acid and base
production change the external environment of growing bacteria but mechanisms of
transport and metabolism help bacterial cells maintain near-constant pH inside,
under acid or base stress from outside. Most of what is currently understood on
bacterial adaptation to changes in the external environment applies to aerated
cultures grown in liquid medium under laboratory conditions. This research will
identify how the bacterium Escherichia coli responds to acid stress and base
stress under conditions found in natural environments, such as low oxygen and
biofilms. Undergraduate researchers will employ fluorescence microscopy and
laboratory evolution to address: (1) How do bacterial cells regulate pH as they
divide and undergo polar aging? (2) How does pH stress cause oxidation stress
(3) How do bacteria evolve under acid stress to grow at lower pH than the
ancestral strain The answers to these questions will help the fermentation
industry devise improved food preservatives and processes for
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: &lt;br/&gt;The project will
contribute to the nation's human resources by continuing a productive research
program run by undergraduates. Each year, 10 first-year student researchers will
be recruited from the Kenyon College STEM programs and science classes, as well
as 2 high school students. Students will learn fundamental techniques of
microbiological research while working with more advanced peers in BIOL 385
Research in Biology and BIOL 497 Senior Honors. They will write their own mini-
proposals, design and conduct the experiments, and draft the manuscript for
publication. Many undergraduates attracted to work on this project decide to
pursue careers in science. Students will also serve as judges for the high-
school science fair, and provide materials and demonstrations for members of an
economically underserved community.