* 1329807
* CPS: Breakthrough: Scalable Component-Based Model Revision of Cyber-Physical Systems with Separation of Concerns
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Sandeep Kulkarni, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 445,719.00

This project develops algorithms for revising a given model for a cyber-physical
system while ensuring that the revised model is correct-by-construction and is
realizable in the constraints imposed by the cyber-physical system. It
specializes these algorithms in the context of fault-tolerance (with the theory
of separation of concerns) and in the context of timed models (with the role of
fairness). The project identifies constraints imposed by the inability to revise
some or all physical components and ensure that they are satisfied during
revision. It specializes model revision algorithms in two contexts: fault-
tolerance and role of fairness during revision. Regarding fault-tolerance, it
develops the theory of separation of concerns for cyber-physical systems. This
work bridges the gap between fault-tolerance components, control theory and
model revision. Regarding fairness, it develops efficient algorithms for
revision by using abstraction to model continuous behaviors with discrete
behaviors that utilize fairness.

One broad impact of this project is to advance the fundamental science and
technology of cyber-physical systems by developing systematic methods that
ensure system correctness during maintenance where the system is revised due to
changing requirements and/or environment. The algorithms from this project will
provide techniques for providing assurance in automotive and aeronautical
systems. In the context where fault-tolerance properties are added, the proposed
activities also have the potential to identify missing specifications early and
thereby reduce the cost of designing corresponding systems. The proposed
activities facilitate in educating graduate students about different tasks
involved in providing assurance via component based models and via model
revision.