* 1329408
* RAPID: Ecological responses to large-scale climate disturbance: Could the interaction of overfishing and disturbance initiate phase-shifts in tropical seagrass ecosystems?
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* James Fourqurean, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2015
* USD 194,639.00

Intellectual Merit: Large-bodied marine predators have both direct and indirect
effects on other members of their communities through predation-related removals
and intimidation-related (that is, non-consumptive) changes in behavior of other
organisms, respectively. Thus, large-bodied predators can produce cascading
effects on other aspects of the ecosystem. Understanding the nuances of top
predator effects on ecosysytem structure and function is a topic of keen
ecological interest with strong implications for conservation and management.
The PIs have been working for 15 years in the pristine seagrass ecosystem of
Shark Bay, western Australia. Their work has shown that tiger sharks induce a
reduction in seagrass grazing by dugongs which allows a slow-growing but highly
palatable seagrass (Amphibolis antarctica) to persist and even dominate. The
slow-growing seagrass has recently experienced a widespread die-off, and two
important questions are: (1) what are the immediate effects on the ecosystem;
and (2) how does the presence or absence of sharks affect re-establishment of
this species, with long-term consequences for the system?

The natural die-back of A. Antarctica provides a unique opportunity to study
these questions of diversity, structure, and persistence, and to examine the
effects of a natural disturbance in a pristine ecosystem that has been studied
for many years. A RAPID award is needed to take advantage of this situation
shortly after disturbance.

Broader Impacts: The project will provide important insights into the impacts of
climate change and overfishing on ecosystem dynamics, and the PIs will integrate
results into their on-going outreach programs, including a website
(www.sberp.org), public lectures, and video-based projects for elementary,
middle, and high school students. Data will be provided to the Department of
Environment and Conservation of Western Australia to assist in their management
of Shark Bay, as well as US data depositories. The project will provide support
for research by a PhD student, a postdoc, and multiple undergraduate assistants.