* 1329452
* CPS: Synergy: Preserving Confidentiality of Sensitive Information in Power System Models
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Bernard Lesieutre, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2017
* USD 678,376.00

The electric power grid is a national critical infrastructure that is increasing
vulnerable to malicious physical and cyber attacks. As a result, detailed data
describing grid topology and components is considered highly sensitive
information that can be shared only under strict non-disclosure agreements.
There is also increasing need to foster cooperation among the growing number of
participants in microgrid-enabled electric marketplace. However, to maintain
their economic competitiveness, the market participants are not inclined to
share sensitive information about their grid with other participants. Motivated
by this need for increased cyber-physical security and economic confidentiality,
the project is developing techniques to obfuscate sensitive design information
in power system models without jeopardizing the quality of the solutions
obtained from such models. Specifically, solution approaches have been developed
to hide sensitive structural information in Direct Current (DC) Optimal Power
Flow models. These approaches are currently being extended to Alternating
Current (AC) Optimal Power Flow models. The project is also developing secure
multi-party methods where the market participants collectively optimize the grid
operation while only sharing encrypted private sensitive information. Finally,
the project is incorporating secure market operations in jointly solving the
Optimal Power Dispatch problem without revealing sensitive private information
from each participant to other participants. The techniques developed in this
project have the potential to broadly impact areas beyond power systems. The
general principles developed in the project can be used to mask sensitive
information in many problems that can be formulated as a linear or non-linear
programming optimization.