* 1329471
* A Study of the evolutionary, functional oological adaptations, and brooding behaviors of the Australasian megapodes in respect to their unique nesting behaviors: eggshell gas excha
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Gerald Grellet-Tinner, The Journey Museum
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2014
* USD 24,424.00

This investigation aims to examine eggs and eggshell structures of modern
megapodes with respect to their nesting strategies and environments. It will
provide novel data on their evolutionary reproductive adaptations and
reproductive fitness in the face of the present climate-driven environmental
changes. Australasian megapodes are most intriguing because they display the
practice, unique among birds, of incubating their eggs by utilizing only
external heat sources rather than body heat. This study will focus chiefly on
the eggshell structural and microstructural functional adaptative
characteristics related to their respective nesting environments. Observations
and microcharacterizations will be performed at Flinders University and the
world-renowned Australian Microscopy and Microanalysis Research Facility located
within Flinders University, the University of Adelaide, and the University of
South Australia, all three&lt;br/&gt;located in Adelaide, South Australia. The
collaborative study will be performed at Flinders University with Dr. Prideaux
and his team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A professor at the Oglala Lakota College
(OLC) in Pine Ridge, the only higher education institution in the largest and
poorest Native American Reservation, will collaborate in this project and is
interested in the ecology, evolution, and reproduction of a box turtle colony
discovered on the Reservation. The present study will greatly benefit this
study.