* 1329172
* SBIR Phase II:  Application of a Durable Self-sealing Material for Hemodialysis Blood Access
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* James Hong, Solinas Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,143,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on the
development of a novel self-sealing materials technology for the primary
application of designing durable blood access systems for hemodialysis patients.
Nearly 580,000 people in the United States alone have end stage renal disease
(ESRD), and over 400,000 people are treated using hemodialysis as the primary
mode of treatment. Current access systems are neither designed for repeated
access nor managing bleeding after hemodialysis treatment, and as a result
commonly lead to secondary complications. The research aims of the proposal are
to: 1) Develop manufacturing methods for device production, 2) Determine
biocompatibility of the materials technology, and 3) Develop an animal model to
evaluate potential clinical impact.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will
yield a unique and novel material that will create a paradigm shift from the
treatment of complications due to hemodialysis to prevention. This will address
clinical market needs and shift reimbursement policies to create better clinical
outcomes and contain costs. Currently, $27 billion is spent on the delivery of
hemodialysis treatment for ESRD patients. The materials technology under
development will lead to vascular access devices suitable for nearly the entire
hemodialysis patient population, thereby creating an estimated addressable
market size of more than $500 million. This research will enhance scientific
understanding by introducing novel engineering and manufacturing methods for a
broad range of applications beyond hemodialysis where repeated access and
reliable sealing is required.