* 1329341
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Managing Uncertainty in the Design of Safety-Critical Aviation Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Samuel Guyer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 396,719.00

The objective of this project is to research tools to manage uncertainty in the
design and certification process of safety-critical aviation systems. The
research focuses on three innovative ideas to support this objective. First,
probabilistic techniques will be introduced to specify system-level requirements
and bound the performance of dynamical components. These will reduce the design
costs associated with complex aviation systems consisting of tightly integrated
components produced by many independent engineering organizations. Second, a
framework will be created for developing software components that use
probabilistic execution to model and manage the risk of software failure. These
techniques will make software more robust, lower the cost of validating code
changes, and allow software quality to be integrated smoothly into overall
system-level analysis. Third, techniques from Extreme Value Theory will be
applied to develop adaptive verification and validation procedures. This will
enable early introduction of new and advanced aviation systems. These systems
will initially have restricted capabilities, but these restrictions will be
gradually relaxed as justified by continual logging of data from in-service
products.

The three main research aims will lead to a significant reduction in the costs
and time required for fielding new aviation systems. This will enable, for
example, the safe and rapid implementation of next generation air traffic
control systems that have the potential of tripling airspace capacity with no
reduction in safety. The proposed methods are also applicable to other complex
systems including smart power grids and automated highways. Integrated into the
research is an education plan for developing a highly skilled workforce capable
of designing safety critical systems. This plan centers around two main
activities: (a) creation of undergraduate labs focusing on safety-critical
systems, and (b) integration of safety-critical concepts into a national robotic
snowplow competition. These activities will provide inspirational, real-world
applications to motivate student learning.