* 1329481
* CPS: Synergy: Smart Flexible Camera Sheet: Ultra-Thin Semantic-Guided Cooperative Micro-Camera Array
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Yu-Hen Hu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

This highly interdisciplinary research addresses two fundamental challenges in
image sensing and image understanding: 1) versatile camera systems in a small
form factor, and 2) 3-dimensional scene and object recognition from
2-dimensional photos. These fundamental challenges are tackled together by
developing a cyber-physical imaging system, called smart flexible camera sheet,
which integrates an array of many micro-cameras (millimeters in size each) onto
a thin substrate. The substrate has flexible geometric shape and the orientation
of each camera is individually adjusted and controlled in real time via
intelligent algorithms. The overall imaging system is ultra-thin and space-
efficient, and can be easily mounted onto or embedded into any planar or curved
surface. Hence it opens up a plethora of new civilian and military applications
where surveillance and visual monitoring are required, thus bearing great
commercialization potential. Example applications are: smart vehicles, smart
transportation, highway safety, smart civil infrastructure, manufacturing lines,
battlefield surveillance and reconnaissance, sensor networks, mobile robotics,
medical facilities, and patient care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
project generates new educational opportunities for students at all levels,
leading to curricular development in electrical engineering, applied physics,
materials science and engineering, and computer science. An important component
of the project is a strong dissemination and outreach program to reach other
universities, K-12 students, teachers, parents and the general public.