* 1329317
* Broadening Participation Research: Focus on Tribal Colleges
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Scott Morgan, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 07/31/2015
* USD 75,916.00

The organizers will convene a 2013 Leaders' Forum for NSF-TCUP PIs and PDs. TCUP
leaders will collaboratively develop strategies to enhance their projects to
include an emphasis on research capacity-building. During the two-day workshop,
participants will immerse in formal sessions during which they will share and
explore innovative best practices to STEM research, instruction, and evaluation
under the theme "Broadening Participation Research: Focus on Tribal Colleges."
In addition, participants will discuss workforce challenges, opportunities, and
the economic impact of TCUP on the tribal communities
served.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
workshop is a critical resource for tribal colleges that are attempting to build
research capacity and to increase the number of American Indian students
enrolling in, and completing, STEM degrees. NSF-TCUP projects have been
instrumental to tribal colleges' capacity to develop and offer increased STEM
instruction and student support since 2001. Some tribal colleges are emerging as
research institutions, with many more positioned to offer opportunities for
research in the near future. The workshop organizers have extensive experience
with TCUP faculty, students, and administrators. The workshop agenda will be
finalized in consultation with a peer committee, and will include strategies for
conducting research independently or in collaboration with neighboring colleges
and universities, including other TCUP institutions. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;The 2013 Leaders' Forum will contribute to the knowledge of tribal
colleges by making them aware of the potential benefits to their constituents
and to the larger research community. Research originating from tribal colleges
has the potential to make contributions to expand knowledge about American
Indians and their homelands.The long-term impact will be tribe specific research
and the development of highly qualified American Indian researchers for the US
workforce. Successful projects with achievable and measurable outcomes will help
move tribal colleges to the next level of institutional effectiveness and toward
greater participation in American Higher Education.