* 1329354
* Microentrepreneurship, Business Growth and SME transition: The Long-run Impact of Repayment Flexibility
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Erica Field, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 75,154.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: SES - 1329354&lt;br/&gt;Institution: National
Bureau of Economic Research Inc&lt;br/&gt;NSF Program:
ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Pande, Rohini&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Micro-entrepreneurship, Business Growth and SME transition: The Long-run Impact
of Repayment Flexibility&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Financial inclusion is
lauded as an important tool in the fight against poverty. One perceived benefit
of financial inclusion is that it enables recipients to launch and grow income-
generating microenterprises. Yet, impact studies of one of the most widely
recognized methods of connecting the poor to credit- microfinance- suggest that
the success of microloans in achieving enterprise growth is, on average,
relatively small. More broadly, the failure of most microenterprises to grow
into larger and more sustainable businesses has posed a major puzzle to the
field of development economics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand the
relationship between the provision of microfinance and the heterogeneity in
microenterprise growth - and to understand constraints on microenterprise
transition to SME status - this project will combine a microfinance field
experiment that yielded large growth results with detailed data on business
histories and individual characteristics of business owners. This National
Science Foundation grant will enable the study of microenterprise growth by
implementing a research design that exploits exogenous variation introduced by
(1) a liquidity crisis in the Indian microcredit sector, and experimental
variation in (2) initial microenterprise size. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the end
of 2010, this client population faced a very significant liquidity crisis
related to a sector-wide microfinance regulatory regime change. This change was
sparked by a series of microfinance client distress accounts in South India.
This liquidity crisis spread from South India to microfinance clients through
the rest of the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The variation in microenterprise
size was created by a field experiment conducted on microcredit loan clients in
Kolkata, India between 2006 and 2007: control clients were required to begin
repayment immediately in accordance with the standard contract, while treatment
clients received a two-month grace period. Field et al. (forthcoming) show that
clients experienced long-run heterogeneity in business size, with higher growth
among treatment clients relative to the control group. The current study will
resurvey all 845 clients in the experimental intervention to generate a seven-
year longitudinal dataset. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The timing of this survey will
allow the examination of whether and how business size dampens the impact of a
liquidity crisis on subsequent business growth. Because the study population
faced a significant aggregate liquidity crisis during this time period, this
study will investigate how enterprise size influences ability to deal with
financial shocks. Additionally, the original tracking data show that, over the
past six years, a significant fraction of sample microenterprises witnessed
substantial growth in capital value. Thus, in addition to examining the long-run
impacts of the Field et al (forthcoming) intervention, and whether the
aforementioned liquidity crisis differentially impacted business according to
their initial size, the survey expansion will analyze the determinants of
business growth from microenterprise towards SME status.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lastly, this survey will have managerial and ownership
information that will allow the comparison of business performance by gender.
This evidence will complement previous research comparing male versus female
entrepreneurial performance, and further it by examining whether intra-household
division of enterprises (across genders) is itself endogenous. If yes, this
would be an important caveat on any research that compares female- and male-
owned businesses in order to isolate the impact of owner gender on business
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results and conclusions of this study on
constraints to microenterprise expansion will be relevant for India, but also
other countries with similar socioeconomic profiles. With South Asia poised to
enter a new regulatory regime, this work will also have significant implications
for microfinance regulation in the region. The findings will help identify
whether and how contract flexibility should be regulated, how much emphasis
should be placed on client screening, and the role of interest rate subsidies.
Finally, the results are also relevant for policy that seeks to increase the
status of women, as it provides evidence on approaches that serve that goal, and
will contribute to the current debate in academic literature on this topic.