* 1329762
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Formal Models of Human Control and Interaction with Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Lewis, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 152,972.00

Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) encompass a large variety of systems including for
example future energy systems (e.g. smart grid), homeland security and emergency
response, smart medical technologies, smart cars and air transportation. One of
the most important challenges in the design and deployment of Cyber-Physical
Systems is how to formally guarantee that they are amenable to effective human
control. This is a challenging problem not only because of the operational
changes and increasing complexity of future CPS but also because of the
nonlinear nature of the human-CPS system under realistic assumptions. Current
state of the art has in general produced simplified models and has not fully
considered realistic assumptions about system and environmental constraints or
human cognitive abilities and limitations. To overcome current state of the art
limitations, our overall research goal is to develop a theoretical framework for
complex human-CPS that enables formal analysis and verification to ensure
stability of the overall system operation as well as avoidance of unsafe
operating states. To analyze a human-CPS involving a human operator(s) with
bounded rationality three key questions are identified: (a) Are the inputs
available to the operator sufficient to generate desirable behaviors for the
CPS? (b) If so, how easy is it for the operator with her cognitive limitations
to drive the system towards a desired behavior? (c) How can areas of poor system
performance and determine appropriate mitigations be formally identified? The
overall technical approach will be to (a) develop and appropriately leverage
general cognitive models that incorporate human limitations and capabilities,
(b) develop methods to abstract cognitive models to yield tractable analytical
human models (c) develop innovative techniques to design the abstract interface
between the human and underlying system to reflect mutual constraints, and (d)
extend current state-of-the-art reachability and verification algorithms for
analysis of abstract interfaces, iin which one of the systems in the feedback
loop (i.e., the user) is mostly unknown, uncertain, highly variable or poorly
modeled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide contributions with broad
significance in the following areas: (1) fundamental principles and algorithms
that would serve as a foundation for provably safe robust hybrid control systems
for mixed human-CPS (2) methods for the development of analytical human models
that incorporate cognitive abilities and limitations and their consequences in
human control of CPS, (3) validated techniques for interface design that enables
effective human situation awareness through an interface that ensures minimum
information necessary for the human to safely control the CPS, (4) new
reachability analysis techniques that are scalable and allow rapid determination
of different levels of system safety. The research will help to identify
problems (such as automation surprises, inadequate or excessive information
contained in the user interface) in safety critical, high-risk, or expensive CPS
before they are built, tested and deployed. The research will provide the formal
foundations for understanding and developing human-CPS and will have a broad
range of applications in the domains of healthcare, energy, air traffic control,
transportation systems, homeland security and large-scale emergency response.
The research will contribute to the advancement of under-represented students in
STEM fields through educational innovation and outreach. The code, benchmarks
and data will be released via the project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal
descriptions of models of human cognition are in general incompatible with
formal models of the Cyber Physical System (CPS) the human operator(s) control.
Therefore, it is difficult to determine in a rigorous way whether a CPS
controlled by a human operator will be safe or stable and under which
circumstances. The objective of this research is to develop an analytic
framework of human-CPS systems that encompasses engineering compatible formal
models of the human operator that preserve the basic architectural features of
human cognition. In this project the team will develop methodologies for
building such models as well as techniques for formal verification of the human-
CPS system so that performance guarantees can be provided. They will validate
models in a variety of domains ranging from air traffic control to large scale
emergency response to the administration of anesthesia.