* 1329442
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Case Study in Food Science, International Trade, and Branding
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Duana Fullwiley, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 18,000.00

Under the supervision of Duana Fullwiley of Stanford University, Leslie Grothaus
will examine how food science influences government campaigns to brand national
foods to gain a competitive advantage in international trade. Research will be
focused on the GHEC (Global Hansik [Korean Cuisine] Expansion Campaign), a top-
down state-led push in South Korea to rank its cuisine among the world's finest.
Methods used to explore this gastro-diplomacy campaign include media analysis,
interviews with food science researchers and professionals, and participant
observation at three food science laboratories. The PI will study the scientific
discovery process for health enhancing components of foods and the development
of 'nutraceuticals' (foods designed to have medicinal properties when consumed
regularly).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to food studies,
cultural anthropology and science and technology. This project will illuminate
the ways in which one state is attempting to create positives cultural and
political links to its cuisine, and to link their cuisine to the
'unquestionable' discourse of science and the positive 'branding' of
national/state identity. Given increasing concerns about global health and links
to food and national diets, this project promises to provide insight into not
only South Korea's attempts to make these linkages, but the ways in which food
science, politics, consumption, nationalism, and health are imagined, marketed,
and experienced in other nation states. The research will result in a
dissertation and a book directed to both academics and a general audience.