* 1329722
* Role of Motor/cargo Attachment Mechanics in Collective Kinesin Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Otger Campas, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2016
* USD 256,000.00

Cell survival depends on the efficient transport and sorting of protein and
chemical species into different functional compartments. Nanoscale motor
proteins that grasp membrane-bound cargos and move them along polymer filaments
enable this transport. The resultant cargo motion is thought to arise from the
cooperative action of multiple motor proteins, but the extent of cooperation and
the molecular mechanisms that enable it are poorly understood. One possible
mechanism for cooperation lies in the ability of multiple motors to share the
load necessary to move the cargo. Such load splitting is expected to depend
strongly on the mechanical properties of the cargo surface, but the detailed
relationship between load splitting, transport efficiency, and cargo mechanics
is unknown. The objective of this research project is to determine how membrane
mechanics influences the ability of motor proteins to cooperatively transport
cargos. To this end, biomimetic cargos with well-controlled interfacial
chemistry and mechanical properties will be generated and coupled to motor
proteins in vitro. The mechanical properties of the cargo surfaces will be
varied from purely rigid surfaces with immobile motor attachment sites to purely
fluid surfaces made of lipids that can rearrange their positions. The fluid
cargos, which are thought to better mimic the properties of cargos in living
cells, would allow motor binding sites to easily move on the cargo surface as
the motor proteins move. The impact of these interfacial lipid rearrangements on
cargo motion will be assessed using precision biophysical tools. Specifically,
the ability of motors to cooperatively move fluid and rigid cargos against an
external force will be determined and quantitatively compared. Computer
simulations and analytical theory will be developed to understand the
experimental data and generate testable predictions for the effects of membrane
mechanics on cargo transport in cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will provide important new insight into the fundamental mechanisms and
regulation of intracellular transport, while creating outreach and training
activities at the interface of biology, physics, and engineering. In particular,
community college and undergraduate students will participate in hands-on
research, and this work will form the thesis project of one graduate student,
who will develop expertise in experiments, computation and analytical theory.
The outcomes of this project will be incorporated into interdisciplinary
biophysics/biomechanics courses at UCSB and the Santa Barbara Advanced School
for Quantitative Biology, and will be disseminated broadly in publications and
conferences.