* 1329390
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Managing Uncertainty in the Design of Safety-Critical Aviation Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Peter Seiler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2017
* USD 473,560.00

The objective of this project is to research tools to manage uncertainty in the
design and certification process of safety-critical aviation systems. The
research focuses on three innovative ideas to support this objective. First,
probabilistic techniques will be introduced to specify system-level requirements
and bound the performance of dynamical components. These will reduce the design
costs associated with complex aviation systems consisting of tightly integrated
components produced by many independent engineering organizations. Second, a
framework will be created for developing software components that use
probabilistic execution to model and manage the risk of software failure. These
techniques will make software more robust, lower the cost of validating code
changes, and allow software quality to be integrated smoothly into overall
system-level analysis. Third, techniques from Extreme Value Theory will be
applied to develop adaptive verification and validation procedures. This will
enable early introduction of new and advanced aviation systems. These systems
will initially have restricted capabilities, but these restrictions will be
gradually relaxed as justified by continual logging of data from in-service
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three main research aims will lead to a
significant reduction in the costs and time required for fielding new aviation
systems. This will enable, for example, the safe and rapid implementation of
next generation air traffic control systems that have the potential of tripling
airspace capacity with no reduction in safety. The proposed methods are also
applicable to other complex systems including smart power grids and automated
highways. Integrated into the research is an education plan for developing a
highly skilled workforce capable of designing safety critical systems. This plan
centers around two main activities: (a) creation of undergraduate labs focusing
on safety-critical systems, and (b) integration of safety-critical concepts into
a national robotic snowplow competition. These activities will provide
inspirational, real-world applications to motivate student learning.