* 1329683
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Mutually Stabilized Correction in Physical Demonstration
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Magnus Egerstedt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2017
* USD 299,999.00

Objective: How much a person should be allowed to interact with a controlled
machine? If that machine is safety critical, and if the computer that oversees
its operation is essential to its operation and safety, the answer may be that
the person should not be allowed to interfere with its operation at all or very
little. Moreover, whether the person is a novice or an expert matters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research algorithmically resolves
the tension between the need for safety and the need for performance, something
a person may be much more adept at improving than a machine. Using a combination
of techniques from numerical methods, systems theory, machine learning, human-
machine interfaces, optimal control, and formal verification, this research will
develop a computable notion of trust that allows the embedded system to assess
the safety of the instruction a person is providing. The interface for
interacting with a machine matters as well; designing motions for safety-
critical systems using a keyboard may be unintuitive and lead to unsafe commands
because of its limitations, while other interfaces may be more intuitive but
threaten the stability of a system because the person does not understand the
needs of the system. Hence, the person needs to develop trust with the machine
over a period of time, and the last part of the research will include evaluating
a person's performance by verifying the safety of the instructions the person
provides. As the person becomes better at safe operation, she will be given more
authority to control the machine while never putting the system in
danger.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The activities will include
outreach, development of public-domain software, experimental coursework
including two massive online courses, and technology transfer to rehabilitation.
Outreach will include exhibits at the Museum of Science and Industry and working
with an inner-city high school. The algorithms to be developed will have
immediate impact on projects with the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago,
including assistive devices, stroke assessment, and neuromuscular hand control.
Providing a foundation for a science of trust has the potential to transform
rehabilitation research.