* 1329125
* IBSS: Analyses of Relationships Between Changing Environmental Conditions and Societal Conflict
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2018
* USD 999,994.00

This interdisciplinary research project will focus on widespread claims that
environmental change will lead to more conflict in vulnerable areas of the
world, especially in Africa south of the Sahara. This project will provide
scientific evidence about environmental effects related to violence across
Africa south of the Sahara and will examine how environmental changes are
affecting the lives of ordinary people. Conflict is not expected to be a direct
result of rising temperatures, decreased and more variable rainfall, changes in
vegetation, and other environmental factors. Instead; environmental change is
expected to result in resource scarcities in countries whose response capacities
are limited. Increasing competition among ethnic groups and communities over
dwindling resources in the areas most affected can lead to growing disparities,
population changes through migration, and controversy regarding resource
distribution. Existing research is inconclusive regarding the scope of the
effects of environmental change. While large-scale studies have shown rising
levels of violence, some have argued that violence is linked to ongoing
political, ethnic, economic, and governance factors. The researchers will use a
model linking climate change and variability, ecological consequences, measures
of social stability and instability, and possible outcomes that include
adaptation and recourse to violence. They will study the relationships between
environmental change and variability across the diverse regions of Africa south
of the Sahara, and they will conduct a more focused examination of the situation
in Kenya, which recently has experienced growing controversy regarding of
resource distribution and increased levels of ethnic competition. Using data
gathered from 1,500 respondents from different ecological regions of Kenya, the
researchers will study the process of adaptation and response through the
perspectives of the varied population across Kenya in the face of climate
stressors, food-security challenges, ethnic relations, and political
competition.

This project will yield new perspectives, information, and insights regarding
the complex interactions between changing environmental conditions and the
functioning of contemporary societies, including the ways that societies adapt
and respond to change. This project's focus on Africa south of the Sahara will
provide special insights into the socio-environmental dynamics in and prospects
for a region considered by many to be a region significantly influenced by
changes in climate, vegetation, and other environmental factors. This project
will advance basic understanding of complex social and environmental system
interactions, and it will contribute to consideration of policies, programs, and
other measures designed to address problems like poverty, social tensions, and
environmental degradation. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.