* 1329310
* Standard Research Grant: Conditions Favoring Consensus in State-Level Energy Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* David Hess, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 208,763.00

Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STS study in technology and policy will
examine conditions that favor enhanced or reduced bipartisanship on bills
concerning energy diversification and improvements in efficiency. The project
will make use of newly available state government databases on bills and laws to
track votes of individual legislators to perform quantitative analysis, which
will be complemented by ethnographic interviews with the staff of state
legislators who are highly involved in energy legislation. The project will
contribute to technology studies and the technology policy side of
interdisciplinary STS inquiry, specifically the body of research on transitions
of large technological systems that focuses on sustainability
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project breaks new methodological ground by using newly available state
government databases; previous research has used only the vote of the whole
legislature. At a theoretical level, the project will integrate research on
transitions, which tends to have a strong management and policy orientation,
with work in political sociology. That is to say, it will bring a political
sociological approach to the study of the transitions of large technological
systems, and likewise it will bring technology studies theory into the political
sociology of science. Thus, the project will make substantial and rather broad
theoretical and methodological contributions to the literature on energy
transitions and the science and technology studies of large technological
systems. It will also contribute knowledge to a practical and important policy
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
broader goals of the project is to affect policy by informing state legislators,
and possibly Congress, about the types of energy laws that are most and least
likely to achieve bipartisan support. The results of this project should be
valuable to legislators across partisan divisions and with widely divergent
views about optimal energy futures, and the material will also be publicly
available for use in energy and technology policy courses. The project will have
two publication components. A web site will be created that provides the first
detailed analysis of votes on energy legislation by political party affiliation
in state legislatures. A policy brief will be made publicly available; it will
include summary statistics of votes by law name, description and type of
legislation, and party affiliation, as well as an analysis of law types that
tend to produce higher levels of bipartisanship based on the quantitative and
qualitative analysis. State legislative offices will be contacted by email when
the brief is available, and there will be a press release as well.