* 1329284
* Collaborative Research:  Anammox in a shallow coastal aquifer - combining in situ stable isotope and molecular approaches to examine controls on rates and communities
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Bongkeun Song, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2015
* USD 47,511.00

Intellectual merit: Groundwater holds a large reserve of DIN (dissolved
inorganic nitrogen) with extended residence times. Current analysis suggests
that 20% of global DIN conversion to N2 (via denitrification) occurs in
aquifers. The PIs will focus their efforts on a newly discovered DIN reaction
pathway, anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox) that combines NH4+ with NO2- to
produce N2. Although anammox has proven to be an important route of DIN loss in
many marine systems, it is almost completely uncharacterized in groundwater
environments despite geochemical conditions that should promote its activity.
The preliminary evidence suggests that anammox may exceed denitrification in
N-rich aquifers. The PIs propose to investigate anammox, and its connection(s)
to denitrification and nitrification at the geochemical and microbial levels
through a series of laboratory and newly developed in situ molecular and
isotopic investigations. The overall goal of this study is to address the
following questions: 1) Does anammox occur at sufficient in situ rates to
warrant its consideration as an important mechanism of N loss during groundwater
transport? 2) Are there indicative chemical or isotopic signatures for anammox
in groundwater that can aid in its detection and quantification? The proposed
work will yield the first reported in situ anammox rates for groundwater and
define how microbial nitrogen cycling communities (anammox, denitrification,
nitrification) interact in a mutualistic or competitive fashion to regulate
nitrogen fate in aquifers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project
provides internship opportunities through the UCONN Center for Environmental
Science and Engineering (CESE). Graduate student support is provided to UNCW and
UCONN. Tobias is in a unique position as Coordinator for the UCONN Coastal
Studies undergraduate major to incorporate this work into undergraduate
education. The project leverages the UNCW Center for Undergraduate Research and
Fellowship and will help support two departmental honors degrees. Research
experience for high school students will be achieved within the UNCW "Summer
Ocean Ventures" program where participants will help with DNA analysis and
graduate students act as mentors. The project will support a public lecture on
connecting groundwater DIN contamination to coastal eutrophication as part of
UCONN's "Coastal Perspectives" and UNCW's "Planet Ocean" public lecture series.
Successful efforts to augment groundwater anammox may result in remediation
recommendations that can be transferred to regional managers through the
Massachusetts USGS district office.