* 1329738
* CPS: Synergy: Integrated Sensing and Control Algorithms for Computer-Assisted Training
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Alper Bozkurt, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,029,403.00

This project will result in fundamental physical and algorithmic building blocks
of a novel cyber-physical for a two-way communication platform between handlers
and working dogs designed to enable accurate training and control in open
environments (eg, disaster response, emergency medical
intervention).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Miniaturized sensor packages will be
developed to enable non- or minimally-invasive monitoring of dogs' positions and
physiology. Activity recognition algorithms will be developed to blend data from
multiple sensors. The algorithms will dynamically determine position and
behavior from time series of inertial and physiological measurements. Using
contextual information about task performance, the algorithms will provide duty-
cycling information to reduce sensor power consumption while increasing sensing
specificity. The resulting technologies will be a platform for implementation of
communication.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Strong interactions among computer science,
electrical engineering, and veterinary science support this project. Work at the
interface between electrical engineering and computer science will enable
increased power efficiency and specificity of sensing in the detectors; work at
the interface of electrical engineering and veterinary behavior will enable
novel physiological sensing packages to be developed which measure behavioral
signals in real time; Project outcomes will enable significant advances in how
humans interact with both cyber and physical agents, including getting clearer
pictures of behavior through real time physiological monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Students are part of the project and multidisciplinary training will
help to provide development of the Cyber-Physical Systems pipeline. Project
outreach efforts will include working with middle school children, especially
women and under-represented minorities, presentations in public museums that
will promote public engagement and appreciation of the contribution of cyber-
physical systems to daily lives. The goal of each outreach activity is to
encourage both interest and excitement for STEM topics, demonstrating how
computer science and engineering can lead to effective and engaging cyber-
physical systems.