* 1329886
* CPS: Synergy:  Integrated Emergency Cyber Physical Human Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 947,884.00

This project will develop architecture and supporting enabling technologies to
avert imminent loss of life or property in fast changing environments. The
selected application is resuscitation in an intensive care unit (ICU) because it
is life critical, time critical, human-centric and includes complex devices and
software. For example, heart attack can be obscured in a trauma patient
hemorrhaging from a broken leg in the presence of a collapsed lung. The
challenge lies in solving the overarching difficulties of safe execution while
maintaining complex and dynamic workflows. The availability and skill levels of
medical staff, patient conditions, and medical device configurations all change
rapidly. The core contribution is design and verification of reduced complexity
situation awareness architecture for Emergency Cyber Physical Human systems
(ECPH), supported by enabling technologies such as workflow adaptation
protocols, managing data uncertainty and safe device plug and play. The ECPH
workflow adaptation protocols are not only a function of the tasks and
environment at hand, but must also be aware of the capabilities and training of
the medical staff. In addition, risk mitigation driven safety interlock
protocols will keep the actions of medical staff and CPS in synchrony with
dynamically selected workflows. This is a cooperative effort of UIUC engineering
and the ICU department of Carle Foundation Hospital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
ECPH team operates to accomplish a mission under rapidly changing circumstances.
The stressful, rushed, and often unfriendly environment of an ECPH system means
that errors, uncertainty, and failures will arise. This research will offer
safety and resilience in the face of such disruptions. Effective and immediate
intervention enabled by an optimized ECPH system will dramatically reduce
preventable errors. The societal impact of effective collaboration under high
stress will be enormous in terms of human lives and health care costs. According
to CDC in 2010, the estimated direct &amp; indirect costs of heart attacks and
strokes alone in the U.S. were $503.2 billion; a significant percent of such
patients during emergency care suffer complications and harm which are
preventable. This project will develop educational material for training the
next generation of researchers and engineers. The technology to be developed
will also be adapted to other similar ECPH environments such as fighting a
raging building fire.