* 1329666
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Diagnostics and Prognostics Using Temporal Causal Models for Cyber Physical Systems- A Case of Smart Electric Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Anurag Srivastava, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2018
* USD 416,000.00

Reliable operation of cyber-physical systems (CPS) of societal importance such
as Smart Electric Grids is critical for the seamless functioning of a vibrant
economy. Sustained power outages can lead to major disruptions over large areas
costing millions of dollars. Efficient computational techniques and tools that
curtail such systematic failures by performing fault diagnosis and prognostics
are therefore necessary. The Smart Electric Grid is a CPS: it consists of
networks of physical components (including generation, transmission, and
distribution facilities) interfaced with cyber components (such as intelligent
sensors, communication networks, and control software). This grant provides
funding to develop new methods to build models for the smart grid representing
the failure dependencies in the physical and cyber components. The models will
be used to build an integrated system-wide solution for diagnosing faults and
predicting future failure propagations that can account for existing protection
mechanisms. The original contribution of this work will be in the integrated
modeling of failures on multiple levels in a large distributed cyber-physical
system and the development of novel, hierarchical, robust, online algorithms for
diagnostics and prognostics.

If successful, the model-based fault diagnostics and prognostics techniques will
improve the effectiveness of isolating failures in large systems by identifying
impending failure propagations and determining the time to critical failures
that will increase system reliability and reduce the losses accrued due to
failures. This work will bridge the gap between fault management approaches used
in computer science and power engineering that are needed as the grid becomes
smarter, more complex, and more data intensive. Outcomes of this project will
include modeling and run-time software prototypes, research publications, and
experimental results in collaborations with industry partners that will be made
available to the scientific community.