* 1329225
* From Dualism to Integration Investigating Development of Engineering Students' Social and Technical Perceptions
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* William Graziano, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 263,990.00

From Dualism to "Integration":Investigating Development of Engineering Students'
Social and Technical Perceptions

Engineering education provides students with foundational technical knowledge
and skills, as well as a sense of engineering identity. Yet as prior
sociological studies suggest, most engineering degree programs place primary
emphasis on technical topics, which tends to marginalize or exclude the social
dimensions of engineering identity and work practices. This investigation
responds to such research by exploring engineering students' cognitive
perceptions of their social and technical worlds, the relationship between their
perceptions of these two domains, and how such perceptions develop. This study
employs an embedded, sequential mixed-methods approach, which includes an
interpretive phenomenological analysis of how engineering students integrate
and/or split their social and technical perceptions of engineering ability and
identity. This qualitative portion of the study is preceded and supported by
data from instruments that probe how students perceive and orient to their
social and technical worlds.

The proposed investigation builds on literature from the social sciences,
psychology, and engineering education by examining students' technical and
social perceptions. It fills a gap in the existing research by investigating the
cognitive models that undergird how students develop the integrated,
sociotechnical perception needed to address the broad, global challenges facing
engineers today. This project lays key foundations for reforming curricula to
enhance the development of these perceptive abilities and associated skills
within engineering education. This investigation has potential for broad impact
by informing engineering educators of critical experiences that shape the
technical and social perceptions of students. The findings can be used to
develop curricula, assessment techniques, and pedagogical strategies that better
enable educators to guide students into a coherent integration of their social
and technical perceptions. Such integration can cultivate engineers with
enhanced capabilities who can tackle the engineering problems marked by
sociotechnical complexity, including the "grand challenges" that face society.
Integrating social and technical perceptions within the curriculum also has
potential to enhance diversity in engineering by appealing to underrepresented
groups of students who may be drawn toward more integrated, sociotechnical
approaches to engineering.