* 1329437
* A role of histone modification in homologous chromosome alignment during Caenorhabditis elegans meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Kentaro Nabeshima, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 09/30/2016
* USD 510,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The mechanism for initial recognition and alignment
between homologous chromosomes during meiosis is an essential basis of genetic
inheritance in sexually reproducing organisms. The overall objective of this
research is to define a mechanism for initial alignment of homologous
chromosomes through histone modification using the nematode, Caenorhabditis
elegans as a model. Preliminary data indicate that a loss-of-function mutant of
MRG-1, a component of a putative histone-modifying enzyme, exhibits a defect in
the initial homologous alignment process. This defect does not seem to be an
indirect consequence of altered expression of meiotic genes that could
potentially result from a change in histone modification. Based on these and
other preliminary studies, the hypothesis is that a particular state of histone
modification catalyzed by the MRG-1-containing histone-modifying enzyme directly
facilitates initial alignment of homologous chromosomes. This idea will be
addressed using biochemical and genetic approaches. Successful completion of
this research will advance fundamental understanding of chromosome dynamics by
presenting the novel concept that histone modification affects interactions
between homologous chromosomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to raising the scientific
literacy among undergraduate students in genetics and chromosome biology in
several ways. First, this research will provide ample opportunities for cutting-
edge scientific research training to undergraduate students. Second, some
undergraduate students will conduct an honors thesis project, in which they will
also learn how to write a thesis based on the research that they conduct. Third,
a larger group of undergraduates will be exposed to the research conducted by
their peers in an upper-level seminar course focusing on chromosome structure
and function. In addition, this research also involves training a postdoctoral
fellow to become an independent researche through direct participation in the
research, in discussion groups and journal clubs, and as a mentor to
undergraduate students and/or rotation graduate students.