* 1329363
* CPS: Synergy: Multi-Robot Cyberphysical System for Assisting Young Developmentally-Delayed Children in Learning to Walk
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Sunil Agrawal, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project is a modular, computationally-distributed multi-robot cyberphysical
system (CPS) for assisting young developmentally-delayed children in learning to
walk. The multi-robot CPS is designed to function in the same way as an adult
assisting a child in learning to walk (addressing the research target area of a
science of CPS by introducing developmental rehabilitation robotics). It
addresses the research target area of new CPS technology by introducing a multi-
robot system: 1) a multi-cable scaffold robot that continuously modulates the
stabilization of medio-lateral and anterior-posterior sway, and 2) a soft,
wearable, exosuit robot with embedded sensing and actuation, which assists with
stance push off and swing flexion. The objective is to build a prototype multi-
robot CPS and perform tests with human subjects to evaluate the CPS
functionality, safety, and interoperability (addressing the research target area
of engineering CPS). Longitudinal tests of typically developing and
developmentally delayed children learning to walk with or without assistance of
the multi-robot CPS are conducted in a motion capture laboratory. Body center of
mass behavior as well as gait parameters of walking are measured as the two
robots work together to assist the child in maintaining balance and propelling
the body forward with each step.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exosuit/scaffolding
multi-robot technology will advance knowledge within engineering with bio-
inspired soft components, including miniature pneumatic artificial muscle
actuators with embedded sensors that enable the control of the muscles in real
time. The bio-inspired architecture and material components of the exosuit will
make possible a new generation of ?smart fabric? that acts in concert with the
body for efficient energy use. The exosuit is part of a larger modular design
that makes it possible to couple it to additional assistive robots via a modular
communications network. Together, the exosuit, scaffold robot, and wireless
communications network for modular CPS, will advance knowledge for the
engineering of other CPS that require high levels of interoperability and
safety, such as medical CPS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-robot CPS is
designed for children who are developmentally delayed as a result of early brain
injury. The long term consequences of early brain injury, e.g., in children born
prematurely, constitute a major health problem and a significant emotional and
financial burden for families and society. The use of a multi-robot
cyberphysical system as part of a rehabilitation program may be able to harness
the potential of the nervous system for plasticity, the ability to re-organize
its structure, function, and connections. The focus is on young children with a
history of early brain injury due to prematurity. However, this new
cyberphysical system will have a much broader impact in restoring function
throughout the life span. Neuroplasticity is not just an immediate response to
injury, but occurs throughout the developmental period, providing an opportunity
to promote repair and re-education, and restore function. A key to this broad
application is the developmentally-motivated, modular structure and
interoperability of the exosuit.