* 1329262
* Computational Worked Examples for Scaffolding Student Representational Fluency
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Falk, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 313,889.00

Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal for this Research in
Engineering Education project is to identify how computational worked examples
coupled with a fading strategy can effectively scaffold student development of
representational fluency across qualitative and quantitative representations in
engineering. This will be accomplished through these objectives:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Use research on complex task learning to
develop and implement a set of computational worked examples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Use naturalistic and quasi-experimental
investigations through design-based research to examine the foundational
research question. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: Disseminate results to
ensure broad impacts among intended audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
foundational research question is: "How computational worked examples can
effectively scaffold student development of representational fluency translating
from qualitative to quantitative representations?" We will approach this
investigation using design-based research coupling phenomenographic methods with
quantitative methods. The long-term goal of this research is to establish an
integrated evidence based program of research to practice centered on how people
develop representational fluency, and to use this knowledge to develop
strategies that will prepare the next generation of scientists and engineers to
be capable of addressing complex interdisciplinary
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact and
Importance:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing is having major implications in
discovery and innovation by supporting advances in healthcare, energy, economic
competitiveness, and national security. Training and engagement of the next
generation of work force engineers able to integrate and take advantage of
computation successfully must be an integral part of modern engineering
education in order to create new opportunities for complex interdisciplinary
work. Graphical representations and other visual representations of the results
of computational problem solving are central to scientific research as well as
to the solution of complex problems in workplace engineering. Specifically, they
are used in engineering as tools to gain insight into the material world,
further interpret information about a problem, identify relationships between
its components, and provide potential solutions to it. Future engineers need to
develop representational fluency, or the ability to describe a problem and
solutions obtained using computational tools visually and in physical terms,
across diverse types of media. The outcomes of this research will include a set
of principles for the design and integration of computational worked examples in
engineering disciplinary courses. Findings will boost the chances for
engineering discovery and innovation success and will help the United States
take advantage of the role of computation in engineering sooner, better, and
with greater confidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
supported by the Research in Engineering Education Program of the Engineering
Education and Centers Division.