* 1329663
* SBIR Phase II:  Expanding the Sustainability of Bio-plastics and PLA by Postponing End-of-Life through the use of Reactive Extrusion Chemistries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,07/31/2014
* Adam Pawloski, Interfacial Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2014
* USD 750,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
robust manufacturing methods to commercialize novel biobased plastics made from
scrap PLA resins, resulting in a new method to effectively address end-of-life
management of bioplastics, specifically polylactic acid (PLA). PLA is the
industry leading bioplastic as it is compostable and made from corn. However,
many PLA-based products manufactured today are land filled or incinerated at
their end of life. Despite being compostable, industrial composting
infrastructure for PLA and other bioplastics in the United States is very
limited. Under this work, a commercial scale reactive extrusion process will be
developed and optimized for the robust production of hyperbranched PLA polymers
from scrap PLA. Phase I research verified that hyperbranching dramatically
improves the melt strength and mechanical properties of scrap PLA. These
benefits give hyperbranched PLA properties that meet or exceed those of virgin
PLA. The process technology being developed will overcome the significant
variability in scrap PLA feedstocks, allowing for production of resin with
uniform product quality. The reactive extrusion process to impart hyperbranching
is cost-effective and scalable. This process will enable a viable business to
sell recycled PLA resin as a value-added material intended for durable goods
applications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development and
commercialization of an important, novel, and cost effective way to meet the
pressing need of making plastics more sustainable by adding value to the most
broadly used bioplastic, PLA. Creating improved PLA resins from lower cost
feedstock will ultimately expand commercial applications for PLA and create a
new market for scrap PLA. The current U.S. market for PLA is approximately 300
million pounds and growing at approximately 15% annually. Commercial plastic
processors and compounders using PLA will be able to replace or supplement use
of virgin PLA with recycled PLA by using this technology. Additionally, by
providing a commercially attractive method to recycle PLA, this new process will
effectively incentivize recyclers to remove PLA from their waste sources.
Penetration of PLA into durable goods markets has been slow due to the higher
price of PLA resin. By using hyperbranched, recycled PLA as a feedstock that
originates from packaging or consumable products, the materials costs for
durable products can be significantly reduced. Recycling PLA by hyperbranching
offers a way to significantly extend the end of life and help enable PLA achieve
its full potential as a sustainable, resource renewable bioplastic.