* 1329702
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Thermal-Aware Management of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Kang Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 539,999.00

Processors in cyber-physical systems are increasingly being used in applications
where they must operate in harsh ambient conditions and a computational workload
which can lead to high chip temperatures. Examples include cars, robots,
aircraft and spacecraft. High operating temperatures accelerate the aging of the
chips, thus increasing transient and permanent failure rates. Current ways to
deal with this mostly turn off the processor core or drastically slow it down
when some part of it is seen to exceed a given temperature threshold. However,
this pass/fail approach ignores the fact that (a) processors experience
accelerated aging due to high temperatures, even if these are below the
threshold, and (b) while deadlines are a constraint for real-time tasks to keep
the controlled plant in the allowed state space, the actual controller response
times that will increase if the voltage or frequency is lowered (to cool down
the chip) are what determine the controlled plant performance. Existing
approaches also fail to exploit the tradeoff between controller reliability
(affected by its temperature history) and the performance of the plant. This
project addresses these issues. Load-shaping algorithms are being devised to
manage thermal stresses while ensuring appropriate levels of control quality.
Such actions include task migration, changing execution speed, selecting an
alternative algorithm or software implementation of control functions, and
terminating prematurely optional portions of iterative tasks. Validation
platforms for this project include automobiles and unmanned aerial vehicles.
These platforms have been chosen based on both their importance to society and
the significant technical challenges they pose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With CPS
becoming ever more important in our lives and businesses, this project which
will make CPS controllers more reliable and/or economical has broad potential
social and economic impacts. Collaboration with General Motors promotes
transition of the new technology to industry. The project includes activities to
introduce students to thermal control in computing, in courses spanning high-
school, undergraduate and graduate curricula.