* 1329578
* Yeast as a model for understanding heterosis
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Jianzhi Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 11/30/2016
* USD 535,000.00

This project aims to understand the genetic basis of heterosis (a genetic
phenomenon in which a hybrid demonstrates higher vigor than its parents) using
the baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model organism. Heterosis is
widely applied in crop breeding and has contributed to major improvements in
crop yields in the last 50 years. Yet, its genetic basis remains elusive,
primarily because of the lack of a powerful model organism. Here it is proposed
that S. cerevisiae be developed as a model organism for heterosis, with three
specific aims. Aim 1 will establish the basic parameters and patterns of
heterosis in yeast. Sixty-three diverse strains of S. cerevisiae have been
chosen based on their geographic, genetic, and environmental origins, and have
been crossed in all pairwise combinations reciprocally to generate 3906 hybrid
strains. The growth rates of these parental and hybrid strains will be measured
and the prevalence and magnitude of heterosis will be quantified in three
biologically relevant conditions. Whether the probability and magnitude of
heterosis are correlated with geographic, genetic, and environmental distances
between parents will be tested. The genomes of all 63 parental strains will be
sequenced to facilitate the interpretation of the observed patterns of heterosis
and Aims 2 and 3. Aim 2 will map the quantitative trait loci (QTLs) underlying
heterosis and test competing models of heterosis (dominance vs. overdominance).
A powerful strategy to map the QTLs underlying heterosis and to differentiate
between dominance and overdominance has been designed by combining backcrosses
with the bulk-segregant-analysis-based extreme QTL mapping. QTLs for five
heterotic hybrids identified in Aim 1 will be mapped by this method. The mapping
in Aim 2 allows the localization of causal mutations of heterosis to small
genomic regions of 1-2 kb. In Aim 3, the causal genes of five QTLs will be
identified and the underlying genetic mechanisms (dominance vs. overdominance)
will be confirmed. Aim 3 will further identify causal mutations and investigate
whether heterosis is caused by the effects of these mutations on protein
function or gene expression. Overall, the project will provide unprecedented
amount of information on the patterns and mechanisms of heterosis in the model
organism S. cerevisiae and significantly improve understanding of the enigmatic
yet highly useful genetic phenomenon of heterosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the project are manifold. First and foremost, this project
will significantly deepen the mechanistic understanding of heterosis, which is
likely to have profound impacts on crop breeding and other applications of
heterosis. Second, the project will produce the resource of 63 high-quality
yeast genome sequences that can be used for addressing a wide array of
scientific questions. Third, the PI has an excellent record of training
evolutionary geneticists; this project will allow the training of a postdoctoral
fellow and a graduate student in classical genetics, genomics, and computational
biology, in addition to their conceptual developments in genetics and evolution.
Fourth, the PI has trained students through the University of Michigan Summer
Research Opportunity Program (SROP), which offers outstanding undergraduates
underrepresented in their field of study the opportunity to conduct intensive
research to prepare them for advanced studies in a Ph.D. program. This project
will allow the PI to continue and expand the collaboration with SROP in training
underrepresented undergraduates in genetics and evolution. Fifth, research
findings will be integrated into the lectures that the PI regularly gives,
including the undergraduate courses of "Introduction to Genetics" and "Capstone
Seminars in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology", the graduate course of "Molecular
and Genomic Evolution", and occasional public lectures.