* 1329278
* BSF:2012259:Circular compositional reasoning by learning and abstraction-refinement
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Corina Pasareanu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 40,000.00

This project is funded as part of the United States-Israel Collaboration in
Computer Science (USICCS) program. Through this program, NSF and the United
States - Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
collaborations among US-based researchers and Israel-based researchers. The
project targets scalable verification of concurrent software via compositional
techniques. Compositional techniques break-up the full program into smaller
components that are checked separately. Typically, a component cannot be
verified in isolation from its environment, consisting of the other components.
The component is therefore verified under a relatively small assumption on its
environment. Progress has been made in the past on automating assumption
generation in the context of a simple reasoning rule, where assumptions and
properties are related in an acyclic manner. However, there are cases where
circular dependency within a system is a real phenomenon that requires more
complex, circular rules, which typically use inductive arguments. Although
effective in scaling up verification, the applicability of these rules has been
limited by the manual effort involved in defining the
assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the automation of the
assumption discovery process in the context of existing circular rules and of
new rules, developed as needed. Abstraction and learning techniques are used to
iteratively build assumptions and refine them based on counterexamples obtained
from checking components separately. The algorithms developed incorporate
3-valued reasoning to allow for more precise yet concise assumptions. The
techniques aim at increasing the assurance of general-purpose concurrent and
distributed software, by scaling up existing verification techniques through
novel automated circular compositional reasoning. Two specific application areas
are investigated, namely UML-based software and security protocols; both these
areas can highly benefit from compositional reasoning.