* 1329255
* Acoustic Foundations of Speech Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Kourosh Saberi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 475,958.00

Our brains have evolved a highly-sophisticated auditory system for the analysis
of sounds, which underlies more complicated abilities such as speech perception.
We currently know very little about the organization of human auditory cortex at
the interface between the auditory inputs from the peripheral sensory receptors
in the ear and the higher-level language systems of the brain. Understanding the
nature of the inputs to higher-level speech perception systems is critical to
understanding what kind of information is ultimately used in speech perception
and how this information is extracted computationally. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Alyssa Brewer and colleagues Dr. Gregory Hickok
and Dr. Kourosh Saberi will use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
measure the functional organization of the human auditory cortex with a level of
detail that has not previously been achieved. They will then use these
measurements to examine how cortical responses to particular types of speech and
speech-related stimuli relate to these lower-level cortical regions. This study
will thus provide the first systematic measurements of the human speech
perception system from the fundamental organization of auditory cortex to
cortical speech representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Acquired and
developmental disorders of hearing, speech and language affect millions of
individuals. The knowledge gained from this study will give us a better
understanding of the organization and function of these systems, which will have
clinical benefits for the treatment of both peripheral auditory diseases and
central language disorders. The research team will continue to share the results
through "Brain Day" programs in the local K-8 elementary schools to bring the
excitement of neuroscience research to the local communities. Furthermore, PI
Brewer has developed ongoing "Brilliant Brain" workshops with Girls Inc., which
include special presentations and summer workshops on the organization,
function, and diseases of the brain. Girls Inc. is a non-profit organization
that provides research and STEM-based experiences to girls ages 6-18 across the
U.S. and Canada designed to help them navigate gender, economic, and social
barriers. Finally, this study incorporates training of new neuroscientists at
the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels for whom these studies will
serve as a foundation of neuroscience research.