* 1329730
* SBIR Phase II:  ION Gate Membrane For High Performance Redox Flow Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Lin-Feng Li, Bettergy Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 601,116.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
novel ion gate membrane with controlled pore size for redox flow battery. Redox
flow battery is one of the most promising electric energy storage (EES)
technologies. However, the cost of the state-of-the-art (SOA) membrane used in
such battery has to come down dramatically in order to reach the overall system
cost target for EES applications. Moreover, the ion selectivity of the SOA
membrane is also very poor, leading to ion cross-over and lower energy
efficiency for the battery. In the proposed approach, an ultra thin composite
membrane will be developed to address the issues. Due to its thin thickness,
tight pore size control and material selection, the membrane is expected to have
excellent ion selectivity, proton conductivity and chemical stability. Once
fully developed, it will be able to meet the stringent requirements of large
scale redox flow batteries for EES applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes promoting the
widespread adoption of redox flow battery as the low cost EES systems and
facilitating the rapid deployment of smart grids. In order to satisfy the
surging energy demand and mitigate the environment impact of fossil fuel usage,
renewable energy sources are becoming more and more important in the power
generation. However, renewable energy sources, such as wind power, suffer the
drawback of fluctuation. To mitigate the problem, smart grids are now being
proposed and developed. The EES system is considered as the key components of
the smart grids. The market for such batteries is expected to grow rapidly.
According to a study, the EES market could reach $52 billion if 10% of wind
plants adopt EES. This work if successful will lead to a breakthrough product: a
low cost, high performance ion gate membrane as a key component for the redox
flow battery. Such a breakthrough product could accelerate the penetration of
redox flow battery in this market. In addition, development of this innovative
membrane will help maintain our nations leading position in this important
field, creating new business opportunities and high tech jobs.