* 1329300
* "A Long Way Coming"--Understanding Engineering Educators' Transformations to Student-Centered Teaching
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Nadia Kellam, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Donna Riley
* 06/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

Over the past decades, the engineering education community, with significant
support from the National Science Foundation, has produced a large body of
knowledge around engineering teaching and learning. While evidence-based
educational innovations were targeted at increasing the number of STEM graduates
prepared to meet society's grand challenges, the widespread impact of this body
of work on teaching practice remains limited. This engineering education
research study seeks to empirically generate a fundamental understanding of
individual teaching transitions, and to actively disseminate the findings with
the aim of fostering individual and institutional change. More specifically, the
research team will conduct a qualitative research study with a view to
understanding the process by which engineering faculty successfully transition
from a traditional teacher-centered approach to a more active learning, student-
centered approach. The research team will elicit personal narratives of exemplar
engineering educators at various stages of their academic career and from
diverse US institutions whom have transitioned to more student-centered teaching
approaches.

The broader significance and importance of this study will be to significantly
advance the theoretical understanding of educational change by providing the
novel perspective of individual transformations as the missing piece in the
widespread adoption of student-centered pedagogies. With the aim of generating a
fundamental understanding of faculty change, the research team explicitly
designed this study to afford both researchers and participants in this study
with opportunities to improve their own educational practice through the
inherently reflective interview process. In addition to traditional modes of
dissemination, such as journal articles, the research team will disseminate the
research outcomes in the form of constructed narratives that represent
fundamental patterns across the data to be used to foster similar transitions
for a broader group of engineering educators. In combination, these efforts will
provide a step towards instituting widespread change and realizing the promise
that prior educational research holds for future generations of engineering
students.