* 1329726
* Collaborative Research: New models and numerical methods for flexible wings, fins, and membranes
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Silas Alben, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 130,722.00

The goals of this project are to create analytical and computational tools,
coupled with experiments, to investigate biological propulsion in fluids at
intermediate scales. These problems typically involve the movement of a flexible
appendage in a fluid where both inertia and viscosity are important. The
fundamental computational challenge associated with these problems is the
accurate and efficient simulation of the moving, flexible structure in the
surrounding fluid. One aim is to extend numerical methods for Stokes flow to
Reynolds numbers on the order of 1 to 10. These methods will then be applied to
aerodynamics problems involving flow through bristled wings. Another aim is to
incorporate viscous effects into vortex sheet methods, in order to more
accurately simulate flows over a wider range of scales. These tools will then be
used to understand the importance of active control of fish fin rays and other
instances of fluid interactions with organisms. Finally, this work will allow
for comparisons of propulsion mechanisms and numerical methods across a wide
range of Reynolds numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The numerical methods and models
developed in this research project can be applied to numerous and diverse
biological fluid-structure interactions problems. Some examples beyond those
specific to the proposal include the pumping of blood by the heart, the flow of
air in the lungs, drag reduction in flexible materials such as leaves and
sessile organisms, and the dispersal of seeds in air and larvae in water. The
broader impacts of this work include the improved understanding of propulsion
mechanics that can be used for the design of micro air and water vehicles; the
development of computational tools which are useful to study optimization
questions in biology; rich examples of nonlinear dynamics for physics; research
mentoring to undergraduates in experimental and modeling work and graduate
students in computational and modeling research. The outreach component will
help more students achieve autonomy in research and critical thinking through
independent research projects. This project also addresses one of the seven
questions posed by the National Academy of Sciences on the role of theory in
advancing 21st century biology: ``what are the engineering principles of life?''