* 1329984
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Safety-Feature Modeling and Adaptive Resource Management for Mixed-Criticality Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2017
* USD 600,000.00

To ensure operational safety of complex cyber-physical systems such as
automobiles, aircraft, and medical devices, new models, analyses, platforms, and
development techniques are needed that can predict, possible interactions
between features, detect them in the features' concrete implementations, and
either eliminate or mitigate such interactions through precise modeling and
enforcement of mixed-criticality cyber-physical system semantics. This project
is taking a novel approach to reasoning about and managing feature interactions
in cyber-physical systems, which encompasses interactions within software,
interactions through the physical dynamics of the system, and interactions via
shared computational resources. The proposed approach consists of three tightly
coupled research thrusts: (1) a novel way of modeling features as automata
equipped with both physical dynamics of the feature environment, and an assigned
criticality level in each state of an automaton, (2) new automata-theoretic and
control-theoretic analysis techniques, enabled by the modeling approach, and (3)
new algorithms for adaptive sharing of computational resources between
individual features that are guaranteed to satisfy the assumptions made during
analysis, realized within a novel mixed-criticality cyber-physical platform
architecture. The modeling approach will introduce a new model for mixed-
criticality cyber-physical components and will support modern development
standards, such as AUTOSAR in the automotive industry, for assigning criticality
levels to features. Component interfaces in this model will capture control
modes and the associated physical dynamics, operating modes and the associated
resource requirements and criticality level, as well as relationships between
control modes and operating modes. Analysis of features expressed in the
proposed model will include detection of interactions and exploration of their
effect on safety properties of the composite system. The broader impacts of the
proposed work are twofold. One impact lies in the pervasive use of cyber-
physical systems in our society. If the developed results are adopted in
industry, it may help to promote improved safety of such systems. Results of the
proposed research will be used in courses offered at both University of
Pennsylvania and Washington University at the graduate and undergraduate levels.
The project will also provide students with opportunities to get involved in
cutting edge research within their fields of study