* 1329620
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: High-Level Perception and Control for Autonomous Reconfigurable Modular Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Mark Yim, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2016
* USD 416,000.00

The goal of the project is the development of the theory, hardware and
computational infrastructure that will enable automatically transforming user-
defined, high-level tasks such as inspection of hazardous environments and
object retrieval, into provably-correct control for modular robots. Modular
robots are composed of simple individual modules; while a single module has
limited capabilities, connecting multiple modules in different configurations
allows the system to perform complex actions such as climbing, manipulating
objects, traveling in unstructured environments and self-reconfiguring (breaking
into multiple independent robots and reassembling into larger structures). The
project includes (i) defining and populating a large library of perception and
actuation building blocks both manually through educational activities and
automatically through novel algorithms, (ii) creating automated tools to assign
values to probabilistic metrics associated with the performance of library
components, (iii) developing a grammar and automated tools for control synthesis
that sequence different components of the library to accomplish higher level
tasks, if possible, or provide feedback to the user if the task cannot be
accomplished and (iv) designing and building a novel modular robot platform
capable of rapid and robust self-reconfiguration. This research will have
several outcomes. First, it will lay the foundations for making modular robots
easily controlled by anyone. This will enrich the robotic industry with new
types of robots with unique capabilities. Second, the research will create novel
algorithms that tightly combine perception, control and hardware capabilities.
Finally, this project will create an open-source infrastructure that will allow
the public to contribute basic controllers to the library thus promoting general
research and social interest in robotics and engineering.