* 1329936
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Event-Based Information Acquisition, Learning, and Control in High-Dimensional Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Bruno Sinopoli, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2018
* USD 333,333.00

This project focuses on the problem of information acquisition, state estimation
and control in the context of cyber physical systems. In our underlying model, a
(set of) decision maker(s), by controlling a sequence of actions with uncertain
outcomes, dynamically refines the belief about stochastically time-varying
parameters of interest. These parameters are then used to control the physical
system efficiently and robustly. Here the cyber system collects, processes, and
acquires information about the underlying physical system of interest, which is
used for its control. The proposed work will develop a new theoretical framework
for stochastic learning, decision-making, and control in stochastically-varying
cyber physical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to obtain analytical
insights into the structure of efficient design, we first consider the case
where the actions of the cyber system only affect the estimate of the underlying
physical system. This class of problems arises in the context of (distributed)
sensing/tracking of a physical system in isolation from cyber system control of
the physical system's state. Joint state estimation and control for cyber-
physical systems will then be considered. Here the most natural first step is to
obtain sufficient conditions and/or special classes of systems where a separated
approach to the information acquisition and efficient control is (near) optimal.
To demonstrate its utility in practice, our theoretical framework will be
applied in the specific context of energy efficient control of data centers and
robust control of the smart grid under limited sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this work will be to develop a theoretical framework for
the design of cyber-physical systems including information acquisition, state
estimation, and control. In addition, separation theorems for the optimality of
separate state estimation and control will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of broader impacts, significant performance improvement of control systems
closed over communication networks will impact a wide range of applications for
societal benefit, including smart buildings, intelligent transportation systems,
energy-efficient data centers, and the future smart-grid. The PIs plan to
disseminate the research results widely through conferences and journals, as
well as by organizing specialized workshops and conference sessions related to
cyber physical systems. The proposed project will train Ph.D. students as well
as enrich the curriculum taught by the PIs in communications, stochastic
control, and networks. The PIs have a strong track record in diversity and
outreach activities, which for this project will include exposure and
involvement of high school and undergraduate students, including under-
represented minorities and women.