* 1329247
* Success Factors for Minorities in Engineering: A Study of NACME Programs
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Irving McPhail, National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 296,482.00

The National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering (NACME) was
established 38 years ago to increase the small numbers of minorities in
engineering. It provides block grants for minority students in engineering at 25
institutions. Although these 25 institutions confer one third of the nation's
minority engineering degrees, there has been no comprehensive study that takes
an empirical look at how this level of success is achieved, nor one that
documents the practices that account for it. The engineering eduction community
has a practical need to know what program and student factors combine to
facilitate minority engineering degrees. The objective of the proposed
independent study is to fill this void by discerning the factors that
distinguish the most successful Minorities in Engineering Programs (MEPs). At
the program level this will be accomplished through three analyses: (1)a
statistical examination of the test scores, grades, and retention/ graduation
rates of students in the NACME block programs, in order to select the five most
successful programs and five less successful programs; (2)an analysis of number
and types of program components and their relative effectiveness as assessed by
MEP staff; and (3)a set of focus group analyses of staff, faculty and students
in selected programs at either end of the success continuum in NACME supported
institutions. At the student level this will be accomplished through five
analyses: (1)an assessment of students? degree of participation in program
components (which is distinct from program offerings); (2) a comprehensive
survey of student adjustment to the engineering and university environment; (3)
an analysis of impact of the engineering environment on students inferred from
multiple freshman-senior cross-sectional analyses; (4) disaggregated analysis of
program participation, adjustment, and value added separately for African
American, Latino and Native American students, as well as within gender; and (5)
disaggregated analysis of program participation, adjustment, and value added
separately for minority and non-minority students to provide a full picture of
relative environment for NACME scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike most
studies in the growing minorities in science academic literature, this proposed
study is specific to engineering. This study of NACME programs would also become
the most comprehensive study yet of minorities in engineering by providing an
integrated set of comparative analyses that inform success factors in a wider
range of institutions that is common in evaluations studies. Further, this study
proposes to include not only minorities but also the factors affecting non-
minority students in engineering as well. The insights gained will be invaluable
to NACME in shaping the standards and expectations for the programs and students
that it supports. By comparing the findings to the existing body of research on
minorities in the sciences, the study seeks to establish the degree of
generalization of these success factors to other evaluation efforts in the
sciences and engineering. The proactive engineering community is poised to make
practical use of the insights gained in its national effort to enhance the
minority engineering pipeline.