* 1329273
* Collaborative Research:   MSB: Impact of sea level rise on sedimentary nitrogen removal processes in tidal freshwater ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 01/22/2013,09/30/2015
* Bongkeun Song, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 207,417.00

Tidal freshwater ecosystems such as rivers and estuaries are located at the
interface between land and sea. These ecosystems provide important natural
services including primary production, nutrient distribution and regulation, and
waste management - services that are at risk due to climate change. Two aspects
of climate change, sea level rise and lower precipitation in some watersheds,
will shift the location of freshwater-saltwater mixing zones to upper rivers and
continuously increase salinity intrusion into freshwater habitats. Sea level is
predicted to rise up to 100 cm by 2100, and by itself can have multiple impacts
on freshwater ecosystems, including direct toxic effects, habitat degradation
and alteration of nutrient cycles. Salinity increases may also have significant
effects on the nitrogen (N) dynamics of freshwater habitats. Nitrification
(ammonia conversion to nitrate) and denitrification (nitrate conversion to
dinitrogen) are key microbial processes controlling the intensity and duration
of eutrophication caused by excess N loading. Salinity intrusion might diminish
microbial N removal capacity in freshwater sediments as nitrification and
denitrification are reduced due to substrate limitation and physiological
inhibition. This could result in prolonged eutrophication and hypoxia at rivers
and estuaries. Alternatively, anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox; ammonium
and nitrite conversion to dinitrogen gas) may become a more important microbial
N removal process and help recover N removal capacity in freshwater sediments
since anammox bacteria can tolerate salinity increases. This project will study
1) the importance of anammox in tidal freshwater sediments, 2) the effects of
salinity on freshwater anammox bacteria and the sedimentary N cycle, and 3)
predictions of an alternative N removal pathway in sedimentary communities
threatened by sea level rise. The proposed research will integrate molecular
microbial techniques, chemical tracer methods and mathematical models to examine
sedimentary N removal processes in the Cape Fear River and New River of North
Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will result in the following
benefits and outcomes; 1) revealing the structures and activities of microbial
communities involved in N removal processes in tidal freshwater sediments, 2)
determining differential responses of sediment communities to seawater
intrusion, 3) understanding the impacts of sea level rise on sedimentary N
removal processes in freshwater ecosystems, 4) predicting a key microbial
process for net N removal capacity of freshwater ecosystems experiencing sea
level rise. This project will also provide an in-depth understanding of
microbial responses in freshwater sediment communities under threat of sea level
rise. Interdisciplinary approaches will provide insight into the linkages
between community structure and activity as well as salinity effects on riverine
sedimentary N cycling. Broader impacts will be manifested through diverse
educational components, outreach, and improved research infrastructure at the
University of North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW) and the University of
Connecticut. Three PIs (microbial ecologist, biogeochemist and ecosystem
modeler) will provide interdisciplinary training to at least three graduate
students seeking a M.S. or Ph.D. degree. Additional educational impact will be
accomplished both in the classrooms and through individual undergraduate
research projects at the two institutions. Research experience for high school
students will be achieved by including the project within the UNCW "Summer Ocean
Ventures" and "Ocean17" programs. The high school students will participate in
DNA analysis and mesocosm experiments. The PI will provide a lecture on the
microbial nitrogen cycle to the students and design three days of laboratory and
field courses to detect and measure denitrification during the Ocean 17 camp.
The graduate students recruited for this proposed research will act as teaching
assistants for the high school students. The program will culminate with a
Summer Ventures Symposium where students will present their work. Outreach will
be facilitated by partnering with a local citizens group (NC-Coastal Ocean
Federation) to recruit volunteers to participate in sampling cruises and water
monitoring program, and by using the existing UNCW "Planet Ocean" lecture series
as a public platform to discuss coastal water resources issues and actions.