* 1329422
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Digital Control of Hybrid Systems via Simulation and Bisimulation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Constantino Lagoa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2018
* USD 640,000.00

A hybrid system is a dynamical model that describes the coupled evolution of
both continuous-valued variables and discrete patterns. A prime example of such
a system is a power electronic circuit, where the semiconductor transistors
behave as ideal switches whose switching actions effectively change the circuit
topology (i.e., the discrete pattern) that in turn defines the dynamics of
currents and voltages (i.e., the continuous variables) and hence the switching
actions. There have been two disparate paths to analyzing and designing hybrid
systems. One path is to focus on the discrete patterns and achieve scalable,
high-level analysis and synthesis. The other path is to pay attention to the
dynamics of continuous variables and guarantee low-level properties such as
stability and transient performance. The research objective of this proposal is
to bridge these approaches by enabling a synergy between the discrete pattern
based and continuous variable based approaches. The theory and algorithms
developed in course of this work will be applied to digital control of power
electronic circuits in order to overcome the scalability and stability issues
suffered by existing approaches to power electronics
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs envision that a successful completion of
the project will establish a new paradigm in the analysis and design of hybrid
systems, and thus contribute to the needs of modern society, such as microgrids
and embedded generation, where power electronic circuits are integral parts. The
research will be integrated into educational programs through student mentoring
and development of courses and laboratory equipment. The PIs will make a special
effort to recruit women and minority students. These broader-impact programs
will help innovate science and engineering education and prepare for next-
generation CPS scientists and engineers.