* 1329956
* MOLECULAR INSIGHTS INTO PHYTOCHROME PHOTOACTIVATION AND SIGNALING
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Richard Vierstra, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/2016
* USD 854,999.00

Intellectual Merit

A complex array of photoreceptors coordinates the response of organisms to their
surrounding light environment. One influential set is the phytochromes (Phys), a
large and diverse group of photoreversible chromoproteins that use a bilin
pigment for light detection. These dimeric biliproteins sense red (R) and far-
red light (FR) through two relatively stable conformational states, an
R-absorbing Pr form that typically represents the ground state, and an FR-
absorbing Pfr form that typically represents the activated state. By
photointerconverting between Pr and Pfr, Phys act as light-regulated switches.
Despite their agricultural and pathological importance and evolutionary
conservation, it is not fully understood at the molecular level how Phy-type
photoreceptors photoconvert between Pr and Pfr nor how this switch reports to
organisms about the light around them. In the past few years, major
breakthroughs have been made in understanding how Phys work at the atomic level
through the determination of 3-D structural models of the photosensing module
from several microbial representatives. These structures revealed the
configuration of the bilin pigment and how it is cradled within its binding
pocket, identified a likely route whereby plant Phys evolved from bacterial
progenitors, and identified several unique structural features likely critical
to signaling. During prior NSF-funded studies, the first paired ground and
photoactivated state structures of the chromophore pocket from two divergent
Phys were generated by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.
Comparisons of these structures provided the first glimpse into how light
triggers light perception. Included are light-driven rotation of the bilin
followed by rearrangement of numerous chromophore/amino acid contacts.
Ultimately, these alterations must convert light energy into mechanical motion
that reorganizes the output module and affect its signaling potential. This
project will build upon these structural studies to answer key questions. What
is the structure of a complete Phy dimer? How does rotation of the bilin
followed by structural changes within the binding pocket alter Phy signaling?
What is the structure of a plant Phy and how can this information be used to
engineer Phy signaling for agricultural benefit? Significant to this work are
the development of recombinant systems that produce large amounts of assembled
photoreceptors and advances that have culminated in the generation of
diffraction quality crystals of a plant Phy. Specifically, this research plan
will: (1) develop more complete structures of a microbial Phy with its signal
output module, (2) define how the knot, spine, and hairpin features contribute
to Phy signaling, (3) determine how the distinctive cyanobacteriochrome
subfamily uniquely detects other portions of the light spectrum, (4) generate an
X-ray crystallographic structure of the photosensing module of a plant Phy, and
(5) use a combination of NMR spectroscopic, X-ray crystallographic, and single
particle electron microscopic approaches to generate models of a complete plant
Phy dimer with and without signaling partners.

Broader Impacts:

This research will provide an essential framework to better understand the
structure, function, and evolution of the Phy superfamily. The anticipated
results will ultimately help elucidate how microorganisms and plants sense their
light environment, which could have important ramifications for understanding
microbial ecosystems, the control of important microbial pathogens, and for the
development of new strategies to improve the productivity of food and biofuel
crops. In addition, the project will enhance scientific infrastructure via a
cooperative arrangement for the training of postdoctoral, graduate,
undergraduate, and minority students in modern molecular and structure-based
approaches in biological research. Training will also involve high school
students sponsored by the Wisconsin Youth Apprenticeship Program.