* 1329380
* Interdisciplinary Dialogue for Education, Collaboration, and Innovation: Intelligent Biology and Medicine In and Beyond 2013
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Zhongming Zhao, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2014
* USD 17,400.00

The 2013 International Conference on Intelligent Biology and Medicine (ICIBM
2013) focuses on educating and training the next generation of bioinformatics,
systems biology, and intelligent computing experts with up-to-date technologies
and knowledge to further advance the future development within these innovative
fields and beyond. ICIBM 2013 will facilitate programs that cater to multiple
levels of research expertise so that those just beginning their research career
can gain the highest level of training and information from experts and
innovators, and those continuing with their research at higher levels have
communication and collaborative opportunities that will significantly increase
the success of research overall. To further disseminate the most innovative
interdisciplinary research the program will include distinguished keynote
lectures, innovative tutorial session, and research presentations. ICIBM 2013?s
commitment to education and diversity, as evidenced by its support of
underrepresented students and trainees, its unique training opportunities, and
its inclusiveness even among its committees (including a culturally and
disciplinarily diverse Trainee Committee to include young scientists more
thoroughly), highlights it as an unprecedented resource for within
bioinformatics, systems biology, intelligent computing, and related fields.
These areas of research integrate science and engineering knowledge with modern,
state-of-the-art intelligent computing technology.