* 1329623
* Building Cellular Complexity: from Molecular Motors to Synthetic Cilia
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2016
* Zvonimir Dogic, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 11/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Molecular motors are nanoscale machines that convert chemical energy from ATP
hydrolysis into mechanical movement along a filamentous track. Over the past two
decades experimental advances have yielded remarkable images of single molecular
motors taking nanometer-sized steps. Furthermore, state-of-the-art technology
also makes it possible to pull on such nanomachines with optical traps thus
determining the maximal force they can exert. Taken together these efforts have
provided essential insight into biochemical mechanisms driving the motility of
isolated molecular motors. However in many instances, ranging from contraction
of a skeletal muscle to spontaneous beating of a biological cilium, motors do
not act in isolation. Instead, thousands of motors coordinate their activity to
produce large scale molecular motion. Despite its importance, little is known
about the emergent collective properties of molecular motor ensembles. The first
goal of this project is to develop an experimental assay that will quantify
contractile sliding forces between a pair of aligned microtubules, exerted by
molecular motor clusters that simultaneously bind and move along both filaments.
Such structural motifs drive numerous complex processes in a biological cell.
Using this information, the project will build microtubule bundles that are
clamped at their base and driven by molecular motors. Theoretical models predict
that such structures will spontaneous beat, thus mimicking the dynamical
behavior of biological cilia. Experimental efforts will directly verify this
prediction and provide insight into the mechanisms that control beating patterns
of biological cilia. In parallel with experimental efforts, this project will
also pursue development of computer simulation models for collective behavior of
molecular motors; these will bridge the gap between existing theoretical models
and experimental data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research and
outreach efforts will be seamlessly integrated through a mutual emphasis on
visualization and microscopy. Movies of dynamical biological structures obtained
via microscopy capture the imagination and interest of scientists and non-
scientists alike. The PIs will organize outreach activities at The Discovery
Museum in Acton, MA, in which optical microscopes and specimens will be
available at the museum, allowing visitors to peer into the microscopic world
and directly visualize biological motion. The PIs will also disseminate
practical knowledge of optical microscopy by teaching an intensive hands-on one-
week summer course. Investigator involvement with the highly successful science
Posse program will further enhance undergraduate and graduate student
involvement from historically underrepresented groups.