* 1329448
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Hurricane Sandy, Disaster Recovery, and the Seeds of Urban Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Robin Leichenko, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2015
* USD 29,810.00

This RAPID response research project investigates the impact of Hurricane Sandy
on future coastal development in heavily damaged communities in New Jersey and
New York. Drawing from new innovations in socio-ecological transition theory,
the study tests the hypothesis that that critical transitions or regime shifts
can be precipitated by external shocks events, such as major natural disasters.
Using a transition framework, the study explores whether Hurricane Sandy and the
responses to the severe storm surge damage from the hurricane have created
conditions that may lead to a transformation of settlement patterns of the New
York-New Jersey (NY-NJ) Metropolitan Region coastal zone. Research for the study
entails documentation and analysis of the types and character of responses and
actions that are being considered or are just underway by individual property
and business owners, government officials at the municipal, county, state, and
federal levels, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in a representative
set of four heavily impacted coastal communities in New Jersey and New York (two
in each state). The application of a transition framework to the assessment of
responses taken in the short-term aftermath of Hurricane Sandy presents a unique
opportunity to advance theoretical and applied understanding of how extreme
disaster events set in motion fundamental, socio-ecological system shifts within
vulnerable and at risk areas of large metropolitan regions. This project
contributes to fundamental understanding of how new types of disaster events
emerging with climate change might affect coastal development patterns in
urbanized areas of the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the United
States and globally, disaster risk reduction policies and strategies have
emphasized using lessons from the past events in order to understand what should
be avoided in the future. Yet growing recognition of the non-stationarity of the
climate is compelling individuals operating at all levels, from local
communities to the federal government, to look at Hurricane Sandy and other
similar extreme events in a different way. In particular, there is growing
recognition that coastal properties, infrastructure, and larger interconnected,
urban systems cannot be rebuilt with the simple goal of reducing vulnerability
to the last event and that the rebuilding effort must allow for much greater
resilience in the future. This study provides invaluable information about
factors that promote or hinder resilience within large, coastal urban systems.
Results of the study are to be disseminated via public presentations to local
and regional stakeholders and through policy documents and research articles.
With respect to traineeship opportunities, the study facilitates the training of
graduate students at Rutgers University and City University of New York in rapid
response climate change impact and adaptation assessment.