* 1329357
* Disasters Roundtable
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Lauren Augustine, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2014
* USD 40,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the mission of the Disasters
Roundtable of the National Academy of Sciences, which facilitates and enhances
communication and the exchange of ideas among scientists, practitioners, and
policy makers to identify emerging issues related to natural, technological, and
other disasters. To meet this objective, the Roundtable convenes 2-3 workshops
and other activities a year to stimulate discussion that advances the
understanding of disaster-related issues and highlights strategies to mitigate
the effects of disasters. The impacts of disasters on world health, environment,
and economies are increasing as the number of natural, technological, and human
caused disasters, and the losses associated with these disasters, increase.
Addressing these issues requires cooperative and collaborative work among
diverse stakeholder communities at the national, state and local levels, and
between the public and private sectors. The Disasters Roundtable facilitates
this type of exchange, providing a neutral forum in which representatives from
diverse disciplines come together to examine issues, share perspectives, and
further the understanding of the entire cycle of preparedness, response and
recovery, and resilience to natural, technological, and human caused disasters.
In doing so, the Disasters Roundtable occupies a unique and important niche in
harnessing and applying the most current thinking among the disaster research,
practitioner, and management communities towards disaster related
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Disasters Roundtable membership is
comprised of recognized experts who are academicians, practitioners and others
in disaster-related fields, with approximately half being ex-officio members
that provide financial support for the Roundtable's activities and participate
as full members. The Disasters Roundtable leverages the contributions of the ex
officio members to achieve the common goals of both the federal agencies, and
the larger disaster community, and to inform policy through advances in science,
research and technology. By using the unparalleled convening power of the
National Academies to bring together experts from diverse sectors, the Disaster
Roundtable can illuminate emerging issues, and move towards finding solutions to
disaster related issues through advances in science, technology and policy.
Disasters Roundtable sessions are carefully structured to feature appropriate
presentations and discussions relevant to scientific developments and timely
policy issues related to disasters. DR workshops draw 100 attendees or more per
event in person and, reach a wider stakeholder community via webcasts and web
archives. The DR uses web based opportunities in all of its open activities to
extend its opportunities to share information, interact with and educate a broad
stakeholder community and promote exchange of information and ideas across
fields. The DR also interacts with key Congressional committees, staffers and
other government representatives to engage in discussions relevant to science
and policy issues related to disasters and hazards. The Disasters Roundtable was
established in 2000 and has held more than 30 workshops, meetings, and
activities on timely and important disasters-related issues during its tenure.