* 1329162
* IBSS: Measuring Justice, Managing Equity: An Interdisciplinary, Multi-Level Approach to Understanding Bias and Equity in Police Stops and Use of Force
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Steven Raphael, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project focuses on what causes racial disparities in policing and how one
can measure these disparities using tools taken from sociology, demography,
public policy, criminology, psychology, and behavioral economics. Understanding
what causes contemporary racial inequality is particularly vexing for
researchers across disciplines because the US's steady decline in racial
prejudice has not been accompanied by an analogous decline in racial inequality
across social institutions (e.g., education, healthcare, employment, criminal
justice). This has meant that traditional theories of how racial inequality is
produced are insufficient to explain contemporary racial dynamics, requiring new
research models to produce new understandings of social inequality. This project
capitalizes on existing research collaborations between the Consortium for
Police Leadership in Equity and law enforcement departments across the US to
produce a mixed-methods approach to understanding what produces racial
inequality in complex systems (i.e., policing). In cooperation with
approximately 25 law enforcement partners, the investigators will first
standardize data collection regarding police stops of pedestrians and motorists
as well as police use of force. Second, researchers will collect psychological
surveys from officers, aggregating responses by districts within departments.
Finally, using social-spatial data, department policy data, aggregate officer
attitude data, and data about the relative contributions of "bad apples" to
department-wide disparity rates, the researchers will address some of the
fundamental questions about race in law enforcement as well as the role that
local demographics and department-wide culture have in producing racial
inequality. The interdisciplinary research team and large number of
participating police departments facilitate inquiry across multiple levels of
analysis and comparisons across different types of departments, producing a
symptomology of unequal outcomes. While previous research has looked at police-
citizen encounters (stops, searches, arrests, force, etc.) or measured biases,
it has rarely done both together. Consequently, this project will contribute
both to scientific understandings of what causes racial inequality in policing
and identifying ways practitioners can measure and manage that
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken together, the investigators intend this
project to promote the development and validation of a nationally standardized
approach to police stops and use of force data collection, analysis, and
interpretation. The findings will be widely disseminated to police departments,
directly informing policy and setting the scientific foundations for national
best practices to reduce racial inequality in police outcomes. This project will
also provide postdoctoral fellows and graduate students a unique opportunity to
examine racial bias in an applied and multidisciplinary context, while exposing
them to more complex and diverse data analytic strategies. This project is
supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences
Research (IBSS) competition.