* 1329644
* CPS: Frontiers: Collaborative Research: ROSELINE: Enabling Robust, Secure and Efficient Knowledge of Time Across the System Stack
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2014,05/31/2020
* Anthony Rowe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,050,000.00

Accurate and reliable knowledge of time is fundamental to cyber-physical systems
for sensing, control, performance, and energy efficient integration of computing
and communications. This statement underlies the proposal. Emerging CPS
applications depend on precise knowledge of time to infer location and control
communication. There is a diversity of semantics used to describe time, and
quality of time varies as we move up and down the system stack. System designs
tend to overcompensate for these uncertainties and the result is systems that
may be over designed, inefficient, and fragile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit derives from the new and fundamental concept of time and the
holistic measure of quality of time (QoT) that captures metrics including
resolution, accuracy, and stability. The proposal builds a system stack
("ROSELINE") that enables new ways for clock hardware, operating system, network
services, and applications to learn, maintain and exchange information about
time, influence component behavior, and robustly adapt to dynamic QoT
requirements, as well as to benign and adversarial changes in operating
conditions. Application areas that will benefit from Quality of Time will
include: smart grad, networked and coordinated control of aerospace systems,
underwater sensing, and industrial automation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the proposal is due to the foundational nature of the work which
builds a robust and tunable quality of time that can be applied across a broad
spectrum of applications that pervade modern life. The proposal will also
provide valuable opportunities to integrate research and education in graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 classrooms. There will be extensive outreach through
publications, open sourcing of software, and participation in activities such as
the Los Angeles Computing Circle for pre-college students.