* 1329545
* Codon Choice and Gene Expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Elizabeth Grayhack, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 06/30/2016
* USD 555,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Translation of the genetic code from triplet codons in mRNA
into the amino acid sequences of proteins ultimately determines the protein
composition of the cell. Translation affects the amount of each protein, is
responsible for errors within the protein, and is regulated in response to
energy needs, nutrient availability, and hormonal changes. During translation,
sixty-one codons specify insertion of the twenty amino acids into proteins, and
thus include many synonymous codons that specify insertion of the same amino
acid. There is overwhelming evidence that the efficiency of translation is
influenced by the choice of synonymous codons used to encode a polypeptide.
However, neither the identity, nor the properties, of codons or codon
combinations that reduce translation efficiency are known. The long-term goal of
this project is to identify the codons and codon combinations that inhibit
translation in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and to determine how they do
so. An initial systematic analysis of the effects of individual codon repeats on
translation showed that the CGA codon was translated inefficiently due to I-A
wobble interactions with tRNA(Arg-ICG), and that adjacent CGA-CGA codon pairs
were far more inhibitory than individual CGA codons. This result implies that
there are likely other codon pairs or triplets that inhibit translation. To find
inhibitory codon combinations, a robust and sensitive method, called RNAID, was
developed, which uses fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) to identify GFP
variants with altered expression. One aim of the current project is to
comprehensively identify all codon pairs that have a significant inhibitory
effect on translation and to assess their biological importance. Inhibitory
codon combinations will be identified using RNA-ID, coupled with deep sequencing
and computational analysis. The biological roles of these inhibitory codon
combinations will be examined using bioinformatics approaches to test hypotheses
about their location, representation, conservation, and effects on ribosome
decoding. The biological consequences of inhibitory codon combinations will then
be evaluated, by examining cellular fitness and individual protein amounts in
cells expressing tRNA variants that suppress the inhibitory effects of these
codon combinations. A second aim of the project is to determine the mechanisms
by which these inhibitory codon combinations exert their effects. Cellular
components that mediate effects of inhibitory codon combinations will be defined
using genetic selections, as well as directed screens to assess the effects of
known translational quality control factors and elongation factors. Study of
these inhibitory codon pairs will lead to new insights into the translation
machinery and its quality control mechanisms, including: the definition of
common decoding properties of inhibitory codon combinations, definition of how
codon interactions affect elongation, and knowledge of the biological functions
of inhibitory codon combinations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: From
the education and training perspective, this project will enable graduate
students, undergraduates and high school students to connect biological research
to the educational process. These students will employ the cutting edge
technology of FACS combined with the simplicity of yeast genetics to participate
in investigations of fundamental questions of gene expression. Both the robust
methodology of yeast genetics and flow cytometry, and the non-hazardous organism
(baker's yeast) are optimal for students' efforts. A program of study will be
developed, including an introductory series of exercises, an individual research
project and inclusion in scientific discourse. Undergraduates will be recruited
from the 50-75 University of Rochester (UR) biochemistry majors for whom the PI
is the faculty advisor and from the UR Summer Scholars Program, which recruits
many students from primarily undergraduate colleges. High school students will
be recruited through direct contact with high school counselors. From an applied
scientific perspective, the comprehensive understanding of how codon choice
affects translation produced from this project will be immensely useful for
scientists interested in engineering and producing large amounts of protein for
biochemistry, structural biology or biotechnology.