* 1329742
* CPS: Synergy: Converting Multi-Axis Machine Tools into Subtractive3D Printers by using Intelligent Discrete Geometry Data Structures designed for Parallel and Distributed Computing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Thomas Kurfess, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2017
* USD 969,557.00

This grant provides funding for the formulation of a data model, and trajectory
planning platform and methodology to execute a fully digital 3D, 5-axis
machining capability. Research will be performed on methods for utilizing
multiple Graphical Processor Units (GPUs), which are readily available, parallel
digital processing hardware, in these calculations. The methodology will be
implemented in the context of an existing advanced computational framework that
has tools for voxelization, variable resolution digital modeling, and parallel
computing, integrating the fields of manufacturing and computer science.
Experiments involving 5-axis machining will be executed to validate the
methodology. Components will be machined and inspected on a coordinate
measurement machine to verify that the target geometry has been achieved.

If successful, this work will bring classical subtractive manufacturing back
into the arsenal of rapid prototyping, providing users of typical CNC machine
tools with the ability to rapidly determine if a part can be produced on a
specific machine and machine the part. Having such a design and analysis tool
will help to reduce the cost, improve the quality and allow rapid deployment of
new innovations in components that require machining. This work will contribute
to variable resolution digital representations to be employed in next generation
digital manufacturing systems. It will also combine state-of-the-art concepts in
computing and manufacturing to realize a completely new a cyber-physical
approach to manufacturing.