* 1329446
* Extra-transcriptional Regulatory Functions of the RNA Polymerase III System
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* David Donze, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 516,600.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;Within the nuclei of eukaryotic cells, genomic DNA
is associated with numerous different proteins to form a structure referred to
as chromatin. These proteins can be either directly bound to DNA, or bound via
interactions with other proteins. These proteins can have a variety of
influences on which genes are expressed in different cells, and also govern the
amount of gene expression under different environmental conditions. The research
described here focuses on how proteins of the RNA Polymerase III (Pol III)
system affect expression of other genes that are transcribed by other eukaryotic
RNA polymerases. Previous work established that tRNA genes (tDNAs), with their
assembled RNA Polymerase III (Pol III) protein complexes, function as barriers
to the spread of repressive chromatin in yeast, and as insulators to gene
activation. These results indicated that Pol III complexes are involved in
demarcating the boundaries of chromosomal domains. In this project, the idea
that Pol III genes exhibit additional 'extra-transcriptional' functions beyond
their role in synthesizing small RNA molecules will be further examined. Recent
data suggests that Pol III complexes can have direct effects on the level of Pol
II transcription, and that Pol III complexes also prevent inappropriate
elongation by Pol II. This project will also test hypotheses to explain the
mechanism that allows Pol III complexes to function in these capacities.
Finally, the research will evaluate which proteins of the Pol III complex are
necessary and sufficient for such functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;From a scientific perspective, the significance of this study
is to determine whether Pol III complex proteins have general extra-
transcriptional functions in yeast, which may have far-reaching implications in
the regulation of gene expression in other eukaryotes. In addition to direct
scientific advancement, the research will have a significant impact in
education, allowing the training of graduate students, and the nurturing of
research interests of promising undergraduates.