* 1329576
* BRIGE: A reductionist approach to enterovirus disinfection
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Krista Wigginton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 174,365.00

PI: Wigginton&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1228076&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRIGE
proposal describes a plan dedicated to a reductionist analysis of the chemical
reactions that take place in an enterovirus particle during disinfection. The
project represents the first step of a long-term goal to develop a research team
at the University of Maryland dedicated to employing state-of the art analytical
techniques to detect and characterize pathogenic microorganisms. In order to
understand the reactions that take place in a virus complex, one must first
understand the reactivity of the protein and genome subcomponents. Although the
reactions between protein and nucleic acid monomers and common disinfectants are
well characterized, the role that higher order organization has on monomer
reactivity is poorly understood. It is proposed that a bottom-up approach to
describe a poliovirus particle's reactivity with free chlorine be developed. A
quantitative Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization mass spectrometry
(MALDI-MS) technique will be developed to determine the kinetics and products of
reactions between chlorine and biopolymers with increasing structure complexity
(i.e., peptides, RNA oligomers, proteins, genomes, capsids, infective viruses).
In doing so, fundamental questions about the role of virus molecular structure
in its disinfection susceptibility will be addressed. The reactivity and
inactivation of three similar poliovirus strains will be compared; this will
elucidate how slight changes in a virus sequence influence its fundamental
reactivity and disinfection kinetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broadening
participation aspect of this proposal is integrated with the research-it
emphasizes retaining female undergraduate students in engineering disciplines.
Specifically, an undergraduate research project will focus on the simple
biopolymer reactivity experiments. The undergraduate researcher will be selected
and mentored in collaboration with the University of Maryland Women in
Engineering Fellows Program. Also included in the broadening participation
aspect of this proposal are planned activities with the new NSF STEP program at
UMD titled Successful Engineering Education and Development Support (SEEDS).
With SEEDS, students will be exposed to current pathogen research topics in
engineering (e.g., biosensors, efforts in the developing world, etc.) through
lunchtime lectures and lab tours. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of
Proposed Work: This research plan will substantially improve the understanding
of the reactions that take place in a virus particle as it is disinfected with
hypochlorous acid. To date, scientists continue to lack a mechanistic
description of virus inactivation and this work will serve as a holistic
examination of the modifications that do and do not contribute to inactivation.
The work will result in a number of scientific advancements including the
development of a quantitative MALDI-MS technique for studying virus proteins and
genomes, a new perspective on the role of protein and genome organization in
their susceptibility to oxidants, an in-depth evaluation of RNA oxidation
reactions, and tools to predict how the disinfection kinetics of emerging virus
strains will differ from the disinfection kinetics of familiar virus strains
based on nucleic acid and amino acid mutations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts of Proposed Work: The research effort described herein has wide reaching
potential impacts in the field of water sanitation. Emerging viruses constantly
create new challenges for environmental engineers and public health scientists.
A better comprehension of the influence that mutations have in virus "hardiness"
will allow for the development of susceptibility prediction tools for use in
disinfection process design. Furthermore, an improved understanding on pathogen
disinfection could lead to the development of effective low-cost, low-energy,
disinfecting strategies.