* 1329723
* Ca2+ Waves in Systemic Signaling Networks in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Simon Gilroy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 634,848.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The immobile nature of the plant lifestyle requires
an ability to continuously monitor local conditions and trigger responses to
help cope as these conditions change. Stimuli are often highly localized, yet
responses must occur throughout the plant body. Thus, the signaling networks
within plants must broadcast information not only within the cells directly
receiving the stimulus but also over much longer distances. This project seeks
to define how the calcium ion plays a role in this long-distance signaling
system. Preliminary work has revealed that in response to local stress, such as
wounding of the leaf or increasing levels of salt around the root, waves of Ca2+
propagate from the site of stress perception to distant regions of the plant
within seconds. This preliminary analysis has also highlighted a potential role
for reactive oxygen species (ROS) and an ion channel named TPC1 in this rapidly
propagating Ca2+ wave system. The major research goals to be undertaken in this
project are therefore to use plants engineered to produce protein-based Ca2+
reporters to monitor and characterize the Ca2+ changes both at the site of
stress perception and in the tissues transmitting this signal. Molecular changes
dependent on the Ca2+ wave will then be monitored to define the relationship
between the Ca2+ wave and other well-defined plant stress response pathways such
as those triggered by ROS and the defense hormones jasmonic- and salicylic-acid.
The third goal will be to engineer the TPC1 gene to alter the regulation of this
ion channel such that it should no longer respond to ROS or Ca2+. The ability of
these mutated versions of the channel to support the movement of the Ca2+ wave
will then be assessed. Through pursuing these three goals, this research program
will help define how this newly discovered Ca2+ wave signaling system plays a
role in helping plants adapt to a constantly changing
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will
integrate research and education. Research opportunities for undergraduates will
be offered through programs such as the Undergraduate Research Scholars Program
and recruitment from members of the Posse Foundation that promote the
representation of underrepresented groups in science. Opportunities for high
school researchers will also be made available. Along with their research
training these scholars will be encouraged to present their work at local,
national and international meetings. In addition, efforts at outreach to the
general public will be made at the local level through events such as the
Wisconsin Institutes of Discovery Science Festival, Wisconsin Science
Expeditions and Saturday Science at The Wisconsin Institutes of Discovery. A
plant biology movie resource, disseminated through outlets such as YouTube, will
also be developed. This resource will be directed towards engaging the general
public through movies and explanations of plant responses, whilst also providing
them with access to the science behind the images.