* 1329509
* SBIR Phase II:  SecureVault Cloud Platform
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Radu Sion, Private Machines Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,142,041.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will design and
build a technology platform that allows cloud infrastructures to run clients'
tasks with full computation privacy. The cloud provider itself is unable to
access to customers' workloads even in the presence of malicious-intent direct
physical access to the hardware itself. The technology significantly increases
cloud defense capabilities, and provides strong computation privacy, and
regulatory compliance guarantees to any regulatory- and security-sensitive
customers. This level of security is achieved by (i) endowing a traditional
infrastructure with a collaborative security layer of active transparent defense
and control, a cloud ?immune system?, and (ii) new mechanisms that allow full
computation privacy for outsourced tasks. The immune system has its own control
network and can instantly share critical information and react independently for
meaningful operation and fast recovery even under sustained attack and severe
compromise. It also transparently monitors and accesses the server runtimes and
can strongly react and immediately present a united defense across the entire
cloud. Moreover, inherent privacy and confidentiality assurances allow safe
computation execution and data hosting with full security, even in the case of a
compromised curious service provider with full physical access to the
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project will manifest itself in all dimensions of our increasingly internet
and cloud-reliant society and technology. Because clouds introduce significant
risks, technology-backed comprehensive security and privacy assurances are
essential to establish cloud computing as a truly viable alternative to in-house
IT. Unfortunately, these guarantees are not achievable with any of today's
offerings or research efforts, despite being direly needed by all major
potential cloud adopters, including financial, governmental and healthcare
markets, heavily governed by security, regulatory compliance and intellectual
property constraints. As a result, rather than risk regulatory compliance
breaches, and unauthorized access to proprietary business logic, these major
markets have simply not adopted the cloud. Countless surveys outline security
and privacy consistently as the top concern preventing adoption, and markets
have reacted with strong reservations. This project develops a disruptive
technology that bridges this gap and makes cloud adoption secure and attractive
in all these markets. As a result it will lead to exponential cross-market
growth. Finally, enabling cloud deployment with full computation privacy,
regulatory compliance and data confidentiality will significantly increase
enterprise agility and competitiveness.