* 1329355
* The 2013 Tropical Cyclone Research Forum; College Park, Maryland; March 5-7, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Meg Austin, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2015
* USD 8,000.00

The Tropical Cyclone Research Forum will be held on March 5-7, 2013 at the NOAA
Center for Weather and Climate Prediction in College Park, Maryland. The theme
of the workshop is "Tropical Cyclone Research: Our Vision for the Future".
Topics include: snapshots of tropical cyclone R&D; federal numerical modeling
initiatives; transitioning research to operations; tropical cyclone model
development and technology transfer; observations and observing strategies for
tropical cyclones and the environment; improvements in tropical cyclone forecast
and warning products and services; and social science applications to the
tropical cyclone forecast and warning notification problem. The Tropical Cyclone
Research Forum is sponsored by NSF, NOAA/OAR and the Office of Naval Research.

Intellectual merit: At the Tropical Cyclone Research Forum, representatives from
the academic research community, industry and federal agencies will have the
opportunity to discuss the latest developments in tropical cyclone research such
as: 1. Review of the 2012 hurricane/typhoon season from both an operations and
reconnaissance perspective; 2. The Navy's Model Development and Improvement
Program/Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program (HFIP); 3. NSF program
initiatives, to include the University-based National Ensemble Program; 4. Earth
System Predication Capability (ESPC)/Next-Generation Suite of Models; 5. Joint
Hurricane Testbed: Project Updates and Plans for the Future; 6. Improvements in
tropical cyclone forecast and warning products and services, to include storm
surge and inland flooding.

Broader impacts: The workshop is important to the nation because it brings
together the academic research community, industry, federal agencies and other
user communities such as emergency management, to prepare for the upcoming
hurricane season and make improvements to the Nation's hurricane forecasting and
warning program. Some graduate students will also participate in this workshop,
promoting education and training that NSF sees as importance to science and
society.