* 1329377
* SBIR Phase II:  Efficient and Scalable Production of Functionalized Electrospun Nanofiber Felts of Regenerated Cellulose with Superior Capacity and Throughput for Bioseparations
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Nyle Hedin, Nanofiber Separations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,502,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project from Nanofiber
Separations, LLC will establish an innovative type of bioseparation media
utilizing electrospun nanofiber felts/mats of regenerated cellulose with high
specific surface area as the support for protein adsorption ligands. Compared to
competitive products (e.g., packed resin beads or microfiber adsorption
membranes), these nanofiber membranes/felts will provide greatly enhanced
throughput (i.e., shorter processing times), reduce the amount of waste
generated, and decrease the volume of media required (i.e., lower costs and
smaller operating footprints) for purification of high-value biopharmaceutical
products. The SBIR Phase I project was completed successfully by developing a
manufacturing process for the functionalized nanofiber felts and proving
superior performance compared to commercial products. This SBIR Phase II project
will focus on further optimization of the formulations used during production of
the nanofiber adsorbents for bioseparations. This will include two scale-up
steps needed for the commercial manufacturing effort anticipated during the
Phase II timeline (nanofiber felt production, surface functionalization, and
module development). Key technical improvements, including greater product
stability and a broader array of functional ligands needed in bioseparations,
will continue to be made to the nanofiber felts/mats.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project goes well beyond
bioseparations. Due to the many advantages of the surface-functionalized
electrospun nanofibers made from regenerated cellulose, this innovative
adsorption material has tremendous commercial potential. Customers will come
from companies within the biopharmaceutical industry, as well as from the
established manufacturers of bioseparations adsorption media. Additionally, the
underlying fundamentals associated with nanofiber adsorption media will have a
wide range of implications, including more efficient separation processes in the
water purification industry and the blood products and/or blood purification
industries. The advantages achieved through this innovative work will lead to
more efficient separation technologies across many sectors and include faster
processes, reduced energy consumption, lower materials requirements, and less
waste generation. In addition to the broader scientific impacts, Nanofiber
Separations, LLC is committed to creating jobs and to training highly technical
staff members, providing them with expertise in the interdisciplinary fields of
advanced functional materials (including nano-scaled materials) and/or
biotechnology.