* 1329350
* Collaborative Research: RUI: BIOMAPS: Modular Programmed Evolution of Bacteria for Optimization of Metabolic Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Todd Eckdahl, Missouri Western State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 469,953.00

Intellectual Merit This project is directed towards developing new methods for
optimizing production of useful compounds by genetically engineered bacteria. In
typical industrial settings, large scale production is fraught with reduced
efficiency and yield of desired compounds. The problem is that an industrially
useful compound may not be useful for the bacteria, and so there is selective
pressure against "producer cells" and for "non-producer cells" which can then
overwhelm the population. To address this problem, a strategy called Programmed
Evolution has been created, which will introduce genetic variation into
bacterial populations and reward cells for producing the largest amount of
compound. This project aims to investigate this optimization process using a
mathematical approach in order to gain a better understanding as to how the
cells reach their final evolved state. Programmed Evolution will be a plug-and-
play system for the optimization of any desired output so researchers and
companies can produce the most compound possible for applications in energy, and
bioremediation.

Broader impacts The Programmed Evolution project will increase diversity for
STEM education since the research is conducted entirely by undergraduates. The
investigators will continue their successful model of recruiting students from
underrepresented groups. The project will contribute to a trained STEM workforce
because the students involved will be highly valued as a result of their
authentic research experiences. The Programmed Evolution process could improve
efficiencies for industrial-scale commercial production of useful chemicals and
pharmaceuticals, thus improving American economic competitiveness. In addition
to strengthening the infrastructure for research and education on the two
collaborating campuses, the project will enable the investigators to continue to
serve as national leaders in undergraduate synthetic biology education and
research through the Genome Consortium for Active Teaching (GCAT). The project
will enhance the undergraduate education of the students, contribute to their
development as scientifically literate citizens, and provide them with the
background needed to pursue research careers. As the undergraduate students
learn how to program the evolution of bacteria, they also learn how to program
the course of their own futures as professionals, educators, and research
scientists.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of
their efforts toward support of Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education.