* 1329782
* Doctoral Workshop and Student Travel support for the 7th ACM International Conference on Distributed Event-Based Systems Conference (DEBS 2013)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides support for the Doctoral workshop and grand challenge forum
to be conducted in conjunction with the ACM International Conference on
Distributed Event-Based Systems conference (DEBS 2013). The 7th conference of
DEBS is held at the University of Texas at Arlington, June 29th -- July 3rd
2013. The event-based paradigm has gathered momentum as witnessed by current
efforts in areas such as event-driven architectures, big data systems, the
internet of things, complex event processing, publish/subscribe systems,
business process management, grid computing, web services, information
dissemination, stream processing, and message-oriented middleware. The DEBS
conference brings together students, researchers and practitioners from these
diverse communities to share their views and reach a common understanding of
current research work and open challenges. The conference also provides a forum
for facilitating the exchange of ideas between academia and industry. The ACM
DEBS proceedings are published by ACM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant provides
partial travel expenses for about 12 U.S.-based students presenting their
research in the doctoral workshop and participating in the grand challenge
activity. Participation in DBES 2013 provides the opportunity to students to
learn about cutting edge research in the area of distributed event-based systems
and to interact with experts in the top stream and event-based systems
conference. The conference will provide an opportunity to students to present
their on-going research, as well as obtain objective feedback on their
presentation. DEBS offers an environment for training and developing the future
generation of academics, and personnel with appropriate skills needed for the
industry, as well as enhancing the participation of underrepresented students in
event-based research. A strong representation of U.S.-based graduate students at
the DEBS 2013 conference is useful in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in this
field of research. The student travel stipend recipients will be announced at
the ACM DEBS 2013 conference website (http://www.orgs.ttu.edu/debs2013).