* 1329406
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ancient Maya Ideology and the Human Body: Materializing Power among Mid-Level Leaders in the Belize River Valley, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Jane Buikstra, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 23,877.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Jane E. Buikstra, Anna Novotny will analyze human
archaeological remains of the ancient Maya from the Belize River Valley in
northwestern Belize. Ms. Novotny's research will use bioarchaeological methods
in a novel approach to investigating leadership strategies of non-royal Maya who
lived there between 800 BC and 1000AD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this period
the Belize River Valley (BRV) was home to productive agricultural communities
and river trade routes from inland cities to the coast. Archaeological remains
from the BRV comprise the largest potential data set on ancient Maya commoners.
Because the BRV was never politically unified, it is an excellent place to study
leadership strategies of a variety of non-royal leaders. The 2000-year span of
BRV occupation also provides a unique opportunity to assess how social
institutions in complex societies change over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ceremony is recognized as a leadership tool and source of
power in ancient societies, and exploring ceremony at all hierarchical levels is
crucial to thoroughly understanding the dynamics of social complexity. This
project will assess the degree to which leaders at Maya commoner communities
used politically powerful rituals that involved deceased individuals of their
lineage. To accomplish this Ms. Novotny will investigate the graves of the
ancestors of mid-level leaders to assess which ancestors were chosen for
veneration, noting whether leaders were biologically related to each other and
other community members, whether leaders were born and raised in the BRV, and
whether their bodies were later chosen for public, post-burial rituals. The
project will investigate remains from the Late Preclassic through Late Classic
periods (800 BC - 1000 A.D.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documenting how non-royal
leaders within the Belize Valley controlled ritual knowledge to create power has
direct implications for refining global models of social complexity and
sociopolitical power. This project will integrate and disseminate
bioarchaeological data sets from the BRV that have never been formally compared
and/or disseminated. All literature and datasets compiled by this project will
be ingested into to the Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR) at Arizona State
University so they will be available for public use. A published monograph as
well as presentations at both American and Belizean archaeological conferences
will also aid in data dissemination. In addition, the project will foster
research collaboration between the United States and Belizean archaeologists and
students. Ms. Novotny will contribute to the science education of Belizean and
American undergraduates by training them in bioarchaeological research methods
as part of the Belize River Valley Archaeological Reconnaissance field school.
Funds are allocated for curation of archaeological materials from the BRV so
this large collection of ancient Maya remains can be preserved for future
studies. Curated material will be made available at Belize Institute of
Archaeology facilities.