* 1329544
* Physical Processes Governing Energy and Momentum Flows on Multiple Scales in Near-Earth Space Using a First-principles-based Data Assimilation System (DAS) for the Global Ionospher
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2019
* Ludger Scherliess, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2019
* USD 1,300,000.00

This grant is for partial support of a project selected and funded under the
2012 NASA-NSF partnership for Space Weather Modeling Collaborations. It is a
collaborative effort, led by Utah State University and with participation also
from University of Southern California and NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The
objective is to first combine multiple existing first principles ionospheric
data assimilation models to develop a modular Data Assimilation System (DAS)
capable of modeling the global Ionosphere-Thermosphere-Electrodynamics (ITE).
Next, a Multi-model Ensemble Prediction System (MEPS) will be constructed for
modeling the I-T-E system that incorporates the existing data assimilation
models with different physics, numerics, and initial conditions. MEPS will allow
ensemble modeling with different data assimilation models for specific science
studies and applications. MEPS will be modular so that it can be coupled to
lower atmosphere (weather) models and to first-principles-based magnetosphere
models. Hence, MEPS can take account of upward propagating tides, planetary
waves, and gravity waves. Since MEPS reconstructions will be consistent with the
available I-T-E measurements, self-consistent ion outflows, convection E-fields,
precipitation, currents, etc., can be provided to magnetosphere models for
inputs and/or validation. The modular architecture also means that data
assimilation models (ionosphere, thermosphere, electrodynamics) developed by
others can be easily incorporated in MEPS. In addition, MEPS will include
different data assimilation models for specific parts of the near-Earth space
domain, which will allow ensemble modeling of specific events with several
different data assimilation models. The MEPS data assimilation models will be
made available to the scientific community so that others can study the I-T-E
system with state-of-the-art data assimilation models. The use of these models
will lead to a paradigm shift in how basic physical processes are studied in
near-Earth space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When completed, the MEPS model (with
component data assimilation models; ionosphere, ionosphere-plasmasphere,
thermosphere, high-latitude ionosphere-electrodynamics, and mid-low latitude
ionosphere-electrodynamics) will be delivered to the Community Coordinated
Modeling Center (CCMC) for access by the scientific community and eventual
transition to use for operational space weather forecasting. The results of this
effort will help provide a several hour predictive capability for the ITE that
is a high priority national space weather need. Graduate students at USU will
participate in the project