* 1330562
* Integration of developmental signals by plant ARGONAUTES
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2014,09/30/2017
* James Carrington, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,020,000.00

Integration of Developmental Signals by Plant
ARGONAUTES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Small RNA-guided
processes are central to eukaryotic development, antiviral defense and
maintenance of genome integrity. These microRNAs were discovered as regulators
of developmental timing in animals, and found to also regulate developmental
timing in plants. Mutant plants affecting the plant juvenile-to-adult transition
and the specification of leaf polarity have been particularly important for the
discovery of RNA silencing components, include the ARGONAUTE (AGO) proteins that
bind small RNAs and control their regulatory effects. Most plants have at least
ten AGO genes with specialized functions, small RNA binding preferences, and
expression patterns. This project will use new genomic resources and tools,
particularly automation and high-throughput sequencing, to clarify the roles of
AGOs in broader gene regulatory networks controlling plant development. This
research will elucidate the signals controlling AGO expression patterns,
determine how and where AGO proteins interact with their targets, and measure
how AGO-small RNA-target interactions lead to downstream transcriptional
changes. The project will thus address fundamental questions surrounding gene
regulation and provide insight into agriculturally important traits such as leaf
architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this
project will be broadened through educational outreach, development of human
resources, and development of publicly available software tools and databases.
The outreach component will be a continuation of the lab?s ongoing collaboration
with the Danforth Center's Science Education and Outreach Director, Dr. Terry
Woodford-Thomas, to develop a bioinformatics and RNA-seq module as part of the
highly successful "Tech Trunk" Program. The Bioinformatics/RNA-Seq trunk will
explore the technology and bioinformatics behind gene expression analysis and
functional genomics. Two training workshops will be provided to high school
teachers that participate in the Tech Trunk program. Additionally, the proposed
research project will provide training and mentoring opportunities at the high
school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels, including for
underrepresented groups. This will be accomplished in collaboration with the
local Students and Teachers As Research Scientists (STARS) program in St. Louis,
the NSF-funded Summer Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Program at
the Danforth Center, and through regular Danforth Center workshops on career
skills and responsible conduct of research. Lastly, all of the genome-scale
datasets and analysis tools developed during this project will made easily
accessible through a public web portal.