* 1330259
* Structure, Dynamics and Energetics of Protein Unfolded States
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Daniel Raleigh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 719,999.00

The native state of a protein is the structure that is most thermodynamically
stable and is normally the biologically active form. Protein folding begins from
a less structured collection of states, commonly known as the denatured state
ensemble (DSE). The DSE is considerably harder to study than the native state
owing to its dynamic and flexible nature, and to the fact that the vast majority
of protein molecules populate the native state under normal conditions.
Nevertheless, understanding the DSE is fundamentally important for understanding
of protein folding and stability. The stability of a protein is dictated by the
free energy difference between the native state and the DSE, thus any changes in
solution conditions or mutations that alter the DSE can alter stability and
folding. The DSE is the reference state for stability measurements; much of our
quantitative understanding of the specific interactions involved in stabilizing
the native state of proteins is derived from experiments that make implicit
assumptions about the DSE. In addition, the DSE can be the starting state for
nonproductive protein aggregation, a process that impacts biotechnology and
biology. This project is directed at fundamental studies of protein folding,
focusing on the role of the DSE. A deeper understanding of the properties of the
DSE and the role that the DSE plays in folding is required for a complete
description of protein folding and aggregation. The DSE can be populated under
harsh, non-physiological conditions, but progress requires characterization of
the DSE under conditions that are relevant for folding and aggregation, i.e.,
under conditions where the native state is stable. Comparative experimental
studies of a set of three representative model proteins will be carried out
under physiologically relevant designed conditions. The experimental work will
be closely integrated with efforts by theoretical collaborators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A range of educational and outreach activities are
planned. An 'adopt a lab' program has been initiated as part of the first year
undergraduate honors lab class and will be further developed. Interactions with
Stony Brook University?s project WISE (Women in Science and Engineering) program
will be established to provide support and encouragement to undergraduate women
who are interested in science and engineering. Laboratory exercises will also be
designed to interface with project WISE. Graduate and undergraduate training and
mentoring are key components of the project. Outreach activities include visits
and seminars at undergraduate institutions, as well as collaborations with
researchers at primarily undergraduate institutions. The research goals of the
project aim to answer fundamental questions in protein folding. As part of the
work, new tools and methodologies will also be developed which can be applied to
a range of problems in protein structure and dynamics beyond the area of protein
folding.