* 1330439
* SBIR Phase II:  Micro Laser Assisted Machining
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Deepak Ravindra, MICRO-LAM, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,188,661.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project enables an
innovative high-productivity approach to manufacturing hard and brittle
materials like ceramics, semiconductors, and glass. The objective of this
proposal is to build on the successful Phase I feasibility study to demonstrate
an efficient and productive method that could manufacture ceramic and
semiconductors with excellent part quality. The process, termed Micro-Laser
Assisted Machining (micro-LAM), allows a cheaper (~40-60%), faster (by two to
five times), and better method of machining and manufacturing hard and brittle
materials by combining the preferential heat from a laser source and extreme
pressure from a diamond tool. The status quo technology for manufacturing these
materials requires extensive machining hours to obtain good part quality, which
is not economical. The demand for high-end ceramics and semiconductors is
continuously increasing; however, high production costs have forced
manufacturers to use other materials with inferior properties. The goal of this
effort is to address this unmet need by commercializing the micro-LAM technology
by the end of Phase II. A minimum viable product will be tested at industrial
partner sites to obtain firsthand customer feedback, which is key to
accelerating the commercialization process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be felt in semiconductor
(microelectronics) manufacturing, optics (mirrors and windows), and precision
mechanical products (bearing and seals), where the superior properties of
advanced semiconductor and engineered ceramic materials are required to achieve
performance criteria. This technology will enable entirely new capabilities for
production of materials and products currently not viable or achievable due to
processing limitations. The micro-LAM technology also has potential applications
for emerging technologies, such as wind turbines and plug-in electric vehicles,
where high-power and high-temperature operation of advanced devices is required.
The current target market size, including optics, semiconductor, advanced
ceramics and glass parts manufacturing, is approximately $250 million, with a
15%/year growth rate. Once market acceptance is established in the target market
segment, the micro-LAM tooling will be launched into the larger diamond turning
machine (DTM) market, with a total size of $2.4 billion. There are approximately
10,000 DTMs in the United States alone (with ~ 500 new tools introduced per
year).