* 1330491
* TWC: Frontier: Collaborative: Enabling Trustworthy Cybersystems for Health and Wellness
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* Roy Campbell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,000,000.00

This frontier project tackles many of the fundamental research challenges
necessary to provide trustworthy information systems for health and wellness, as
sensitive information and health-related tasks are increasingly pushed into
mobile devices and cloud-based services. The interdisciplinary research team
includes expertise from computer science, business, behavioral health, health
policy, and healthcare information technology to enable the creation of health
&amp; wellness systems that can be trusted by individual citizens to protect
their privacy and can be trusted by health professionals to ensure data
integrity and security. Although these problems are motivated by a nationally
important application domain (health and wellness), the solutions have
applications far beyond that domain.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
developing methods to authenticate clinical staff to tablet computers in a
continuous and unobtrusive way, and to provide patients a usable way to control
the information that mobile sensors collect about them. One of the goals is to
manage security of healthcare devices in the home and in remote clinics, without
adding burden on the homeowner or clinical staff; towards this end the
investigators are developing methods to verify medical directives issued to
remote devices. One approach being investigated is segmenting access to medical
records from mobile devices to limit information exposure, and developing
methods to audit behavior of this complex ecosystem of devices and systems. The
investigators will design tools to handle genomic data in the cloud while
enabling patient control over information, detect malware in medical devices
through power analysis, and provide contextual information to those who use
health data collected in the field.