* 1330637
* Collaborative Research:  Cultural Models of Nature across Cultures:  Space, Causality, and Primary Food Producers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Giovanni Bennardo, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 140,176.00

This cross-cultural research investigates cultural models (CMs) of nature held
by populations across several cultures and five continents ranging from long-
time primary food producers, e.g., farmers, fishermen, herders (and also hunters
and gatherers) to those who recently shifted to become primary food consumers
due to globalization forces. CMs of nature, typically held out of one's or a
community's awareness, affect environmental actions in ways not necessarily
predicted by more traditional ecological models. The project comprises fifteen
scholars and six graduate students who are experts in a particular cultural
area. Linguistic and experimental data will be collected and analyzed by a
common protocol that combines qualitative and quantitative approaches.
Methodology and ethnography play paramount roles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers expect to discover a variety of CMs of nature
that characterize each community investigated. These CMs represent specific
organizations of the constitutive categories underlying the concept of nature,
that is, humans, animals, plants, weather, physical environment, and the
supernatural. They also expect causal relationships to be one of the major
forces (in addition to spatial relationships) weaving together these categories.
Similarly, while attributed to different elements and in a different potency,
intentionality will be universally present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results,
because of the focus on primary food producers, will provide insights on how
this kind of population typically constructs a CM of nature. In addition, one
can explore the possibility that conceptions of space are central to the
construction of CMs (in this case, of nature), thus, provide supporting evidence
for an architecture of the mind that includes a major role for the spatial
domain in the forming of other domains of knowledge. Finally and more
importantly, the findings are intended to supply policy makers, i.e., major
actors in finding solutions to climate change induced problems, with information
on indigenous CMs of nature that will assist them in their decision-making.