* 1330238
* Collaborative Research: North East Water Resources Network
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Daniel Leathers, University of Delaware
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sean Kennan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,000,000.00

IIA-1330446, University of Vermont, Judith Van Houten &lt;br/&gt;Linked to:
IIA-1330238, University of Delaware, Daniel Leathers and IIA-1330406, University
of Rhode Island, Jennifer Specker.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
Collaborative Research: North East Water Resources
Network&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North East Water Resources (NEWRnet) consortium
is comprised of Delaware (DE), Rhode Island (RI), and Vermont (VT). This
consortium will create an advanced sensor network in watersheds for gathering
high-frequency, spatially-extensive water quality and quantity data and a
network of lab and field-based experiments and agent-based models to investigate
how to align sensor data and their visualization in a way that will be
utilization by stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of NEWRnet is to improve the environmental
governance and market mechanisms that sustain and/or improve water resources by
linking information from a network of high-frequency sensors to behavioral
results from decision makers. NEWRnet will address and integrate two challenges
in environmental science and management to: 1) Understand the impact of climate
variability and extreme weather events on water quality and quantity across the
north-south gradient from VT to DE; and 2) Provide valuable and rapid
information to stakeholders (resource users, resource managers, and policy
makers) to lead to more time efficient and more informed land and water use
decision making. The research design includes a sensor network nested in
watersheds in each of the three states, using the same sensors to gather and
transmit high-frequency hydrological and geochemical data for sharing to address
hypothesis-driven questions. Concurrently, NEWRnet will create a network across
all three states for experimental economics and agent-based modeling. Value-
added data displays from the sensors will be tested in lab and field-based
experiments to examine how stakeholders react to frequent, multi-dimensional
environmental information over large areas and longer time periods, which in
turn will inform agent-based models that will simulate the decision making of
information users (farmers, residents, businesses, town managers, governance
bodies) on a broader scale. The modeling will involve these stakeholders and
test scenarios for their use of these high-frequency water quality data.
Workforce development and diversity programs will be integrated into the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The project has
significant relevance to local communities as well as more broadly across the
US. Researchers engage with diverse stakeholders (farmers, rural and urban
residents, lake side residents and local to national level government agencies)
and address water quality issues from a broad number of perspectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how best to represent high-frequency data
for use by stakeholders will be of broad interest beyond the three participating
states. Appropriate displays of high-frequency data could allow policy makers
and managers to accelerate their responses to low flow, drought and severe storm
events, which are predicted to be more frequent and of higher intensity for our
region, thereby reducing deleterious effects.