* 1330800
* Experimental and Computational Determination of Microbial Genotypes and Phenotypes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Robert Edwards, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 812,000.00

Bacteria are all around us and affect our environment, producing, for example,
50% of the oxygen we breathe. Despite our advances in biotechnology, we still
don't understand all of the functions that bacteria perform. Scientists are good
at understanding the genetics of different bacteria, but more data is required
to place the genetic data in a broader context. This project uses high-
throughput techniques to understand all the different things that bacteria do in
order to survive and grow. First, the growth of hundreds of different bacteria
will be measured in hundreds of different growth conditions. This provides a
database for all scientists to use so that they can compare the metabolic
capacity of different types of bacteria. Second, new sequencing technology will
be used to understand the bacteria at the genetic level. This includes
identifying the genes that are being used by the bacteria during growth under
different conditions. Third, new computational tools will be developed to allow
scientists to analyze these complex data sets. The tools and data being
generated will be available to the broader scientific community so that they can
compare genotypes to phenotypes. Even though this work focuses on bacteria
because they are easy to grow and manipulate, much of the data that will be
generated applies to more complex organisms, including humans.

Broader Impacts: San Diego State University (SDSU) is a Hispanic serving
institute that has had the largest improvement in graduation rates in the
nation. PI Edwards and Co-PI Dinsdale teach dynamic classes to students that
introduce them to the newest sequencing technologies and data sets. Over 130
students have taken the DNA sequencing and analysis classes which introduce the
students to practical aspects of DNA sequencing and data analysis using the
newest technologies available. The students write scientific publications based
on the work they do in classes. High school students are trained over the
summer, and participate in the BRIDGES program that teaches community college
students how to adapt to studying at SDSU. This project supports SDSU's work
with K-12 education in San Diego, the Republic of Kiribati, Brazil, and
Australia, as well as open days at San Diego State University and its Coastal
and Marine Institute Laboratory.