* 1330788
* Regulation of mid-meiotic RNA processing by forkhead factors in fission yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2013,08/31/2020
* Jo Ann Wise, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2020
* USD 711,017.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT:&lt;br/&gt;Cells have evolved elaborate mechanisms to ensure
that genes encoding proteins or RNAs that are required only in specific cell
types or at certain times in development are tightly regulated. This project
will utilize the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe as a simple model
system to gain broadly applicable insights into the molecular events responsible
for maintaining strict temporal control over gene expression. Meiosis, a
differentiation process that produces haploid gametes from diploid precursor
cells through division without DNA synthesis, and mitosis, through which cells
proliferate through division after DNA synthesis, are conserved pathways
throughout the eukaryotic kingdom. In fission yeast, the switch from cellular
proliferation to differentiation in response to adverse environmental conditions
is mediated by sequential waves of altered transcript accumulation that
correlate with early events (DNA replication and recombination), middle events
(cell division) and late events (spore formation). The overarching goal of this
project is to dissect the molecular mechanisms through which members of the
forkhead family of transcription factors function antagonistically to prevent
inappropriate expression of meiotic genes in mitotically growing cells and
collaboratively to promote productive RNA synthesis and processing during
meiosis. Although some forkhead family members act as conventional promoter-
restricted transcription factors that regulate initiation, recent work in the
principal investigator's laboratory has revealed association of these factors
along the entire gene body and even downstream from the coding region in meiotic
cells. Consistent with this unusual distribution, complementary data indicate
that forkhead factors regulate the addition of a polyadenosine tail to newly
synthesized mRNAs, which is mechanistically linked to transcription termination.
The first two specific aims of this project will test the working hypotheses
that the decision between polyadenylation and read-through transcription is
enforced by differential recruitment of RNA processing factors at the promoter
and/or competition between elongation and termination as the transcription
complex traverses the polyadenylation signals. The third aim will utilize deep
sequencing of RNA from forkhead-regulated meiotic genes, followed by
bioinformatic analysis to reveal shared sequence motifs and other features that
may be required for their coordinate regulation. The discovery that forkhead
factors function at the interface between transcription and RNA processing
resonates with recent developments in the gene expression field as a whole, and
provides a unique opportunity to investigate polyadenylation, a vital but
understudied regulatory mechanism, in a biologically relevant context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: &lt;br/&gt;This project will build upon
the principal investigator's strong track record of mentoring scientists from
diverse backgrounds and at various stages of professional development. The
postdoctoral fellow will play a pivotal role by co-supervising undergraduate and
high school students in addition to receiving training in cutting-edge
experimental strategies. The collegial atmosphere in the Center for RNA
Molecular Biology at CWRU will help to ensure that broader impact goals are
achieved, as will the use of fission yeast, which resembles multicellular
eukaryotes at the molecular level, yet is relatively simple to culture and
manipulate even by students just beginning bench research. As in the past, a
particular effort will be made to include women and members of groups generally
under-represented in scientific research in the project.