* 1330350
* SBIR Phase II:  MEMS Resonant Nanobalance Dew Point Meters
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Paul Neilson, FemtoScale Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2016
* USD 750,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS)-based moisture (dew point) measurement
instrument. Trace moisture measurements are needed in a variety of industrial
sectors including natural gas production and distribution, semiconductor
manufacturing, pure gas supply, aerospace, and petrochemical processing.
Commercially-available moisture sensors are either very expensive, or
alternatively lack the required accuracy, long-term stability, and
responsiveness for many existing applications. The innovative aspect of the
proposed approach is the utilization of micro-electro-mechanical resonant
balances coupled with a cooling element. The instrument will measure dew point
using the highly accurate chilled surface technique to deposit a layer of
moisture on the surface of the resonant balances, hence combining the accuracy
of the chilled surface measurement technique the with small size, low power
consumption and affordability enabled by MEMS. The MEMS resonant balances are
capable of detecting as little as a few femto-grams of deposited moisture.
Therefore, only a very small amount of gas needs to be chilled for a short
period of time (i.e. low power/battery operation) to deposit sufficient water to
indicate the dew point. The self-zeroing capability of the measurement technique
eliminates the need for frequent maintenance and calibration.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes a significant
leap forward in the moisture measurement technologies that have experienced no
major development over the past several decades. The proposed new class of dew
pointers offers higher accuracy, responsiveness, stability, and robustness
currently unavailable at the same price range. An important immediate market
with great national significance is the measurement of moisture in natural gas.
In cold climates excess water in the gas pipeline can freeze the pipe shut,
rendering the pipeline useless until the frozen point can be identified and
cleared. Furthermore, due to the variability of the moisture content and the
complete lack of suitable and affordable measurement equipment, wet gas is being
used as the pricing standard in the natural gas industry, leading to pricing
errors of up to 1.74%. The proposed battery- or solar-powered sensors will
permit unattended operation and data transmission capability and will be
installed at the natural gas wellheads as well as different points along the
distribution network where these types of measurements are in high demand.