* 1330559
* Testing an Integrated Structural-Cognitive Theory of Collective Action
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Ross Matsueda, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 138,050.00

SES-1330559 Steven Pfaff Ross Matsueda University of Washington

Social scientists have long sought to explain why participation in collective
action (CA) is so variable. Why, even when the members of a population have
widespread, severe grievances and a latent demand for a solution, is concerted
action aimed at redress an unusual event? Questions like this have inspired a
number of productive and revealing research programs. In situations involving
public goods, many research perspectives expect a free-rider problem to exist,
whereby actors have a general preference to achieve the common good but clear
incentives to not contribute to its provision. Because, under some conditions,
individuals can be coerced or compensated to follow-through on their expected
contributions, CA action can occur. Nonetheless, the implications for
widespread, sustained and effective public-spirited action are pessimistic. But
how warranted are these claims? If everyone is not only prone to free-riding but
aware that others are too, how does mobilization ever occur? What are the micro-
and macro-level factors that help overcome collective inaction? Why do aggrieved
people respond to mobilization in great numbers in some instances but most often
do not?

The investigators test a new synthetic structural-cognitive theory of CA by
conducting a cross-national factorial survey (FS) on individual propensity to
protest. This is approached by constructing a experiment which uses vignettes to
study the propensity of students to engage in a walk-out against the imposition
of tuition increases. The researchers have developed a web-based FS program
using open-source LimeSurvey software and will conduct factorial surveys on the
propensity to protest among students at the University of Washington in Seattle
and at the University of Leipzig in Germany. The goals of the project are to (1)
explore how individuals understand and respond to incentives; (2) estimate CA
thresholds and examine non-linear ways in which they may operate in a
population; and (3) disentangle invariant causal mechanisms producing collective
action from socio-cultural differences in institutional and national context
that may interact with these causal mechanisms.

Broader Impacts This model of CA is applicable to a wide range of behaviors,
including voluntarism, social movements, boycotts, demonstrations, and other
forms of action. It will be able to shed light on which social structures
facilitate mobilization and why some policy proposals are apt to provoke
opposition. This knowledge can lead to greater attention to public responses in
political life and to improved policy initiatives and administrative strategies.
Methodologically, the investigators employ methods in rigorous ways that will
influence future research on political action and other forms of collective
behavior. The project will develop and make publically available an inexpensive,
user-friendly, web-based FS program from open-source LimeSurvey software that
can be widely adopted by social scientists. In addition to publishing study
results, the project will result in novel, publically available data. The Co-PIs
will incorporate research findings into both undergraduate and graduate
teaching, and continue to make data available to other faculty and graduate
student instructors teaching courses in theory, political sociology, movements
and related courses. The Co-PIs are also participants in interdisciplinary
centers (CSSS and CSDE) relevant to the project.