* 1330873
* SBIR Phase II:  Sensors for Smart HVAC controls
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2016
* Zheng Ni, Dioxide Materials Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2016
* USD 788,958.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
inexpensive carbon dioxide sensors for heating, ventilation and air conditioning
(HVAC) controls. CO2 sensors are now being used to lower heating bills and
improve air quality in new commercial buildings, but they have not been widely
deployed in retrofits (i.e. A/C replacement), because the sensors are too
expensive, and require too much power. In Phase I, Dioxide Materials has
demonstrated a new design that requires 3 orders of magnitude less power, and
are projected to cost a factor of 5 less than the CO2 sensors used in HVAC
today. That will allow CO2 sensors to be used in building retrofits, and
residential buildings saving energy, and lowering HVAC costs for a wide range of
customers. These sensors use new combinations of catalytic materials that have
never been characterized before. Consequently, there are significant scientific
challenges in the work including 1)developing novel inks that show high
catalytic activity for CO2 activation and can be printed by conventional screen
screen printing processes. 2) developing technology to enhance the CO2
permeability through the electrolyte to enhance the measurement speed, 3)
developing empirical models of the sensor response that can be used to develop
algorithms, and later to be ported&lt;br/&gt;into HVAC design software 4)
understanding the effects of the room environment on the sensor response and
develop methods to mitigate the response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be to enable
affordable control systems. Most HVAC systems are inefficient. They run full
blast when buildings are nearly empty, and over ventilate because the air
quality in a building is unknown. Several vendors have developed control systems
that use CO2 sensors to assess the air quality and adjust the HVAC systems
accordingly. Energy savings of up to $0.31/ft2/yr (i.e. $465/yr for a 1500 ft2
house) have been demonstrated, but the systems have&lt;br/&gt;not been widely
deployed because the needed CO2 sensors are too expensive. If successful,
Dioxide Materials? new sensors will make advanced HVAC control systems
affordable. Utility bills will go down. Further, utilities will not need to
generate as much electricity, so greenhouse gas emissions will be reduced.