* 1330337
* Modular Transcriptional Coordination of Central Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Siobhan Brady, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,074,847.00

Primary metabolism functions to provide the energy and building blocks for life
and reproduction. Even with this central role, very little is known about how
primary metabolism is regulated, especially at the level of gene expression.
This project will employ a systematic approach to develop models of how this
regulation occurs. A series of experimental strategies is expected to identify a
set of key regulatory modules that are predicted to be central for the control
of primary metabolism. Mutants of select transcription factors will be used to
assess the phenotypic consequences using a high-throughput platform.
Physiological, metabolomic and transcriptional effects will be monitored to
assess module function. The combined data generated will enable further
experimental studies to test whether regulatory modules of primary metabolism
are structured around specific biochemical networks, or whether they are
structured around physiological outputs such as increased growth or
yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Modern biology has a fundamental
desire to understand how the genome of an organism programs its phenotype.
However, this is greatly complicated by the need to move from the molecular to
the macroscopic scale. It requires critical information of how transcriptional
regulation and primary metabolism are interconnected and how regulatory modules
connect at the molecular and physiological scales. Current biochemical and
systems dogma says that gene regulation is structured around biosynthetic
pathways; however this project will directly test an alternative hypothesis that
modules have a more interconnected structure built around the physiological
endpoints. Finally, this project will begin to develop a predictive model of how
the genome governs the dynamics of primary
metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A better understanding of how
primary metabolism is regulated enables downstream manipulation of the process
to engineer improvements in crop yield or quality. The project will provide
interdisciplinary research opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students to prepare them for future careers in industry or academia.
Established outreach programs will be used to recruit minority students from
local high schools and colleges throughout the USA for summer internships. In
addition, the principal investigators will be involved in teaching, both in a
university classroom setting and in ongoing outreach efforts to educate
community members about plant metabolism, quantitative genetics and ecology.