* 1330667
* Characterization of a novel, evolutionarily distinct chaperone for centromeric histone H3
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2018
* Barbara Mellone, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2018
* USD 510,000.00

This research will take an evolutionary approach to understand how centromeres
assemble. Centromeres are essential elements of chromosomes that are crucial for
proper transmission of genetic information from cell to cell during cell
division. When centromeres fail to assemble correctly, the result can be an
imbalance in chromosome number whereby cells have too many or too few
chromosomes. In animals, such an imbalance can lead to visible developmental
defects, which in turn can lead to birth defects or death. This study aims to
impact our understanding of the conserved aspects of centromere assembly, and
hence aspects that are crucial for preventing an imbalance in chromosome number
and catastrophic developmental defects. In addition, this research will have a
strong educational impact by providing opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to engage directly in research and by developing a new hands-
on summer laboratory workshop for high school teachers to enable them to learn
about chromosome biology and take the lessons learned back to their high school
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In eukaryotes, centromeres assemble by binding
special centromere-specific histone H3 proteins, which are escorted to the
correct location on the chromosome by chaperone proteins. Recent results have
revealed structural and sequence variation in these chaperones, which suggests
that during evolution, multiple mechanisms may have arisen for assembling
centromeres. This work will focus on analysis of the chaperone proteins using
evolutionary, structural and functional studies. Comparisons will be made among
a newly discovered chaperone from Drosophila and two well-conserved chaperones
from yeast and mouse. The outcomes of the work will provide unique mechanistic
and evolutionary insights into the fundamental processes that govern centromere
structure and function. The project will also have broad impact from the
educational perspective. The research will be carried out by undergraduate and
graduate students, many of whom are women, thereby providing opportunities for
scientific training, career development and direct participation in the
promulgation of scientific findings through publications and conference
presentations. In addition, a novel hands-on summer laboratory workshop will be
developed for high school teachers (ten per year), focusing on the basic biology
of chromosome segregation and cell division and extending to emerging topics
such as stem cells and altered genetic states in cancer. The teachers will leave
the workshop armed with teaching materials, ideas for lesson plans, and positive
research experiences through their direct involvement in experimentation. By
enabling the teachers to take what they learn back to their classrooms, the
workshops will have a multiplier effect on the scientific education of scores of
pre-college level students.