* 1330318
* Common Principles in Reading and Skill Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Carolyn Brown, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 493,139.00

The research will investigate how factors that affect skill learning can be
harnessed to improve reading and reading education. Beginning readers must
decode letters on the page into the sounds of language. These decoded sounds can
then be linked to meaningful ideas and concepts, allowing children to leverage
what they know (spoken language) to learn a new skill (reading). Traditionally,
decoding was taught as a process of memorizing a large set of rules that
translate letters to sounds (e.g., "A" with a silent "E" makes the "long A," as
in LATE). However, while rules are clearly an important educational tool, many
psychologists now view learning to read as a process of encoding probabilistic
relationships between the written letters and the sounds rather than explicit
rules. As a result, learning to read may be more like acquiring a skill, like
shooting a basketball, than like memorizing a list of rules. It is therefore
potentially significant for the instruction of reading that basic research has
uncovered several principles that improve skill acquisition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies test these principles in first-
graders learning to read by partnering with a private-sector reading-technology
company to develop short-term studies in which students learn a handful of
decoding skills. To examine the correspondence between reading and skill
acquisition, the investigators have also devised a motor task that captures the
same kind of probabilistic input-output relationships that are required for
decoding in word reading. Thus, the experiments will be run in pairs, and each
pair will include a motor experiment and a reading experiment. Within each pair,
the investigators will manipulate the ways in which the tasks are presented and
observe whether these manipulations produce similar effects on performance
across the two experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study aims to have a broad
impact on our understanding of how children learn to read: First, the
experiments will test how best to structure learning experiences to teach
decoding skills. The findings will have immediate implications for reading
instruction, and the project includes opportunities for outreach to educators
and policy makers. Reading is a foundational skill, laying the groundwork for
the entire school curriculum. Thus, improvements in children's reading ability
have the potential for widespread and lasting impact throughout the educational
system and into society in general. Second, because reading is an elaborate and
nearly universal behavior, it provides an excellent model task for studying
human learning generally in a much more complex domain than is typically studied
in the laboratory. Uncovering principles common to reading and motor skill
acquisition will have wide-spread implications for understanding how the brain
encodes complex behaviors. Third, classroom-based research is expensive and
difficult. By developing an analogue of reading in a motor task that can be run
efficiently in the laboratory, this project may enable psychologists and
educators to understand the fundamental learning principles that underlie
reading in a much more cost-effective way, allowing for more targeted
interventions in the classroom.