* 1330652
* SBIR Phase II:  Non-Invasive Intracranial Pressure Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Anthony Bellezza, Third Eye Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2017
* USD 635,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a noninvasive intracranial pressure (ICP) monitor based on a pilot
clinical study correlating ocular blood pressure and blood flow parameters to
ICP. The proposed novel device will combine several standard medical techniques
used by ophthalmologists to gather data. The ultimate goal for this project is
to develop a portable, easy-to-use unit that will be used by medical personnel
on patients in the hospital, and prior to their
arrival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project, if successful, will be to improve the diagnosis of patients with head
injury by improving the diagnosis of elevated ICP, and reducing the
complications associated with unnecessary invasive procedures. ICP monitoring is
a common tool for physicians treating patients with acute intracranial
hypertension caused by neurological disorders, trauma, and stroke. Knowledge of
a patient's ICP progression aids the physician in determining the optimal
medical and/or surgical treatment. Every year, these surgical procedures expose
patients to significant complications. Commercialization of a noninvasive ICP
monitor would significantly decrease the burden on patients and to the
healthcare system in the diagnosis and treatment of head injury by determining
ICP more cheaply and safely than current technologies. A non-invasive method
also would address the need for additional long-term ICP monitoring data, and
expand the knowledge of how mild or moderate traumatic brain injury relates to
ICP.