* 1330695
* Functional Dynamics and Energy Coupling Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Nathan Alder, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2016
* USD 421,426.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondria not only produce the vast majority of
energy within eukaryotic cells, but also regulate cellular processes such as
calcium homeostasis, lipid synthesis, and metabolite transport. The vital
functions carried out by this organelle depend directly on the potential energy
that is stored across its inner membrane in the form of a proton electrochemical
gradient. Characteristic of all energy-conserving membranes, this potential is
parsed as an electric field and a difference in proton activity across the lipid
bilayer. This project will address two fundamental features of the mitochondrial
inner membrane electrochemical potential. First, the changes in membrane protein
structure that are driven by alterations in the energized state of the inner
membrane will be investigated. Novel, high resolution fluorescence-based
approaches will be employed to elucidate the manner in which alterations in the
proton gradient and transmembrane electric field differentially change the
conformation of a model mitochondria-resident protein. Elucidating the basis of
such electromechanical coupling is vital to understanding how proteins in
energy-conserving membranes harness the electrochemical potential to perform
cellular work. Second, the energetic landscape of the topologically complex
inner membrane will be investigated. Using precisely targeted pH-sensing and
electrochromic probes to measure localized ion gradients and electric fields,
the temporal and spatial heterogeneity of the inner membrane energetic profile
will be measured with unprecedented resolution. By challenging the current dogma
of electrochemical potential equilibrium across the membrane regions, this work
is poised to create a new paradigm for understanding the energetic regulation of
processes such as ATP production and local changes in the bilayer structure.
These advances in the current understanding of membrane bioenergetics will be
made possible by the technical innovations used in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-sponsored work
will involve two teams of researchers in a model designed to promote
multidisciplinary interactions and development of leadership in the sciences,
emphasizing the involvement of students traditionally underrepresented in the
STEM fields. The work will also serve to further develop and expand novel
research tools in the construction of model membrane systems and in the process
of site-specific polypeptide labeling, all of which will be made available to
the scientific community. The education outreach component of this project is
based on the Biology Summer Institute series in cooperation with the University
of Connecticut Early College Experience Program. This series of modular
classroom and laboratory courses offers professional development to teachers
from regional high schools, exposing them to advances in research and current
scientific topics, which can be integrated into their own curricula during the
subsequent academic year. As this program develops, the Institute will be
expanded to include summer courses for high school students as well. Taken
together, this education outreach will be highly integrated with the research
activities of the project. Moreover, the outcomes of this pedagogical outreach
model will be disseminated in educational publications and conference workshops
as a means of effectively helping to raise scientific literacy of the public.