* 1330862
* Understanding Regulatory RNA-protein Networks to Control Cellular Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Baldea, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 482,833.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Control of cellular metabolisms is one of the main
objectives of modern cellular and biomolecular engineering. The recent discovery
of noncoding RNAs as regulators has led to an entire new class of metabolic
regulation that has already found a significant place in synthetic biology and
metabolic engineering. However, the mechanisms by which regulatory RNAs interact
with entire protein networks to simultaneously regulate multiple metabolic
pathways in response to external inputs are less understood. This project aims
to apply a novel method that employs recently developed in vivo molecular
characterization tools and quantitative modeling approaches towards: (1)
investigating basic molecular features used by regulatory RNA-protein
interactions in the context of stress-response mechanisms, and (2) translating
experimental data into quantitative kinetic models that capture the interplay
between external stresses, metabolic changes, and molecular interactions. This
research will result in furthering our understanding of how molecular regulators
function in vivo and in the context of natural cellular networks, contributing
to a more complete picture of cell behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;These studies will have the broader impact of providing new
means and approaches for cellular engineering through exploiting the unique
modes of RNA-protein regulation. The results of this research are expected to
find broad applications in improving the productivity of microorganisms in
economically interesting biotechnology processes. Furthermore, establishing a
general interdisciplinary platform for studying how RNA regulators function in
vivo and in the context of entire metabolic networks will be of value to the
broader research community. In addition, this project will support broader
outreach efforts to a low-income underrepresented community through the "Raising
Future Scientists" program. This program will seek to increase awareness among
middle school and high school students, and also their parents, about the
societal problems that engineering and science can address and solve.