* 1330809
* Structure-function relationships in metalloenzymes with multiple redox-active centers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Marius Schmidt, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 660,027.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Two metal-containing, multi-heme respiratory
enzymes involved in the interconversion of ammonia and nitrite, an important
stage in the biological nitrogen cycle, are being investigated. Cytochrome c
nitrite reductase from Shewanella oneidensis catalyzes the six-electron
reduction of nitrite to ammonia during anaerobic respiration. Hydroxylamine
oxidoreductase from nitrosomonas europaea catalyzes the four-electron oxidation
of hydroxylamine to nitrite, as part of a larger process in which ammonia is
oxidized to nitrite during aerobic respiration. Under non-physiological
conditions, hydroxylamine oxidoreductase can also reduce nitrite to ammonia
similar to cytochrome c nitrite reductase, while cytochrome c nitrite reductase
can oxidize hydroxylamine to nitrite. The primary aim of the project is to
determine how the proteins, which have broadly similar architectures, are
tailored to shepherd the ammonia-nitrite interconversion preferentially in one
direction or the other. The immediate focus is on the mechanism of the multi-
electron reduction of nitrite to ammonia by ccNiR. Intermediate states that form
and decay during the reactions catalyzed by cytochrome c nitrite reductase are
being investigated with the use of a variety of spectroscopic, electrochemical
and structural techniques, most notably Laue X-ray crystallography and Laue-
based time-resolved crystallography. These relatively new techniques have
enormous untapped potential. The development of these techniques is an important
complementary part of the project. The research outcome will provide a better
understanding of the notoriously complicated redox chemistry of nitrogen at
enzymatic metal centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
project's highly interdisciplinary nature provides the students in research
training with a wide breadth of skills that would make them very competitive
when they go on to independent careers after graduation. The project will
involve an average of three undergraduate researchers per year, in addition to
two high school students and two high school teachers who will perform summer
research. The graduate students funded to work on this project will also provide
direct supervision for many of the undergraduates and one high school student
and teacher. The project also provides insight into the growing environmental
problem of nitrogen cycle imbalance. Ammonia (a major component of fertilizer)
and nitrite are two examples of "reactive nitrogen;" that is, nitrogen usable by
many living organisms, as opposed to "elemental nitrogen" which makes up 78% of
the air we breathe, but is directly usable by only a few bacteria. Over the last
50 years the balance between reactive and elemental nitrogen has shifted
significantly towards the former, as more fertilizer was generated to produce
food and (recently) biofuels. This shift is having many unintended negative
consequences, which will soon have to be mitigated. A better understanding of
ammonia-nitrite interconversion would lead to the more efficient use of ammonia
fertilizer, and thus help redress the imbalance.