* 1330171
* A Molecular Link Between Actin and Exocytosis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Magdalena Bezanilla, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 02/28/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Polarized growth of individual cells is a complex process
integrating cellular metabolism events and the extracellular environment.
Extension and shape changes are frequently accompanied with deposition of
material into their extracellular environments. In plants, cells also build a
network of carbohydrate polymers that act as a rigid barrier, known as the cell
wall. Plant cells grow by building new cell wall material and plant cell shape
is intimately linked with how this material is deposited on the outside of the
cell. This project will work to elucidate the link between delivery of cell wall
material and the cell's internal network of dynamic filaments known as the
cytoskeleton. In particular the PI will use sophisticated light microscope
imaging methods to test the hypothesis that formin proteins are critical for
targeting actin assembly processes that initiate cell wall material exocytosis.
Although it is known that cell growth and the cytoskeleton are intimately
connected, a detailed mechanistic understanding of this coupling remains to be
elucidated. This project will take advantage of moss, a simple, genetically
tractable plant model system, to address this fundamental cell biological
question.

Broader Impacts: The investigator will broaden the impacts of the proposed
research by providing resources and expertise to the plant research community,
training of undergraduates and underrepresented minorities, and incorporating
aspects of the project in undergraduate education. The moss model system is
ideally suited for undergraduate laboratory experiences. Therefore, the
investigator will also develop a project-based laboratory course wherein
students perform RNA-induced silencing experiments to analyze the function of
individual genes and their roles in cell growth. Additionally, a summer
laboratory module offered through the STEM Diversity Institute at U. Mass will
aim to increase participation and recruitment of underrepresented minorities.
Course materials from the summer module will be distributed to underrepresented
faculty at partner institutions to facilitate implementation of similar courses.
Incorporating faculty and students in this endeavor will contribute to
increasing diversity in the sciences.