* 1330077
* CPS:  Synergy:  Collaborative Research:  Engineering Safety-Critical Cyber-Physical-Human Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Lui Sha, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2017
* USD 742,695.00

This cross-disciplinary project brings together a team of engineering and
computer science researchers to create, validate, and demonstrate the value of
new techniques for ensuring that systems composed of combinations of hardware,
software, and humans are designed to operate in a truly synergistic and safe
fashion. One notable and increasingly common feature of these "Cyber-Physical-
Human" (CPH) systems is that the responsibility for safe operation and
performance is typically shared by increasingly sophisticated automation in the
form of hardware and software, and humans who direct and oversee the behavior of
automation yet may need to intervene to take over manual or shared system
control when unexpected environmental situations or hardware or software
failures occur. The ultimate goal is to achieve levels of safety and performance
in system operation that exceed the levels attainable by either skilled human
operators or completely autonomous systems acting alone. To do so, the research
team will draw upon their expertise in the design of robust, fault-tolerant
control systems, in the design of complexity-reduction architectures for
software verification, and in human factors techniques for cognitive modeling to
assure high levels of human situation awareness through effective interface
design. By doing so, the safety, cost and performance benefits of increasingly
sophisticated automation can be achieved without the frequently observed safety
risks caused by automation creating greater distance between human operators and
system operation. The techniques will be iteratively created and empirically
evaluated using experimentation in human-in-the-loop simulations, including a
medium-fidelity aircraft and flight simulator and a simulation of assistive
automation in a medical context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, this
research is expected to impact and inform the engineering of future CPH systems
generally, for all industries and systems characterized by an increasing use of
hardware and software automation directed and overseen by humans who provide an
additional layer of safety in expected situations, Examples include highway and
automotive automation, aerospace and air traffic control automation, semi-
automated process control systems, and the many forms of automated systems and
devices increasingly being used in medical contexts, such as the ICU and
operating room. This research is also expected to inform government and industry
efforts to provide safety certification criteria for the technologies used in
CPH systems, and to educate a next generation of students trained in the cross-
disciplinary skills and abilities needed to engineer the CPH systems of the
future. The investigators will organize industry, academic, and government
workshops to disseminate results and mentor students who are members of
underrepresented groups through the course of this research project.