* 1330874
* Comprehensive genetic dissection of a model highly complex trait in budding yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2016
* Ian Ehrenreich, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 11/30/2016
* USD 510,000.00

Elucidating the connection between genotype and phenotype is critical to
achieving new heights in agriculture, evolutionary biology, and medicine. In
this project, our goal is to help characterize basic principles underlying the
genotype-phenotype map by comprehensively dissecting a genetically complex trait
in a "simple" model organism. Specifically, we will extend our ongoing research
on variability in susceptibility to DNA damage in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We
will use statistically powerful and high-resolution genetic mapping experiments
to identify the dozens of genetic variants that cause differences in DNA damage
tolerance among three strains. We will then study how these genes interact and
exert their effects using genetic experiments and functional assays. Our work
should produce one of the most detailed genetic characterizations of a highly
complex trait to date, and could also provide new insights into how cells detect
and repair DNA damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of our broader impacts on
society, we will use the proposed research to train multiple PhD, undergraduate,
and high school students. We will also work with Rebecca Cooper, who instructs
four sections of AP Biology at Burbank High School, to develop multiple lab
practicals in which we use heritable trait variation in yeast to help teach
biology to high school students. Additional interactions with Ms. Cooper?s class
will involve talking with students about career opportunities in science, as
well as discussing the many impacts of biological research on everyday life.
Lastly, we will use the proposed work as a vehicle to expose minorities to
research through the USC GREU program.