* 1330459
* SBIR Phase II:  A Surface Acoustic Wave Based Ion Source
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* John Edgar, Deurion LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2016
* USD 542,350.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
high--?]throughput --?] surface acoustic wave nebulization (HTP--?]SAWN) ion
source for mass spectrometry (MS). The SAWN ion source developed during phase I
resulted in a device that has competitive performance between the two most
popular ionization techniques for MS: electrospray ionization (ESI) and
matrix--?]assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI). SAWN offers the
convenience of ionization from a planar surface like MALDI, but the performance
characteristics of ESI at atmospheric pressure (Heron et al. Anal. Chem. 2010).
However, at the end of phase I SAWN remains low throughput and at an early
developmental stage technologically. The phase II proposal will refine SAWN
performance by coupling it to a novel MS interface that efficiently samples
solvated analytes produced by SAWN making it immediately available on all major
manufacturer?fs instruments. Phase II will result in an 1) optimized
piezoelectric wafer by investigating options other than lithium niobate; 2)
automated, robotic, HTP--?]SAWN that will double the throughput of an existing
ESI--?]based assay; and 3) a more economical to manufacture and efficient to
operate concentric ring interdigitated transducer electrode design developed in
phase I.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will provide a
high--?]throughput --?] surface acoustic wave nebulization (HTP--?]SAWN) ion
source for mass spectrometry that offers ease of use; lower ion energetics and
the capability to instantaneously monitor chemical reactions. SAWN has been
shown by direct comparison to generate ions of lower energy (Huang et al. JASMS
2012; Yoon et al. Anal Chem 2012) than ESI and by inference MALDI. In addition
to HTP--?]SAWN, phase II will result in SAWN being compatible with all major
manufacturer?fs instruments. SAWN will also be combined with direct analysis in
real time (DART) to expand the capability of SAWN and DART; e.g. the combination
will provide secondary ionization of compounds in emulsions desorbed from the
SAWN chip into the DART stream. Additionally, dried blood spot analysis by
HTP--?]SAWN will be developed using a newborn error assay for lysosomal storage
disorders as an example. This assay will be used to demonstrate the potential of
SAWN for immediate analysis of reaction products. SAWN has the broader potential
for direct analysis any number of chemical or biochemical reactions within
seconds of them having been carried out from monitoring cellular secretions or
bacterial communication.