* 1330136
* SBIR Phase II:  Applying Language Understanding at the Point of Care to Enhance Clinical Documentation and Realize Quality Improvements
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Daniel Riskin, Health Fidelity, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2015
* USD 405,687.00

The innovation presented in this proposal is a new paradigm for capturing
critical quality information at the point-of-care using advanced technologies in
an intuitive workflow. Healthcare quality and cost represent top national
priorities. An increasingly common strategy to improve outcomes and value of
care is performance assessment to promote best practices. Over decades, the most
successful quality improvement (QI) programs have been heavily data-reliant.
These programs require identifying patients that fit specific quality measures
and assuring their care meets national guidelines. Linking patients to quality
measures is the rate limiting step, involving an overwhelming amount of manual
labor to review narrative notes one at a time and link them to an appropriate
subset of hundreds of known quality measures. Leveraging a robust platform
proven in Phase I, the proposed Phase II solution offers an automated approach
to capturing a set of quality measures in real-time. The output will provide
rich and compliant documentation enhanced with quality measures that feed the
electronic health record (EHR) and downstream clinical, operational, and
financial hospital systems through standard protocols. The goal is a disruptive
change that will fast-track national initiatives and enable a safer and more
efficient healthcare system.

The broader/commercial impact of this program is to further national healthcare
goals of reducing cost and improving quality in care. The approach leverages
increased breadth, depth, and accuracy of patient data captured at the point of
care. The most aggressive national initiatives encourage capturing a small
portion of the hundreds of known quality measures. Accelerating capture and use
of quality measures is an opportunity to meaningfully improve a healthcare
system that lags in quality and cost. Impact must also be considered at a
personal level. There is a cost to care within a system where quality is not
documented and tracked. A typical example out of the hundreds of defined
measures is ventilator associated pneumonia (VAP). Multiple studies on manual
programs to document VAP and leverage care algorithms demonstrate greater than
40% reduction in mortality and 20% reduction in cost. VAP, though common, did
not make the top 15 list of measures required by the government in 2014 because
it is too difficult to capture. There is currently no automated approach to
capture this quality measure. Addressing technical limitations in documenting
quality measures will expand QI reach and save lives.