* 1330180
* A Queueing Framework for Synthetic Circuits in E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* William Mather, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Crane
* 08/31/2017
* USD 961,252.00

Intellectual Merit: Biological cells can cope with processing bottlenecks and
also leverage the dynamics of bottlenecks to robustly control cellular behavior.
This realization prompts a re-evaluation of the fundamental design principles
believed to govern biological circuits. This project will investigate synthetic
and native circuits in E. coli that are known to experience bottlenecks stemming
from the competition of basic cellular components (created, modified, or
degraded) for the shared molecular machinery. The experimental data combined
with the theoretical predictions will allow the development and validation of
queueing theoretical principles relevant to biological systems. Queueing theory
is commonly applied to resolve performance limitations in traffic and
communications systems. Fluorescence microscopy, microfluidics, and synthetic
biology will be combined with quantitative modeling to probe protein degradative
mechanisms and stress response pathways in terms of queueing theory in E. coli.
Successful accomplishment of this project will lead to effective strategies for
the synthesis and understanding of biological circuits that either avoid or
exploit processing bottlenecks to perform specific tasks. The successful
demonstration of the biological queueing theory is likely to impact also the
more traditional disciplines, including telecommunication networks, call centers
and transportation systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Part of this
project will lead to the construction of new content for elementary school STEM
education with a specific emphasis on the interdisciplinary aspect of science.
This will be done largely through close collaboration with Kids' Tech University
(KTU), a successful elementary school program at Virginia Tech with the single
goal to create "the future workforce in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) by sparking kids' interest in these fields." This
collaboration will result in the generation, presentation, and distribution of
interactive booths to illustrate interdisciplinary phenomena related to this
project. Graduate and undergraduate students will be mentored in service
learning to ensure effective outreach and to provide these students with
teaching experience. Undergraduates will be supported to construct modules for
Virtual KTU, which freely provides interactive web-based demonstrations of STEM
topics to students of all ages and educators.