* 1330110
* CPS: Synergy: Distributed Sensing, Learning and Control in Dynamic Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2019
* Bir Bhanu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

The objective of this project is to improve the performance of autonomous
systems &lt;br/&gt;in dynamic environments, such as disaster recovery, by
integrating perception, planning&lt;br/&gt;paradigms, learning, and databases.
For the next generation of autonomous systems to be&lt;br/&gt;truly effective in
terms of tangible performance improvements (e.g., long-term
operations,&lt;br/&gt;complex and rapidly changing environments), a new level of
intelligence must be attained.&lt;br/&gt;This project improves the state of
robotic systems by enhancing their ability to coordinate&lt;br/&gt;activities
(such as searching a disaster zone), recognize objects or people, account
for&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty, and "most important" learn, so the system's
performance is continuously &lt;br/&gt;improving. To do this, the project takes
an interdisciplinary approach to developing &lt;br/&gt;techniques in core areas
and at the interface of perception, planning, learning, and databases
&lt;br/&gt;to achieve robustness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
significantly improve the performance of cyber-physical systems &lt;br/&gt;for
time-critical applications such as disaster monitoring, search and rescue,
autonomous &lt;br/&gt;navigation, and security and surveillance. It enables the
development of techniques and &lt;br/&gt;tools to augment all decision making
processes and applications which are characterized&lt;br/&gt;by continuously
changing operating conditions, missions and environments. The
project&lt;br/&gt;contributes to education and a diverse engineering workforce
by training students at the&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Riverside, one
of the most diverse research institutions in US &lt;br/&gt;and an accredited
Hispanic Serving Institution. Instruction and research
opportunities&lt;br/&gt;cross traditional disciplinary boundaries, and the
project serves as the basis for &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate capstone design
projects and a new graduate course. The software and &lt;br/&gt;testbeds from
this project will be shared with the cyber-physical system research
community,&lt;br/&gt;industry, and end users. The project plans to present
focused workshops/tutorials at major &lt;br/&gt;IEEE and ACM conferences. The
results will be broadly disseminated through the &lt;br/&gt;project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project website
at: &lt;br/&gt;http://vislab.ucr.edu/RESEARCH/DSLC/DSLC.php