* 1330100
* SBIR Phase II:  Combining Fungal Metabolites and Fungal Insect Pathogens for Cost Effective Control of Bark Beetles in Forestry
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,02/29/2016
* Clifford Bradley, Montana BioAgriculture Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2016
* USD 510,915.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop fungal bioinsecticides for control of bark beetles in forestry. Bark
beetles are difficult to control. With a life cycle mostly under tree bark,
exposure to insecticides is limited to the short period when adults search for
new host trees. Control of mountain pine beetle (MPB), one of the most damaging
species, is limited to persistent chemical insecticides and pheromone
repellents. Health and environmental issues of chemical insecticides limit use;
pheromones protect individual trees but do not kill beetles. Phase I discoveries
of formulation, application methods, and persistence demonstrated the safe,
environmentally benign fungal pathogen Beauveria bassiana can compete in
efficacy and cost against chemical insecticides. Natural biochemicals that
inhibit boring and increase exposure to pathogen spores show promise for
enhanced products. Phase II objectives are: 1) bring one fungal pathogen to
commercial introduction; 2) develop improved fungal pathogen strains and/or
boring deterrent; 3) isolate pathogen strains for other bark beetles. Field
trials will provide the basis for use recommendations in MPB control. New fungal
pathogens and continued development of boring deterrents will enable expanded
MPB control strategies and development of products against other beetle
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project, if successful, will be innovative biological approaches to address
outbreaks of both native and introduced bark beetles. Outbreaks of unprecedented
scale are being driven by climate change and global commerce. Bark beetle
outbreaks are devastating forests and urban trees, and impacting timber value,
urban land values, and esthetics of forested public land. Phase II will
contribute to the understanding of fungal pathogen host range in different
genera of bark beetles and in non-target insects. Using fungal or tree derived
biochemical boring deterrents to increase fungal pathogen efficacy represents an
important technical innovation for developing cost effective, more broadly
useful, forestry bioinsecticides. The current MPB outbreak is devastating
western forests. Phase II will provide a new tool for protecting trees from MPB
attack in high value public recreation areas, private forest land, and urban
landscaping. A safe and environmentally benign fungal bioinsecticide will enable
new strategies for broader management of MPB. Bark beetles are a large,
increasing problem in forestry with multiple outbreaks of native and introduced
bark beetles. Phase II will establish the foundation for developing fungal
bioinsecticides to effectively respond to this dynamic market.