* 1330297
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multi-Sited Case Study of the Processes Leading to the Convergence of Competing Visions for Augmented Reality Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Tarleton Gillespie, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,117.00

Overview

This STS Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant supports research to develop an
empirical understanding of communities that create and advance augmented reality
technologies, meaning any technology that combines real and virtual objects,
superimposed in real time and in three-dimensional space such as Google's
Project Glass. Many such devices have already emerged promising dramatic
transformation across multiple domains such as medicine, tourism, education,
manufacturing, national security, law enforcement, and entertainment. To date,
however, there has been little empirical research into the communities that
create and advance this technology.

Intellectual Merit

The project will map out future visions being advanced by four distinct
stakeholder groups important to the production of augmented reality
technologies: Academic developers, trade lobbyists, governing organizations, and
the media. The project will examine how promises about the future are created
and articulated, how these different stakeholder groups interact with each
other, and how they attempt to persuade one another to align behind certain
visions. The research will utilize both qualitative and quantitative methods; in
doing so, it will integrate approaches from communication, sociology, STS, and
policy analysis. The goal is to understand the discursive and institutional work
that surrounds a rapidly emerging technology and how these promises are created,
debated, circulated, and inscribed in the technology.

Broader Impacts

Interrogating the claims that shape technology will shed light a number of
issues including how ethical, social, and political commitments get built into
the discourse surrounding the development of augmented reality technologies, and
the processes involved in creating these futures. Doing so will serve to provide
new conceptual and empirical resources that can be used to improve science and
technology policy and implementation, specifically in assessing the risks and
benefits of emerging technologies and potential regulation of the content,
access, and use of information technologies. It will also help educate
practitioners and the public about the potential benefits and pitfalls of
augmented reality technologies.