* 1330937
* Workshop: How the Brain Accommodates Variability in Linguistic Representations; July, 2013 - University of Michigan
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Victor Ferreira, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 12/31/2014
* USD 11,903.00

When we listen, we rapidly and reliably decode speakers' intentions and we
mostly do so independently of whom were are talking to. Yet, anyone who has
interacted with an automated speech recognition system (e.g., while booking a
flight) is painfully aware that speech recognition is a computationally hard
problem: although we hardly ever become aware of it, the physical signal
corresponding to, for example, one speaker's "b" can be identical to another
speaker's "p", making it hard for computers to distinguish between them. How
then does the human brain accomplish this task with such apparent ease?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF funded workshop brings together researchers from
computer sciences, linguistics, and the cognitive sciences to discuss and
investigate how the brain achieves robust language understanding despite
variability. The invited speakers are internationally-known experts.
Representatives from both industry and academia will present on the state of the
art in automated speech recognition, implicit learning during language
understanding, and the neural systems underlying speech perception. The workshop
will take place in conjunction with the 2013 Linguistic Society of America's
Summer Institute--the largest international linguistics summer school--and will
thereby provide training to a large number of young language researchers.