* 1330641
* Collaborative Research: Strengthening the scientific basis for decision-making: Advancing sustainability science and knowledge-action capacities in coupled coastal systems
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Cooperative Agreement
* Timothy VanReken
* 07/31/2016
* USD 3,000,000.00

IIA-1330691, University of Maine, Michael Eckardt &lt;br/&gt;Linked to:
IIA-1330641, University of New Hampshire, Jane A. Nisbet &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: Collaborative Research: Strengthening the Scientific Basis for Decision-
making: Advancing sustainability science and knowledge-action capacities in
coupled coastal systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The states of Maine (ME) and New
Hampshire (NH) propose the New England SusTainability Consortium (NEST) to
capitalize on synergies between their research and development capacities that
can advance the theory and practice of sustainability science to strengthen
connections between science and decision making. Sustainability Science focuses
on developing solutions to pressing societal problems involving the dual
challenge of improving human well-being and protecting the planet?s life support
systems. NEST?s initial focus is on scientific challenges related to the
sustainable management of coastal systems. Specifically, ME and NH combine
complementary research strengths to examine systems interactions between
watershed processes and human activities that contribute to high populations of
pathogenic bacteria in coastal waters, which in turn trigger decisions to close
economically important beaches and shellfisheries. Closure decisions are
currently made with inadequate scientific knowledge, and long-term trends
suggest worsening coastal pollution that will require more frequent decisions of
this nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The coastal
closure problem provides a promising model system for growing NEST?s ability to
investigate and strengthen the connection between science and decision-making.
NEST unites diverse capabilities to advance sustainability science via several
innovative mechanisms: 1) combining expertise drawn from over ten STEM
disciplines representing natural science, social science, and engineering; 2)
integrating insights gained from different research approaches (e.g. bacterial
metatranscriptomics, behavioral economics, watershed sensor networks,
institutional analysis, hydrologic modeling, environmental communication); 3)
conducting research on spatial scales ranging from microbes to watersheds, and
temporal scales spanning short-term bacterial growth to multi-decadal changes in
land use and climate. NEST will use innovative systems thinking and state-of-
the-art research tools while emphasizing how the coupled watershed-human systems
under study influences, and responds to, decision-making by individuals and
institutions. In addition, the research will include an examination of NEST?s
organizational processes (e.g. collaboration, communication, integrative cross-
jurisdictional education and research) to inform the global science and practice
of interdisciplinary team science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;NEST pursues the goal of advancing the scientific basis of decision-
making through a process that is broadly inclusive of many segments of society.
University students and faculty researchers collaborate with diverse
stakeholders (e.g. government, shellfish harvesters, citizen scientists). The
project supports the construction of an expanded network of environmental
sensors that will strengthen informal and formal science education. The proposed
work creates innovative, solutions-driven networks that connect diverse
universities and colleges, all levels of government, tribal communities, Non-
Governmental Organizations, citizens, and the private sector.