* 1330211
* Intrinsic Disorder, Energetic Coupling and Allostery
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2013,09/30/2017
* Vincent Hilser, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 09/30/2017
* USD 587,281.00

Intrinsic Disorder, Energetic Coupling and Allostery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current project investigates the role of protein intrinsic disorder (ID) in
mediating signaling in the transcription factor family of proteins, a process
known as allostery. By measuring the stability and DNA binding affinity for a
number of naturally occurring variants of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
transcription factor and comparing these values to the transcriptional activity
in cells, this project provides a framework for understanding allosteric
signaling in proteins containing ID. The resulting experimental data will be
used to construct a quantitative, predictive model of allostery. The
intellectual merits of the proposed activities are two-fold. First these studies
provide the first systematic analysis of ID-mediated allostery using both
biophysical studies and live cell assays of function. Second, these studies
challenge a recently developed ensemble allosteric model designed to
quantitatively characterize allostery in terms of the intrinsic stabilities of
cooperative elements of structure and the interaction energies between them. As
such, this research represents an advance over previous qualitative and largely
speculative models for ID function, and provides one of the first quantitative
descriptions of how and why proteins use intrinsic
disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project are
two-fold, and focus on research, education and the bridge between these two
activities. First, the primary goal of the research is to experimentally
determine the allosteric control present in GR. However, GR shares architecture
with the estrogen (ER), progesterone (PR), androgen (AR), and vitamin D (VDR)
receptors, all of which play a vital role in hormone-dependent cell signaling
and regulation. As such, insights gained from the current research will directly
impact understanding in these other systems. Second, a key objective of the
research is to derive a quantitative model that is subject to simulation and
validation. As part of two previous NSF proposals, the Principal Investigator
has developed a significant amount of computer-based course work focuses on
modeling of dynamic biological systems. The models developed as part of the
current research will be directly integrated into the graduate and undergraduate
curriculum at Johns Hopkins University, and thus will not only play a vital role
in the education of biology students, it will significantly expand the biology
students? access to computational methods and technologies.