* 1330399
* Universal Versus Culturally Constructed Aspects of Consumption
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Jon Holtzman, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 105,312.00

Jon Holtzman of Western Michigan University will explore the biological and
cultural processes that inform preferences for particular kinds of foods. The
project will engage approaches varyingly emphasizing universal dimensions of the
human experience of eating versus those placing a greater emphasis on cultural
specificity. As such, the project aims to contribute to multi-disciplinary
approaches to the study of taste as well as engage with debates in nutrition and
public health. The project will use a combination qualitative and quantitative
methods to examine attitudes, experiences, and patterns of use concerning food
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This question is best pursued by examining
sweetness, a taste for which a broad range of scientific fields attribute a
unique and largely deterministic power over humans. That scientific literature
has thus far emphasized either the parallels between neurological responses to
sugar and psychoactive drugs, suggesting an evolutionarily hardwired attraction
to sweetness, or it has been influenced by research on the global "nutrition
transition" that suggests increased access to sugar concomitant with rising
incomes almost inevitably contributes to epidemic obesity. Anthropologists have
tended towards a more circumspect approach to sweetness and other basic tastes,
usually acknowledging universal aspects to the human sensory experiences of
taste but emphasizing the need to understand how these are shaped and given
meaning in particular cultural and historical contexts. Japan has been chosen as
the principal site for assessing universal versus culturally constructed
approaches to sugar because it is a notable outlier to global obesity trends
despite high levels of wealth and sugar access. One possible explanation for
this Japan's outlier status is the influence of intricate Japanese food systems
that tie eating to social, aesthetic, and moral values, which the project aims
to examine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By understanding what factors limit sweet
consumption and the concomitant health issues associated with excessive sweet
use the project aims to assess the relative important of cultural constructions
of taste versus more deterministic conceptions, while also offering insights
into issues regarding food consumption that will have a direct impact on public
health debates in the U.S. and globally.