* 1330344
* Real Time Chemotaxis in Commensal Plant-microbe Associations
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Vasilios Alexiades, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 815,305.00

Various plant-microbe and microbe-microbe interactions take place in the
rhizosphere, the outcomes of which influence plant health and productivity. The
molecular communication between bacteria and host plants that allow the
establishment of specific symbiotic or pathogenic plant-bacteria interactions
are known in detail. However, commensal plant-microbe associations that dominate
in the rhizosphere have not been studied to the same extent and relatively
little is known regarding the strategies used by commensal soil bacteria to
initiate a loose association with plant root surfaces or the spatiotemporal
dynamics of these associations. This research aims to characterize key bacterial
determinants implicated in the establishment and maintenance of commensal
bacteria-plant associations and the spatiotemporal dynamics of these
associations, in real-time. Experiments will characterize the role of sensing
and chemotaxis in the association of Azospirillum brasilense with wheat roots,
which is an excellent model to quantitatively analyze beneficial commensal
plant-microbe associations at high temporal and spatial resolution scales. Using
iterations between experiments and mathematical modeling, the research will
characterize the selective advantage that multiple chemotaxis pathways provide
to the ability of bacteria to sense and respond to gradients relevant to their
lifestyle in the soil and in the rhizosphere. Next, the role of receptors
capable of integrating metabolic status with sensing in mediating rhizosphere
colonization will be determined. The project will also use a novel expression
system to track how changes in the intracellular concentration of a key
metabolite (c-di-GMP) affect locomotor behaviors in real time. Last, a
quantitative approach to monitor, in real-time, the role of sensing and
chemotaxis in the spatiotemporal dynamics of commensal plant-root colonization
will be implemented. Most soil bacteria form commensal associations with the
roots of plants and the sequenced genomes of these bacteria encode at least two
Che pathways. Results obtained will be directly transposable to other motile
soil bacteria and will provide much needed quantitative insights into the
molecular mechanisms involved in the establishment of commensal plant-microbe
associations. This knowledge is a prerequisite to a systems-level understanding
of the diverse plant-microbe associations that exist in the rhizosphere. The
approach to real-time and quantitative monitoring of commensal plant-microbe
associations will document the spatiotemporal dynamics of these associations for
the first time and ultimately inform future effective strategies to manipulate
the rhizosphere to improve plant health and productivity.

Broader Impacts: This project will provide new tools and methods to
quantitatively analyze the spatiotemporal dynamics of plant-microbe
associations, including approaches to track real-time root-microbe associations.
The mathematical model derived from this research will be useful in future
systems-level simulations of plant-microbe associations for rhizosphere
manipulation and promotion of plant health. The project will also characterize
sensory modules that will enhance the synthetic biology toolkit. In addition,
cross-disciplinary interactions in biology and mathematics for graduate students
and undergraduate students, including members of underrepresented groups in the
sciences, will be established.