* 1330072
* CPS: Breakthrough: Reinforcement Learning Algorithms for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Peter Stone, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,760.00

This project investigates new reinforcement learning algorithms to enable long-
term real-time autonomous learning by cyber-physical systems (CPS). The
complexity of CPS makes hand-programming safe and efficient controllers for them
difficult. For CPS to meet their potential, they need methods that enable them
to learn and adapt to novel situations that they were not programmed for.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a paradigm for learning sequential decision
making processes with potential for solving this problem. However, existing RL
algorithms do not meet all of the requirements of learning in CPS. Efficacy of
the new algorithms for CPS is evaluated in the context of smart buildings and
autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-physical systems (CPS) have the
potential to revolutionize society by enabling smart buildings, transportation,
medical technology, and electric grids. Success of this project could lead to a
new generation of CPS that are capable of adapting to their situation and
improving their performance autonomously over time. In addition to the
traditional methods of dissemination, this project will develop and release
open-source code implementing the new reinforcement learning algorithms.
Education and outreach activities associated with the project include a Freshman
Research Initiative course, participation in a UT Austin annual open house that
draws in many underrepresented minorities to interest the public in computer
science and science in general, and the department's annual summer school for
high school girls called First Bytes.