* 1330313
* SBIR Phase II:  Portable, Low-Cost, and Robust Black Carbon Measurement Instrument using Radio Frequency Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Alexander Sappok, Filter Sensing Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2017
* USD 633,871.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a novel radio-frequency (RF) sensing method to provide a real-time
measurement of black carbon emissions. The feasibility of this concept was
demonstrated in Phase I, and engine emissions measurements are targeted in Phase
II. Accurate measurement and characterization of black carbon emissions are
hampered by the lack of low-cost, portable measurement systems suitable for use
in the field. This information is critical to ensure regulatory compliance, and
diagnose engine malfunctions leading to inefficient operation and high soot
emissions. Currently there exist two broad classes of instruments used for
monitoring black carbon: (1) expensive laboratory instruments, and (2) low-cost,
portable devices with limited utility. This work will bridge this gap, by
utilizing radio frequencies to provide a direct, real-time measurement of black
carbon. The research will investigate using inexpensive RF technologies, similar
to those used in cellular phones, which are ideally-suited for use in a portable
measurement system. The Phase II work will build on the results of Phase I,
specifically focusing on pushing the limits of this sensing method to increase
low-level sensitivity, and increase functionality by identifying other particle
constituents in the black carbon.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will
address a currently unmet market need for the development of a black carbon
emissions measurement system, which will enable further black carbon emissions
reduction and provide tangible benefits to human health and the environment.
Recent studies indicate a warming potential for black carbon 2,000 times greater
than the equivalent amount of CO2, and have also linked the pollutant to a range
of adverse health effects, including cancer. Regulators and source operators
alike require tools to monitor black carbon emissions, ensure in-use compliance,
and improve engine efficiency. Currently, few technologies can distinguish black
carbon from other types of particulate matter. Accurate measurement systems
generally range in price from $15,000 to $70,000 or more, and are ill-suited for
portable use in the field. Driven by strict emissions regulations, the market
for particle and black carbon measurement systems is rapidly outpacing the
markets for other types of emissions analyzers. The proposed technology is well-
positioned to capitalize on this growth, providing a robust, portable, and much
lower-cost alternative to high-end instruments. This technology is not limited
to black carbon emissions measurements, but a wide range of related applications
including powder processing and nanofabrication.