* 1330146
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Selectively Reinforced Aluminum Composite Brake Rotor
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* Josh Loukus, REL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2015
* USD 571,836.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is focused on
developing a one-piece functionally graded hybrid (fiber/particle) reinforced
aluminum alloy matrix automobile brake rotor. Composite brake rotors offer
increased weight savings, higher braking performance, and increased component
life. Current composite rotors on the market have a cost barrier, which limits
mass production on high-production vehicle platforms. This project will assist
in the deployment of a one-piece, hybrid reinforced rotor. These rotors will
utilize functional reinforcement gradient (FRG) technology across the braking
surface and macro-interfaces. The technology development work requires
addressing challenges related to the development of our squeeze casting process,
die and preform design, and controlling the microstructure/properties of the
aforementioned surfaces and interfaces. The proposed work will extend the
current state of the art one-dimensional FRG technology to a higher-order
gradient, specific to a vented one-piece rotor for a vehicle
application.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project includes increased mass efficiency in all transportation vehicles.
The project findings will address a multi-billion dollar automotive brake market
but also can be leveraged across multiple other vehicle platforms. The
technology can be also used in both structural and drivetrain applications
further increasing fuel efficiency, reducing fuel emissions, and reducing
lifecycle costs of vehicular components. Composite components in ancillary
markets such as the military and trucking will also benefit from the
customizability of material properties with the FRG technology. Increasing the
agility of military vehicles for the Warfighter, reduction of in-theatre
operating/maintenance costs, and rolling weight reduction in class 8 vehicles
are examples of realized project benefits.