* 1330288
* Fluid Flow as a Driver of Bacterial Cell Division, Surface Motility, and Spreading
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2017
* Zemer Gitai, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2017
* USD 750,000.00

This project combines expertises in microbiology, engineering, and physics to
advance understanding of how fluid flow affects bacterial shape, motility and
spreading. There are many factors that account for the abundance of bacteria.
For example, bacteria are found with different morphologies and each species has
a specific characteristic shape, suggesting that shape is under intense
selective pressure. Therefore, understanding the physiological benefits of
specific shapes is a fundamental question in basic biology. In addition,
bacteria have evolved a number of motility mechanisms that enable movement in
liquid environments and on solid surfaces. While flagellar-driven swimming in
liquid environments has been characterized extensively, far less is known about
surface motility, and even less is known about the influence of flow on
establishing unique microbial surface, or near-surface, responses. Finally, the
major determinants of the fitness of bacterial populations in nature are their
ability to grow/divide in their current environment and their ability to spread
into new environments capable of supporting their growth. Little is known about
how bacteria spread in the presence of flow. Each of these themes is addressed
in this project by integrating the experimental tools of molecular biology with
the experimental and theoretical perspectives of engineering and physics. In
particular, this work will (i) study how flow differentially impacts the
division of bacteria with different shapes, (ii) investigate the effect of fluid
flow on bacterial surface motility and study the role of fluid flow in affecting
bacterial spreading for both (iii) near-surface planktonic cells and (iv)
surface-attached populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of this
research will include the PIs publishing in leading journals across molecular
biology, biophysics, engineering, and physics, hosting visitors from different
disciplines and institutions, engaging undergraduate students in research,
giving talks at conferences, leading professional development activities for
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral colleagues, and participating in
research programs oriented towards young researchers from under-represented
groups. Also, the PIs have successfully incorporated research themes into
outreach activities aimed at young people such as lectures and activities for
secondary school students and "holiday" lectures for children and parents. The
outreach activities are directly linked to the project and reflect the PIs
commitment to being engaged in teaching and mentoring future research
scientists.