* 1330014
* CPS: Breakthrough: Rigorous Integration of Decision Procedures and Numerical Algorithms for the Formal Verification of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Frank Pfenning, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 499,680.00

This project establishes a new framework for the formal verification of cyber-
physical systems. The framework combines the power of logical decision engines
and scalable numerical methods to perform safety verification of general
nonlinear hybrid systems. The key difficulty with formal verification of hybrid
systems is that all scalable modern verification techniques rely heavily on the
use of powerful decision procedures. For hybrid systems, one needs to reason
about logic formulas over the real numbers with nonlinear functions, which has
been regarded as an intractable problem. The project proposes new directions for
tackling the core decision problems, with the combined power of logical and
numerical algorithms. The research directly leads to the development of
practical tools that will push the frontier of verification of realistic cyber-
physical systems to a brand new level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at
fundamental research of problems that stand at the core of the design, analysis,
and implementation of reliable cyber-physical systems. It combines techniques
from logic, numerical analysis, and automated reasoning, and will produce a
unifying methodology that is powerful to address main challenges in this field.
The techniques developed in this project will significantly enhance the
complexity and reliability of the next generations of cyber-physical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Cyber-physical systems are ubiquitous in safety-
critical applications as diverse as aerospace, automotive, civil infrastructure,
energy, manufacturing, and healthcare. Malfunctioning cyber-physical systems can
have catastrophic economic and societal consequences. This project will have a
broad range of impact in these areas. &lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
significantly enhance the management of complexity and reliability of the next
generations of cyber-physical systems, and will broadly impact all the
application areas.