* 1330008
* CPS: Synergy: Data Driven Intelligent Controlled Sensing for Cyber Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* David Castanon, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2018
* USD 998,503.00

Cyber-physical systems employed in transportation, security and manufacturing
applications rely on a wide variety of sensors for prediction and control. In
many of these systems, acquisition of information requires the deployment and
activation of physical sensors, which can result in increased expense or delay.
A fundamental aspect of these systems is that they must seek information
intelligently in order to support their mission, and must determine the optimal
tradeoffs as to the cost of physical measurements versus the improvement in
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent explosion in sensor and UAV
technology has led to new capabilities for controlling the nature and mobility
of sensing actions by changing excitation levels, position, orientation,
sensitivity, and similar parameters. This has in turn created substantial
challenges to develop cyber-physical systems that can effectively exploit the
degrees of freedom in selecting where and how to sense the environment. These
challenges include high-dimensionality of observations and the associated "curse
of dimensionality", non-trivial relationships between the observations and the
latent variables, poor understanding of models relating the nature of potential
sensing actions and the corresponding value of the collected information, and
lack of sufficient training data from which to learn these
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research includes:
(1) data-driven stochastic control theory for intelligent sensing in cyber-
physical systems that incorporates costs/delays/risks and accounts for scenarios
where models for sensing, decision-making, and prediction are unavailable or
poorly understood. (2) Validation of control methods on a UAV sensor network in
the real world domain of archaeological surveying.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The proposed effort includes: (a) Outreach: planned efforts for
encouraging participation of women and under-represented groups; (b) Societal
impact: research will lead to novel concepts in environmental monitoring,
traffic surveillance, and security applications. (c) Multi- disciplinary
activities: Impacting existing knowledge in cyber-physical systems, sensor
management, and statistical learning. Research findings will be disseminated
through conferences presentations, departmental seminars, journal papers,
workshops and special sessions at IEEE CDC and RSS; (d) Curriculum development
through new graduate level courses and course projects.