* 1330760
* Computational design of novel biodegrative enzyme pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Lawrence Wackett, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 08/31/2016
* USD 650,000.00

In the last 150 years, humans have synthesized hundreds of thousands of
chemicals featuring functional groups not previously found in nature. Many of
these chemicals are eventually biodegraded by recently-evolved enzymes and
metabolic pathways found within microbes in soil and water. In some cases,
microbes metabolize the chemicals incompletely and release new chemicals into
the environment. In other cases, microbes completely metabolize the chemicals
and assimilate the carbon, nitrogen and/or phosphorous for growth and survival.
Due to the large influx of new chemicals over a very short evolutionary time
scale, biodegradation is often suboptimal, marked by enzymes that are unstable
and inefficient, and metabolic pathways that are
incomplete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past, society waited for natural
solutions to evolve. A major goal of this proposal is to further develop the
ability to routinely and robustly address the limitations of newly evolved
enzymes and metabolic pathways and provide new enzymes useful for commercial
purposes. The proposed research will result in a protein-engineering framework
to help overcome the deficiencies of newly evolved enzyme pathways by combining
the accumulated knowledge about biodegradation pathways with state-of-the-art
methods in computational enzyme design and laboratory evolution. This research
will bring together two different, but complementary, research groups with
additional collaborators in quantum chemistry and X-ray crystallography.
Overall, we seek to develop a multi-faceted approach for better understanding
natural evolution and creating new functions&lt;br/&gt;not yet discovered in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will train undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students at the interface of chemistry, structural
biophysics, microbiology, and computer science. Novel pedagogical approaches
such as scientific video games and crowdsourcing will be developed and used to
engage non-experts in the scientific enterprise. Students from underrepresented
groups and minorities will be actively recruited and the PIs will engage in
outreach activities involving the public, high school and undergraduate students
and their teachers.