* 1330743
* Role of ISWI Chromatin Remodeler in Transcription-coupled Repair and Genome Stability
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2017
* Catherine Freudenreich, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 11/30/2017
* USD 576,000.00

Intellectual Merit. Cells of every organism must preserve the genome to prevent
mutations. Repetitive DNA is common in genomes and presents a particular
challenge for cells, as slippage can occur during replication or repair. In
particular, structure-forming repeats, such as CAG/CTG triplet repeats, have
been shown to be particularly prone to gains and losses in copy number. It is
essential to understand mutational processes within repetitive DNA, especially
when mutations occur in a region that could affect gene function. One of the key
repair systems used within transcribed regions is transcription-coupled repair.
Recent discovery indicates that a new factor, the Isw1 chromatin remodeler
protein, is needed to prevent CAG expansions during transcription-coupled
repair. The specific objective of this project is to determine the role of Isw1
in transcription-coupled repair, and how it controls fidelity of repair within a
CAG repeat to prevent expansions. The model eukaryote Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(baker's yeast) will be used since it exhibits repeat instability similar to
human cells, yet offers powerful genetic and molecular tools that will be
employed to address the proposed questions. This research will provide
fundamental insight into mutational processes in eukaryotic organisms, including
yeast and humans. In addition, the discovery of a new player in transcription-
coupled repair, the Isw1 protein, creates an opportunity to better understand
this important DNA repair pathway and how it operates in the context of
chromatin, which is the form that DNA takes when packaged within cells. Isw1 can
"remodel" chromatin, or change its structure to facilitate access to the DNA.
Thus the results of this project also have a high potential to significantly
advance the current limited knowledge of the role of chromatin remodeling in DNA
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. In addition to creating new
scientific knowledge, this project will have a broader impact on education of
students at the undergraduate level. Traditionally laboratory exercises taught
in undergraduate courses consist of activities where students follow a set
protocol with a particular result in mind. However, real science rarely follows
this predictable pattern. Part of this project will be to take advantage of the
versatility of our model system to develop a new laboratory course designed to
engage Tufts undergraduates in novel research in the area of molecular genetics.
This new course will allow undergraduates to experience "non-cookbook"
laboratory research and make new discoveries by doing an open-ended screen for
cellular factors that protect against mutations and genome rearrangements.
Currently this opportunity is available to only a small number of students, so
the availability of this laboratory will significantly broaden the number of
students engaged in significant scientific research and critical thinking. The
young scientists working on the transcription-coupled repair project will also
be involved in the design and implementation of the new course, giving them the
opportunity to combine their research efforts with course design and training in
teaching. To allow other educators to utilize these teaching modules, once
finalized, the course materials, protocols and reagents will be made available
to the larger Genetics community through publication.