* 1330912
* Interplay of Transcriptional, Translational Regulatory Mechanisms and Kinetics of an Environmental Response
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Nitin Baliga, Institute for Systems Biology
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,199,999.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Environmental factors change with reproducible
characteristics. While changes in oxygen can happen within seconds to minutes,
temperature changes occur at a much slower pace over hours to days. Regulatory
networks in an organism are tuned through evolution to elicit a response that
matches the characteristics of a given environmental factor (e.g. a rapid
response to fast changing factors). The overarching hypothesis of this project
is that the relative use of regulation at different stages of information
processing (transcriptional, post-transcriptional, translational and post-
translational) is dictated by the necessary characteristics of an environmental
response. In order to test this hypothesis under varying environmental
conditions, changes in synthesis and degradation rates will be measured for all
transcripts and proteins in strains of Halobacterium salinarum. Building in this
proof-of-concept, the research project will systematically investigate interplay
across different levels of regulation in the context of specific environmental
responses.

BROADER IMPACTS: Resources: This research will generate fundamental principles
of integration across different levels of regulation, and also generate
innovative computational and experimental methodology that will be published as
well-documented, open-source data and software. Education: Rapid advances in
interdisciplinary science are widening the gap in the way biology is taught and
how it is practiced. An award winning high school (HS) education program in the
lab is bridging this divide through inquiry-based teaching practices at the
grassroots. This ten-year-old program is centered on summer internships for
students of disadvantaged backgrounds who are encouraged to apply through
numerous partnerships including programs for inner city youth and a UW-based
program for advancement of women in science. Educational kits developed through
this program have been aligned with state standards, iteratively improved
through classroom pilots, and disseminated through professional teacher
development to 14 states across the US. In addition to training postdoctoral
fellows in systems biology, this project will also develop inquiry-driven,
standards-based, HS educational materials. Developed together with local science
educators, this novel curriculum module has been requested by teachers and will
help students internalize the concepts and methods for using systems biology to
understand cellular dynamics in the context of environmental change. These
curricula will be aligned with the new Next Generation Science Standards and
regularly assess its impact on student learning and career choices through a
rigorous evaluation program.