* 1330968
* SBIR Phase II:  Synergistic Combinations of New Materials & Systems for Scalable Desulfurization of Distributed Biogas Resources
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Hongyun Yang, IntraMicron Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2016
* USD 898,761.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes a
fundamentally new means for biogas/landfill gas desulfurization that produces
negligible waste, allows for sulfur recovery/recycling, and provides annualized
operating costs that are fraction of current practice. The proposed process
consists of two synergistic components: a novel oxidative sulfur removal (OSR)
catalytic reactor that produces elemental sulfur and a polishing adsorbent bed
equipped with a unique in-situ bed-life sensor (BLS) that permits optimal
adsorbent bed operation and cycling. The OSR catalyst has high contaminant
tolerance, high selectivity to elemental sulfur, high activity, and low cost.
After the OSR reaction and sulfur condensation, the outlet hydrogen sulfide
concentration can be reduced to below 5 ppm at a conversion above 90%. If a
polishing adsorbent bed is needed to achieve lower sulfur levels, it will be
outfitted with an in-situ BLS that provides real-time adsorbent capacity
monitoring to maximize adsorbent utilization. This approach is particularly
effective for biogas/landfill gas streams with severe sulfur concentration
variations; it reduces annualized operating costs by 50% to 65%, while reducing
both solid waste generation (adsorbent consumption) and footprint by a factor of
10 - 30.

The Broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will
drastically change the landscape of biogas/landfill gas utilization by improving
desulfurization economics and reducing desulfurization solid waste generation.
The low-cost, environmentally benign nature of this process will not only
improve the desulfurization efficiency of typical biogas sources, but it will
facilitate the development of small-scale and/or high-sulfur-content
biogas/landfill gas sources for renewable fuel and energy applications.
Moreover, the proposed approach can eliminate large sulfur adsorbent beds for
almost all current biogas/landfill gas applications with high outlet sulfur
thresholds (i.e. direct heating, power generation and combined heat and power),
and shrink the size of desulfurization units for advanced applications with low
outlet sulfur thresholds (i.e. fuel cells and GTL). Its small footprint and
scalability make this technology favorable for mobile, small-scale applications.
Besides biogas/landfill gas, other gas streams including natural gas, associated
gas, petroleum gas, and syngas from a variety of sources can be desulfurized
using this process. BTL, CTL, GTL, and renewable electric power generation will
benefit from the success of this innovation. The proposed innovation directly
addresses the energy independence and security of our nation (EISA 2007).