* 1330832
* Dynamics of Reductive Dehalogenating Communities Associated with Dehalorespiration Under Conditions of Competition for Hydrogen
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Lewis Semprini, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Crane
* 09/30/2017
* USD 893,635.00

Chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons, such as tetrachloroethene (PCE) and
trichloroethene (TCE) are the most abundant groundwater contaminants of US
aquifers. While bioremediation of these pollutants via reductively
dehalogenating microorganisms has been successful at many sites, there are
numerous sites where the success has been limited. This limited success is
frequently due to a lack of understanding of in situ microbial reductive
dehalogenation and complex biogeochemical processes. Dehalococcoides mccartyi
(Dhc) species appear to be the most important microbes for complete
dechlorination of PCE and TCE to the harmless ethene. As members of the rare,
slow growing biosphere, Dehalococcoides sp. are strictly anaerobic microbes, are
highly niche-adapted to reductive dehalogenation, are difficult to isolate in
pure culture, and are metabolically integrated in unknown ways into a supporting
microbial community. This collaborative, interdisciplinary engineering and
science research will provide a fundamental understanding of the dynamics of
slow growing, reductively dehalogenating microbes, their populations, and the
associated microbial communities during reductive dehalogenation of
chloroethenes at fluctuating low concentrations of hydrogen their preferred
electron donor. A better understanding will be achieved by a combined approach
consisting of experimentally determining molecular and organismal properties of
the competition for hydrogen by different microbes of a dehalogenating community
and of developing a predictive mathematical model to simulate the competition
for hydrogen among the microbial community. The expected outcome is a deeper
systems-level understanding of how in a natural microbial ecosystem, dynamically
changing diverse electron donors and alternate electron acceptors cause shifts
in composition of the microbial community and populations of dehalogenating
microbes.

Broader Impacts. The broader impacts of this research will be on three levels:
1) Successful engineering of microbial reductive dehalogenation for
bioremediation of groundwater contaminated with chloroethenes. The collaborative
interdisciplinary research will provide insights into crucial data and modeling
needed for engineering more efficient bioremediation systems. This type of
combined molecular/experimental, statistical and mathematical approach is
expected to be transferable for engineering the remediation of other high
priority environmental contaminants, such fluorohydrocarbons, heavy metals, or
radionuclides; 2) Fundamental insights will be obtained into the (eco)
physiological dynamics and natural population structure of Dehalococcoides sp.
which are members of the highly-niche adapted, rare, slow growing biosphere.
Studies will enable scientists to begin to frame and answer some crucial
questions on the biology of such microbes and on life under low-growth
conditions in general; 3) The students involved in this project will be trained
in microbial physiology and molecular methods, statistical methods for the
analysis of molecular information, in environmental engineering and in
mathematical modeling of biological or geochemical systems. The students will
learn the fundamentals either in engineering or microbiology as their core
discipline, and will also be trained in using statistical methods and modeling
to educate the next generation of collaborative microbiologists and
environmental engineers.