* 1330828
* RUI:  Chromatin Dynamics and Transcription in Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Jennifer Armstrong, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 11/30/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The goal of this project is to use the powerful genetic
system of Drosophila melanogaster (the fruit fly) to understand how DNA is
managed in the cell and how genes are regulated. In eukaryotic cells, DNA
interacts with histone proteins to form a structure called chromatin. Chromatin
structure and function is regulated by chromatin modifying enzymes and chromatin
remodeling factors. How these proteins generate and maintain chromatin
structures to allow proper gene expression throughout the development of an
organism is of great interest. The PI's long-term goal is to understand how
chromatin remodeling factors regulate the dynamic nature of chromatin. This
project is focused on the Drosophila melanogaster CHD1 chromatin remodeling
factor and its roles in regulating histone dynamics across genes to regulate
gene expression. Experiments will test the working hypothesis that the CHD1
chromatin remodeling factor regulates histone dynamics across genes to
antagonize repressive chromatin. The proteins involved in these processes are
highly conserved; these studies in Drosophila melanogaster should therefore be
applicable to other organisms, including humans. The PI will employ genetic,
molecular, and cell biological tools and techniques, which are ideal for the
investigation of chromosome morphology, gene silencing and histone dynamics.
This work is ideally suited for the PI's undergraduate laboratory, as Drosophila
genetics is especially amenable to student research.

Broader impacts: Undergraduate students from Claremont McKenna, Scripps, and
Pitzer Colleges will carry out most of the research. During her first nine years
in the W.M. Keck Science Department, the PI mentored 43 undergraduates in her
research laboratory (37 women and 6 men), including three Latina students, three
African-American students, and several first-generation college students.
Research students typically spend one to three years in the laboratory. Over the
three years of this project, the PI will provide a substantive (often multi-
year) research experience for 10-15 undergraduates, providing them with skills
to help them succeed in their chosen careers. Three top-tier liberal arts
institutions share the PI's unique interdisciplinary department. Approximately
70% of the department's science graduates are women, partially due to a large
number of science majors from Scripps, an all-women's college. One of every four
Keck Science students is an ethnic minority, and fifteen percent of the
department's students are from ethnic groups underrepresented in the sciences.
The student body therefore places the PI in the position to encourage science
students from historically underrepresented groups. As part of this research,
undergraduates will attend and present their work at national conferences
including the Annual Drosophila Research Conference and the Asilomar Chromatin
and Chromosomes conference.