* 1330955
* SBIR Phase II:  Tunable Terahertz Quantum Cascade Lasers for Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Alan Lee, LongWave Photonics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2016
* USD 599,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
a prototype frequency tunable quantum cascade laser (TQCL) operating at
terahertz frequencies (2-5 THz) for applications including gas spectroscopy and
non-destructive imaging. This novel source is based on distributed feedback
(DFB) terahertz QCL with a lateral waveguide dimension much smaller than the
wavelength (wire laser). This optical mode extends outside the waveguide,
allowing an external MEMS plunger to interact with the mode and affect tuning. A
cryogenically operated motor is used to deflect the MEMS plunger allowing for
electronic control of output frequency. A combination of mechanical electrical
Stark shift tuning will allow frequency tuning range of &gt;300 GHz with a
resolution of 1 MHz. The output frequency of the TQCL will be coarsely
calibrated allowing the output frequency to be selected in software. The TQCL
will be housed in a small footprint cryocooler, and will have output powers
greater than 100 ÂµW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be in detection and characterization of narrow
gas lines (MHz) or solid absorption features (GHz) in spectroscopy, remote
sensing, astronomy and spectroscopic imaging. The innovation will be useful for
academic, industrial and governmental research. The electrical operation of the
MEMS tunable source and the turnkey nature of the cryogenic system will allow
non-expert researcher access to the terahertz spectral region. Future uses
include incorporation into a swept-source optical coherence tomography system
for non-destructive evaluation (NDE). Terahertz frequency radiation is of
particular interest for use in NDE because they are able to penetrate materials
that are opaque at infrared and visible wavelengths such as structural foams,
polymers and paints. Potential applications include the validation of the
structural integrity of foams used in the aerospace industry, continuous
monitoring of paint processes in the automotive industry, and the validation of
pharmaceuticals tablet coatings used in controlled release formulations.