* 1330056
* CAREER:  Parallel Dynamic Meshing Techniques for Simulation-Assisted Medical Interventions
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Suzanne Shontz, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 11/30/2014
* USD 350,824.00

The investigators will research and develop parallel dynamic meshing algorithms,
theory, and software for use in the patient-specific design of inferior vena
cava (IVC) filters for improved treatment of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). This
life-threatening disease results when blood clots form in a deep vein; DVT
effects over 2,000,000 people in the U.S. each year. A mechanical filter is
often placed in the IVC in order to trap a moving blood clot before it reaches
the heart. A typical doctor uses only one or two types of filters when treating
his patients rather than selecting the most appropriate IVC filter for his
patient's condition. Current computational simulations of blood clot entrapment
by IVC filters are of low accuracy. Hence, techniques to generate accurate
meshes of the IVC and surrounding veins, IVC filter, and blood clots for use in
such simulations will be developed.

The investigators will develop novel, parallel dynamic meshing techniques to
generate accurate meshes of the IVC and surrounding veins, IVC filter, and blood
clots. The investigators will develop parallel mesh warping algorithms and
muticore software for updating the meshes in response to patient-specific
deformations. Parallel geometric and topological mesh optimization methods in
order to improve the quality of the meshes will be developed. The algorithms
will be encapsulated in the form of a parallel dynamic meshing toolkit for
simulation-assisted medical interventions. In addition, the researchers will
develop a theoretical framework for dynamic meshing for improved quantitative
understanding of deformations. Educational activities at the college- and pre-
college level will be designed to build pathways for women and underrepresented
students to pursue computational science.