* 1330948
* SBIR Phase II:  Commercialization of Innovative Low Refractive Index, High Temperature Perfluorocyclobutyl Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,06/30/2019
* Jeffrey DiMaio, TETRAMER TECHNOLOGIES, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,677,989.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will determine the
technical feasibility and the commercial value proposition for high temperature,
highly processable fiber optic coatings across a range of markets to include
fiber lasers, fibers for oil and gas, avionics fiber, and medical fiber.
Tetramer will perform research to modify the structure of polymer coatings to
provide enhanced performance which will extend the capabilities of current fiber
optics. Coatings developed will advance our understanding of structure property
relationships and establish new boundaries for the polymer system. During this
program, Tetramer will synthesize new monomers and polymers and evaluate their
properties for use as fiber coatings. At the end of this program, Tetramer
anticipates it will have developed 3 new types of polymers with a set of
performance characteristics which are not available from any one single material
today. New fiber coatings will be developed which are capable of operating at
temperatures above 300 deg C, having greater processability, and for laser
applications, having lower refractive indices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will impact society in many ways due
to the various markets in which the coatings can have a meaningful impact on the
optical fiber performance. Fiber optic lasers are quickly becoming the preferred
method for laser fabrication. By enabling fiber lasers to operate at higher
temperatures, fiber lasers will immediately see increased output powers and
longer service lifetimes. With applications in industrial metal working
(welding, cutting, and engraving/marking), micromachining, and medical devices,
doubling power output via improved coatings will have a major impact across many
industries. Higher temperature fiber coatings will improve down-hole drilling
and the overall efficiency of oil drilling operations through better temperature
monitoring in deep wells. This has the potential to lower prices of oil and
increase oil production. Additionally, these fibers can aid in geothermal well
monitoring which would provide a green source of energy. The coatings under
development have the potential to generate increased revenue and profit
throughout the value chain through increased performance of products and
enhanced market sizes through enhanced capabilities. Tetramer will also use this
Phase II program to train undergraduate and graduate level students from nearby
Clemson University