* 1330932
* SBIR Phase II:  Nanostructured Composite Transparent Electrodes for Touch Panels
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Whitney Gaynor, Sinovia Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 909,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on
bringing the company's transparent conductive films to the touch panel market.
The performance, cost, and durability of current touch sensors are limited by
shortfalls of the current industry standard material, indium tin oxide (ITO).
The company is commercializing a conductive plastic film with superior
performance, cost, and durability. This study will cover expansion of its scale
manufacturing capabilities, allowing it to provide both pre-patterned and
customer-patternable transparent conductive films suitable for use in the
market. During SBIR Phase I period, the company migrated its lab-scale
prototyping methods to processes compatible with at-scale roll-to-roll
manufacture of unpattenered conductive films. While each step of its process was
individually scaled to high throughput, production of a final product requires
that all of the steps be combined into a single process flow. This Phase II
grant will allow it to combine these processes while adding the ability to
produce functional circuits in addition to bulk films. It will also allow it to
continue pushing its films' performance higher by utilizing new techniques and
materials to increase the clarity of its films. Finally, the company will
thoroughly characterize the lifetime properties of its final
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial impact of this
project will be significant, as it will result in a fully designed process by
which the company can produce market-ready products. It will also result in
functional demonstration touch panels to put into the hands of its customers. At
the conclusion of the study the company expects to have secured a design win
with a customer and will be in an excellent position to raise operating capital
at low risk to its investors so that the company may begin shipping products. As
a Silicon Valley materials technology company, the company's success in the
touch panel market will help bring part of a major market back to the US that
has moved overseas. This SBIR Phase II study will allow it to expand the staff
and also support jobs at the US companies whose toll-coating facilities the
company uses for its product development and manufacturing.