* 1330311
* Pyrolysis of Lignin for Bio-oil under CO2 Laser Irradiation in the "Wall-Less" reactor
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Barry Dellinger, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 353,137.00

The energy production from a biomass representative lignin is an attractive
option given that the higher bio-oil yields and decreased char formation are
provided. In this proposal a novel process will be developed to convert lignin
into the more high-quality bio-oil and chemicals with virtually no secondary
char effect based on a method known as Infrared Laser Powered Homogeneous
Pyrolysis or IR-LPHP. The PI is an expert in diversification of this method,
which allows performing the pyrolysis experiments strongly in homogeneous,
"wall-less" conditions under irradiation of IR CO2 laser. The principal
advantage of this method is that all chemical processes occur only in a small
"hot zone" practically at cold conditions of the reactor
walls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CO2 laser flash pyrolyses the lignin dispersed
particles generated by a spray technique in gas phase, followed by a rapid
quenching of many products which will diffuse out of the "hot zone" avoiding
further secondary processes (degradation, cleavage, or condensation with other
molecules). Such an approach is strongly believed to upgrade the liquid product
(bio-oil) yields. Markedly different products are expected to be produced under
the IR-LPHP of lignin due to the diverse heating rates, temperature, and
residence times in the specific "wall-less" condition at the same power of laser
irradiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the way to obtain higher yields bio-oil and
decrease the char formation, the detrimental heterogeneous influence of the char
and reactor walls on the total process has never been elucidated. The novelty of
this project is to obtain more high-quality bio-oil in a "wall-less" reactor
using the advantages of the flash IR LPHP technique at minimized char - gas
phase interaction. This special reactor design allows employing a perspective
exploratory research expecting break up lignin?s macromolecular structure, but
maintaining the aromatic nature of the building block molecules. For the first
time the intermediate radicals formed in the gas-phase lignin pyrolysis in the
"wall-less" reactor conditions, will be identified directly using Low
Temperature Matrix Isolation (LTMI) Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)
technique. Collaboration with the University at Buffalo team to evaluate kinetic
parameters of the key gas-phase reactions will lead to a global, pseudo-first
order lumped kinetic model for lignin pyrolysis based on the CHEMKIN - 4 Pro
Combustion kinetic package to predict the optimal pathways for formation of
aromatic desired compounds. Therefore, this project represents potentially
transformative research because it will offer a unique, non-standard approach
for producing more high-quality (upgraded) bio-oil at its high yield with the
perspective of transformation of bio-oil into alternative transportation fuel
and the important chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis put forward by
the PI lies on the idea that utilizing the advantages of laser pyrolysis in
"wall-less" reactor would have a great potential for application to various
biomass pyrolysis processes. Bringing high-volume aromatics efficiently from a
material as structurally complex and diverse as lignin becomes a challenging but
beneficial for society due to the several environmental advantages of the bio-
oil (note that the bio-oil can be upgraded to the bio-fuel in a number of ways -
physically, chemically and catalytically) over fossil fuels as a clean fuel as
well: CO2/GHG (greenhouse gas) neutral, no SOx emissions (because the plant
biomass contains insignificant amounts of sulfur), more than 50% lower NOx
emissions than diesel oil in a gas turbine. This project will advance
understanding of the new pathways for formation of bio-oil in "wall-less"
reactor conditions; therefore, will have broad applications across biomass
conversion, biofuels and bioenergy. Developed reaction-kinetic global model will
help to understand the efficiency of thermal conversion of lignin into high-
quality bio-oil product used both as an energy source and a feedstock for
chemical production and can be included in similar models for cellulose,
hemicellulose pyrolysis as well in coal industry. Virtually any form of the
biomass can be considered for IR-LPHP application. Therefore, the new
methodologies satisfying requirements for producing high-quality bio-oils may be
economically competitive in using bio-oils as substitute for fuel oil, diesel in
many applications, including boilers, furnaces, engines, and turbines for
electricity generation.