* 1330728
* RUI: Mechanisms of Modulation of GABA(A) receptors by Steroids and Lipophilic Hormones
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Grace Brannigan, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT The project seeks to clarify how steroids and thyroid
hormones interact with the main receptor for the primary inhibitory
neurotransmitter in the brain, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). The brain
produces certain steroids, known as "neurosteroids", and also responds to
thyroid hormones, which are chemically similar. Each of these hormones is known
to interact with the type A GABA receptor (GABA-Ar), thus modulating the effects
of GABA on the ion channel activity of the receptor, a process that exhibits
significant changes in numerous brain processes, including sleep and anxiety.
However, the precise molecular mechanism and location of these lipophilic ligand
binding sites on the receptor are unknown. The research will combine an
integrated computational and experimental approach to investigate the molecular
mechanism(s) through which neurosteroids, thyroid hormones and other compounds
act on GABA-Ar. In particular, X-ray crystallography has suggested a likely
binding site for the anti-parasitic ivermectin, another GABA-Ar modulator. This
project tests whether neurosteroids and thyroid hormone also bind to this site:
the experimental approach evaluates potential competition for binding sites
between neurosteroids or thyroid hormone and ivermectin, while the high
performance computational approach uses rigorous methods to predict the absolute
strength of interactions of neurosteroids or thyroid hormone with the GABA-Ar
ivermectin site. The interdisciplinary team assembled for this project includes
researchers with expertise in physics, chemistry, biology, and high performance
computing. Researchers in the team have extensive experience with the systems
and methods to be used, and the work has the prospect to define new details of
the molecular basis of GABA receptor function.

BROADER IMPACTS The proposed activities will impact education and contributions
to the scientific community within the Rutgers-Camden community, and will
provide a multidisciplinary framework for the training of students with
different scientific backgrounds. Through an integration of research and
teaching, the personnel supported by this project will participate in advising
students in a yearly undergraduate biophysics on individual projects involving
physics-based simulations of biological processes. In addition the project will
provide opportunities for research education that will enhance innovative new
undergraduate and graduate programs, thus enriching both national educational
mission as well as advancing development of a globally competitive STEM
workforce. The Co-PI is director of an NSF STEP project to enhance the
quantitative background of STEM students and to create a learning community
among them on the Rutgers-Camden campus and is Co-PI on an NSF REU project on
computational biology. This project will provide a resource for students from
these programs and offer an opportunity to engage in research at the interface
of experimental and computational biophysics.