* 1330775
* SBIR Phase II:  Recombinant Multi-epitope Mosaic Protein Design for Urine-based Diagnosis of Leptospirosis
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Edwin Agbo, Fyodor Biotechnologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2015
* USD 729,789.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop and validate a non-invasive, multiplex urine dipstick for clinical
diagnosis of Acute Febrile Illness (AFI) caused by polymicrobial infections. The
target diseases include leptospirosis, typhoid fever, dengue, as well as
Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax malaria, responsible for ~229M AFI's and
&gt;800,000 deaths a year worldwide. Current diagnostic tools are invasive,
technically complex, and thus not suitable in tropical and subtropical countries
where these diseases are most prevalent, especially in rural and point-of-care
settings where blood testing is impractical. The Phase I project successfully
developed and validated pathogen-specific recombinant antibody reagents that
demonstrated diagnostic potential in urine. This Phase II project envisages two
broad objectives: (i) detailed characterization of the recombinant monoclonal
antibody reagents to validate their individual and collective diagnostic
utility; and (ii) to develop and validate a multiplex dipstick test device for
concurrent detection of a set of leading causes of acute fever in a single urine
sample. The deliverable will be a simple diagnostic device with the potential to
diagnose either/both Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax and Leptospira,
which combines the need to improve specific diagnosis of AFI with the need to
address alternative causes of acute fever.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be the delivery
of a rapid diagnostic tool that addresses a major challenge faced by people in
low resource settings with high burdens of global health diseases, i.e. how to
manage acute fever without the benefit of rapid differential diagnostic tests.
Although individual tests for each potential cause of fever would be beneficial,
it is often not feasible or practical to rapidly select, run, and interpret
multiple individual tests in these settings. The cost implications for such
individual testing also will be prohibitive. Therefore, a multiplex rapid device
as envisaged here that will evaluate groups of symptomatically related febrile
diseases is urgently needed. It will offer both medical and logistical benefits
for rapid testing of leading causes of acute febrile illness in a single urine
sample. It will deliver a single answer multi-disease diagnostic with broader
impact, and offer differential diagnosis through a multiplexed assay rather than
individual testing, most suitable in resource limited settings where diagnostic
laboratory capacities are limited. This multiplex urine dipstick test is
designed to be a foundational platform device to which other diagnostic reagents
for acute fever can be iteratively added to suit a particular region.