* 1330766
* Evolutionary Genomics of Long Intergenic Non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Carlos Machado, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 510,000.00

The importance of non-coding RNAs is becoming increasingly apparent for a wide
range of biological processes, but they are still a relatively new topic, and
many aspects of their function and evolution remain poorly understood. Long
intergenic non-coding (linc) RNAs are perhaps least understood among the non
coding RNAs, yet they are known to play roles in dosage compensation, embryonic
development, stem cell maintenance and differentiation, and epigenetic
regulation of expression. The proposed work is focused on lincRNAs across the
species Drosophila pseudoobscura and Drosophila persimilis. RNA-seq will be used
to catalog changes in lincRNA expression during development, and these data will
be used to evaluate divergence in lincRNA sequence and expression
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims are the following: 1-Identify
the lincRNAs in the D. pseudoobscura transcriptome using RNAseq data;
2-Characterize patterns of lincRNA expression in D. pseudoobscura and D.
persimilis, with a focus on those lincRNAs that are differentially expressed;
3-Compare levels of intraspecific polymorphism to levels of interspecific
divergence using expression and sequence data, and complare patterns for
lincRNAs to patterns of protein-coding genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts include a summer research experience for high school students and
teachers. Participant selection will be done in collaboration with minority high
schools in the area, and will be facilitated by a Math and Science Partnership
grant to the University System of Maryland. Undergraduate research opportunities
will also be provided, and recruitment will be done partly through the
University of Maryland and partly through the Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute in Panama.&lt;br/&gt;