* 1330507
* A Longitudinal Analysis of Networks and Changes in Network Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Mikhail Balaev, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2014
* USD 166,571.00

SES-1330507 Mikhail Balaev University of North Carolina Greensboro

Social scientists have studied the composition of and ties between the
executives in government and corporations since the 1960s. This project will
analyze the changes in the corporate-government networks and their dynamics from
1978 to the present by focusing on the professional affiliations (such as
employment and board memberships) of the senior executive government officials.
Using previously unanalyzed documents, such as the Financial Disclosures and
Ethics Agreement letters that all senior officials must file according to the
1978 Ethics in Government Act, a unique longitudinal network data set will be
constructed. Each tie to an organization will be coded to reflect the
organization?s main industries and ownership types. Education, gender, and
wealth of the senior government officials will also be coded in the dataset. The
project will use analytical techniques that include mean comparisons, time-
series analysis, network analysis, and longitudinal dynamic network analysis.
The novelty of these data will result in the first longitudinal network analysis
of the government-corporate power networks. This study will offer an
unprecedented insight into the dynamics of the historical development of U.S.
corporate-government ties.

Broader impacts

The proposed project will code previously unanalyzed documents and produce a
unique longitudinal network dataset for current and future research across a
number of social science disciplines. The infrastructure of the dataset will
allow for easy yearly updates and a seamless addition of further variables which
will broaden the applicability of these data for a wide range of research
projects that deal with the formation and the functioning of the government and
the development of public policy. The study will provide training for graduate
and undergraduate students in such and such methodology and theory. The
publications based on this study will be of importance to academics, students,
politicians, the media, and the general public. The empirical analysis of the
patterns in the historical development of the corporate-government networks will
contribute to public debate and government transparency and accountability to
the society at large.