* 1330545
* Causes and Consequences of Variation in cyclic AMP - Protein Kinase A Signaling in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Paul Magwene, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Few detailed studies have been conducted on the influence of genetic variation
on signal transduction pathways, even though knowledge of this is important to
the understanding of cell behavior. The cyclic adenosine monophosphate-protein
kinase A (cAMP-PKA) signaling pathway is conserved in animals and fungi and
regulates cellular growth and differentiation. For example, in yeast
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) cAMP-PKA signaling plays a central role in regulating
developmental transitions such as the shift from typical yeast form growth to
filamentous growth and the formation of biofilms. The goal of this project is to
develop and use fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based sensors to
characterize how signaling in the yeast cAMP-PKA pathway varies with genetic
background and environmental stimuli, and the manner in which this affects
cellular growth and differentiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This
project will support the training and mentoring of postdoctoral, undergraduate
and high school trainees. It will also support a continuing outreach project
lead by the PI that provides a week-long course on microbiology and systems
biology to advanced high school students. The PI will use materials from this
outreach course to develop on-line science investigation modules that will be
made available to high school science educators at the state and national level.