* 1330149
* WORKSHOP: IEEE VR 2013 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Benjamin Lok, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2014
* USD 11,800.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 8 graduate students (6
domestic and 2 international) along with 4 senior members of the community
(faculty and industry researchers) in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) to be
held in conjunction with and immediately preceding IEEE Virtual Reality 2013,
which will take place March 18-20, in Orlando, Florida, immediately following
the IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces and preceding the ACM SIGGRAPH
Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games. Virtual reality (VR) is a
multidisciplinary field involving human-centered computer simulations that seek
to imitate or augment real world senses (usually sight, sound, and touch) and
experiences. VR research includes developing and assessing methods and systems,
and facilitating and understanding user perceptions, beliefs, and behaviors.
First organized by the IEEE Computer Society in 1993, IEEE Virtual Reality is
the premier international conference and exhibition in this field and includes
prestigious technical paper presentations, workshops, tutorials, research
demonstrations, and exhibits from industry. Based on prior year numbers, IEEE VR
2013 expects over 300 registrants, 20 exhibitors, and 30 student volunteers.
More information about the conference may be found online at
http://www.ieeevr.org/2013.

Inspired by broad student interest and successful events at past CHI and ISMAR
conferences, this will be the first Doctoral Consortium associated with IEEE
Virtual Reality. The schedule includes a pre-event dinner where the students can
meet and encourage each other socially, followed by a day-long private workshop
where they each present their work to a panel of senior VR researchers and
receive specific constructive feedback. Each student will prepare a poster on
his/her research, (which will also be on display during the conference as part
of the poster presentations), and will have a total of 50 minutes for a
presentation during the workshop, of which approximately 20 minutes is reserved
for an extensive discussion with the other graduate student participants and the
senior researchers. Discussions will be run freely but will be facilitated by
the DC co-chairs and mentors, who will address the strengths of the work,
challenges and issues that may arise, and implications of the results. Talk
titles and abstracts, along with the procedures followed, will be archived in an
IEEE VR 2013 binder as a reference for the following year's conference.

Broader Impacts: The goal of the Doctoral Consortium is to provide an
interactive and supportive mentoring opportunity for mid-level graduate students
in virtual reality, to afford these students a valuable opportunity to get
independent perspectives on their research from senior individuals with a wide
collective breadth and depth of knowledge, and to build a cohort of young
researchers within the VR community. The organizers will take steps to achieve
diversity among the students with respect to research topics, disciplinary
backgrounds, methodological approaches, and home institutions (no more than one
graduate student will be accepted from any one institution). Factors such as
gender and ethnicity will also be taken into account, with an emphasis on
including underrepresented groups.