* 1330950
* SBIR Phase II:  Energy Saving Solenoid Valve
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Lowell Jones, Nexmatix LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,399,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project applies a novel
design to pneumatic solenoid valves that allows 20-25% of compressed air to be
recycled. Given compressed air is one of the most expensive forms of stored
energy, this energy-efficient design provides manufacturers with a cost
effective solution for pneumatic systems using directional control valves. The
basic technology has been proven to reduce compressed air use. Research
objectives for this project are designed to prove the breadth of applicability
and address current design factors in selecting valves. These objectives
include: 1) design, production, and laboratory testing of prototypes across a
spectrum of design platforms selected from commercially available valves; 2)
production of durable (metal) prototypes for life-cycle testing; 3) research on
safety enhancements to the original prototype design, to further ensure
commercial adoption; and 4) a full-scale field test of the technology in a
manufacturing environment. These objectives provide a clear path for the
delivery of an energy saving valve technology that is reliable, cost-
competitive, and can replace a significant portion of the multibillion-dollar
worldwide solenoid valve market.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is introducing a game-
changing technology into a stagnant, mature industry - pneumatic valves. The
U.S. and European pneumatic valve market is $2.1 billion. The United States
comprises 27% (approximately $500 million) of this total with over 70% of all
manufacturing facilities employing compressed air systems. These systems utilize
pneumatic solenoid valves to control air flow to actuator devices. Existing
pneumatic systems are regarded as highly inefficient. The research to date has
proven that this innovation will deliver a cost-competitive energy saving valve
technology with the potential to apply to approximately 60% of the multi-billion
dollar directional control valve market. A 20% reduction in compressed air can
save U.S. manufacturers significant energy costs each year, with a national
potential for $400 to 500 million in total savings. U.S. business leaders
recognize the critical need for innovation in order to stay competitive.
According to the 2011 Next Generation Manufacturing Study, sustainability was
identified as an important area of focus. This includes designing and
implementing waste and energy-use reduction to deliver superior cost
performance. The proposed energy saving technology can help U.S. manufacturers
stay competitive by achieving sustainability goals and reducing costs.