* 1330138
* SBIR Phase II:  Cloud-based Simulated Patients for Rapid Competency Development in Medical Education
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,03/31/2017
* Craig Knoche, i-Human Patients, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,249,679.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II award proposes to
enhance the technical understanding of how to create rich, high-performance,
entirely cloud-based applications that are accessed anytime, anywhere on any
device. The layered Web application architecture eliminates the need for a local
application or proprietary browser plug-ins like Java or Flash. The framework
will provide complex interface components and powerful functionality in
interface composition, styling, dynamic behavior and data manipulation. Benefits
include: 1) Smooth, seamless local application-like user experience independent
of user platform, 2) Lower support costs as all business logic is deployed in
the cloud, 3) Improved security as the server validates all actions so if client
data is tampered with, the server can detect it and react accordingly, 4)
Simpler yet more powerful application programming model, closer to GUI software
development than traditional Web development, 5) Ability to deliver complex
computation and storage-intensive functionality to mobile platforms, and 6)
Integration of real-time collaboration without local and proprietary
installation requirements.



The broader/commercial impact of the simulated patient service is driven by
enabling medical educators to accelerate development of students' clinical
competencies in an affordable and scalable manner, helping to address the widely
anticipated shortage of qualified U.S. providers driven by the aging of the Baby
Boomers and an expected 15% increase in demand for healthcare services due to
coverage of the previously uninsured. Shortages in developing countries are even
greater. The service will also help ensure the quality of medical education and
lower the cost of healthcare as mastery of critical diagnostic reasoning is the
basis for efficient delivery of care and is required for optimal outcomes, cost
control and reduction of hospital readmissions. If used in testing,
certification, continuing medical education, and protocol adherence, it could
ensure the competency of recruits, help busy clinicians keep up with advances in
medical knowledge, and identify those in need of additional or remedial
training.