* 1330169
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Catalysts for Air Cathodes
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Paul Matter, PH Matter, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 508,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is focused on
development of a scalable and economical process for production of non-precious
metal electro-catalysts, and electrodes based on these materials. The reliance
on precious electrode catalysts currently hinders broader commercialization of a
number of promising technologies. The materials being developed in this project
have unique properties compared to currently available electrode materials, and
can be used for a number of important applications, including batteries, fuel
cells, and industrial electrolysis. In this project, pH Matter, LLC will develop
a scalable process using low cost starting materials for the production of the
non-precious metal electro-catalysts, and develop electrodes based on these
materials for early adopter applications. The project will result in commercial
product offerings from pH Matter that will enable higher-performing
electrochemical cells for customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is related to a number of
electrochemical applications, including batteries, fuel cells, and next-
generation electrolysis processes. The strongest value proposition of pH
Matter?s material is for replacement of precious metal electrodes currently
required in many of these applications. Developing an alternative to precious
metal electrodes will enable introduction of high performance and low-cost
primary and secondary metal batteries. Applications for these batteries could
range from portable electronics to grid load leveling. Reducing the cost of fuel
cells by replacement of the precious metal cathode would enable wider adoption
for fleet vehicles and possibly automotive applications. Further, next-
generation electrolysis processes, such as chlorine synthesis with an oxygen
depolarized cathode, could improve efficiency by 30% for the largest source of
industrial electricity consumption. Consequently, the materials being developed
on this project have broad applicability that will promote energy efficiency and
alternative energy use.