* 1330876
* SBIR Phase II:  High Efficiency Thermoelectric Converter
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Michael Staskus, NanoConversion Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,213,549.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is intended to
establish the feasibility of a high-efficiency, low-cost electric power
generator called the C-TEC, for Concentration-mode Thermoelectric Converter. The
C-TEC is an electrochemical converter that generates electricity from heat using
a thermally-regenerated concentration gradient of ions across an electrolyte
membrane, rather than a thermal gradient across a semiconductor material. This
important difference yields a technology with the potential for the high
efficiency of a fuel cell, combined with the low cost, low maintenance, and long
life of a thermoelectric device. Detailed theoretical models and calculations
have shown the potential for greater than 30% efficiency in similar devices, but
in practice, only 15% to 19% efficiency has ever been realized. The Phase I
program successfully demonstrated the key elements of a low-cost, high-
efficiency design, and created a simple efficiency algorithm for developing a
device capable of demonstrating high efficiency. This efficiency model will be
refined using prototype verification builds during the Phase II program, and
then used to design, build and test a prototype device suitable for the
distributed power generation markets.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development
of low cost, high efficiency generators that can operate using any form of heat
in a wide variety of applications. C-TEC generators are inherently more
versatile than other technologies that require high-grade, specific fuels, such
as engines (gasoline), turbines (natural gas), fuel cells (hydrogen), or solar
cells (sunlight). The C-TEC makes no noise, has no moving parts, and requires no
maintenance, making it ideal for long-term power generation. Clean, distributed
electricity provided by microCHP (Combined Heat and Power systems at less than 5
kW electrical power) enables breakthrough electrical efficiency greater than 90%
in the home, representing an important technology for the widespread adoption of
the electric car. The C-TEC-powered electric car will use domestic natural gas
as a bridge to renewables, reducing emissions and dependence on foreign oil and
massive infrastructure development costs associated with upgrades to our grid
capacity. Other technologies have been proposed as prime movers for microCHP,
including fuel cells and engines, but these fall short in terms of cost and
maintenance. Ultimately, the cost and versatility of the C-TEC will provide
economic advantages like fast payback to drive the adoption of new clean
technologies.