* 1330294
* Identification of the Plant RNA Editosome
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2014,04/30/2017
* Maureen Hanson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2017
* USD 750,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Plant organelles convert certain cytidines to uridines in
mRNA post-transcriptionally in a process known as RNA editing. This process is
critical for proper expression of many chloroplast and mitochondrial genes that
have accumulated T to C mutations. If not edited, these genes would produce non-
functional proteins that would have a detrimental effect on important processes
such as photosynthesis and respiration. The complete composition of the plant
RNA editing protein complexes, the plant editosomes, is unknown. The selection
of the C to be converted to U is performed by Pentatricopeptide Repeat-Motif
(PPR) RNA-binding proteins, which recognize sequences on the RNA in close
proximity to the C target. In addition to the large PPR protein family, members
of two additional plant protein families, the RIP and ORRM families, have
recently been found to be required for RNA editing in organelles. Unlike the
site-specific PPR proteins, which are needed for editing of only one or a few
individuals Cs, the ORRM and RIP proteins are essential for editing efficiency
of the majority of edited Cs in chloroplasts and/or mitochondria and thus likely
are components of most editosomes. The role of additional ORRM family members
will be examined by mutant analysis and gene silencing in conjunction with a
deep sequencing editing assay. ORRM and RIP proteins will be expressed with
tandem affinity purification tags in transgenic plants in order to isolate
editosomes, whose component proteins will then be identified by mass
spectrometric methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: C-to-U RNA editing
is able not only to change the encoded amino acid, but can also create start and
stop codons, profoundly affecting the accumulation and function of proteins.
Understanding the site-specific plant RNA editing mechanism will pave the way
for future genetic engineering of plants and other organisms through deliberate
post-transcriptional modification of codons. The project will provide training
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students, including ones from
other colleges who are participating in a summer internship program that offers
research experience and formal lectures. The PI will continue her efforts to
promote the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women in STEM fields. The
coPI will disseminate a detailed deep sequencing protocol that is valuable not
only for RNA editing researchers, but more generally for scientists studying a
subset of the RNA transcriptomes in their experimental organisms.