* 1330864
* Spatial Coordination of Emergent Cell Behaviors by Ras
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2018
* Zev Gartner, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 11/30/2018
* USD 800,000.00

The goal of this research is to define the underlying physical processes that
guide the collective and emergent behaviors of closely interacting groups of
epithelial cells. The small GTPase Ras is important in both intracellular and
intercellular signaling networks, and the tools and concepts to be developed in
this study will elucidate how Ras regulates multiple emergent behaviors of
groups of cells as they undergo development. The project will reveal how Ras, as
a key signaling node in pathways downstream of growth factor receptors, couples
its activity across multiple time and length scales to orchestrate complex and
emergent phenomena in groups of cells. The central hypothesis to be tested is
that whereas the absolute level of Ras activity in single cells controls the
physical properties of cell motility, cohesion, and autocrine secretory
profiles, in groups of epithelial cells it is the relative level of Ras activity
between cells that determines their emergent behaviors. These emergent behaviors
may be attributed to a competition between the processes of differential
motility, differential adhesion (or cohesion), and the community effect
(autocrine loops). The hypotheses will be tested using advanced chemical biology
tools, live cell imaging and mathematical modeling. Broader impacts: This
project will directly provide quantitative and cross-disciplinary training to
two graduate students. Training will include synthetic chemistry, cell biology,
quantitative video microscopy, and mathematical modeling. To broaden the impact
of the project, computational modules from these studies will be incorporated
into a course on distributed control in multicellular systems.