* 1330511
* RUI: Biology-Physics Collaboration to Investigate the Genetic and Structural Basis of Competence in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2019
* Kristine Lang, Colorado College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2019
* USD 576,967.00

Intellectual Merit: Bacteria have a covering membrane, analogous to human skin,
designed to keep their internal components in and foreign bodies out. Some
bacteria have developed the ability to import foreign DNA across this membrane
and incorporate it into their own genomes. This ability is called natural
transformation or competence. Because competent bacteria can import everything
from their own native DNA to animal DNA, they can adapt rapidly in stressful
environments, such as in the presence of antibiotics. This research project is
to better understand how bacteria are able to find DNA and move it across their
membranes. What is currently known is that some bacteria can make structures,
called Type IV Pili, which consist of pores through their membranes and through
which associated long appendages can project outward. Type IV Pili are used by
bacteria to pull themselves across a surface, essentially using the appendages
as retractable grappling hooks. The machinery responsible for competence is
believed to be similar in structure to Type IV Pili. This similarity suggests
two hypotheses: first, the set of genes that build the competence machine must
be similar to the set of genes that build Type IV Pili, and second, the
competence machine performs similar actions to Type IV Pili, albeit for a
different purpose. This research will use Type IV Pili genes to identify
potential competence genes and then evaluate whether those genes really do
participate in building a competence machine. In addition, Atomic Force
Microscopy will be used to take very high resolution pictures of competent
bacteria to see both the competence machines and appendages. Looking at the
competence machines themselves yields an understanding of how a population of
cells becomes more competent. Perhaps populations become more competent when
each cell makes more machines or when more cells makes machines or when each
machine makes more appendages. The pictures will also indicate whether competent
bacteria might use their appendages to "fish" for DNA by throwing them out and
retracting them to move the DNA toward themselves. The overall goal of this
research is to generate a much deeper understanding of both the genetic basis
and the physical mechanisms of competence in
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: All the proposed research will
take place in collaboration with undergraduate students. The PIs have a strong
track record of involving undergraduates in research, having collectively worked
with 108 students in ten years each at Colorado College. Many of these students
were women and minorities, and the PIs actively recruit such students. The PIs
are a physicist and a biologist in collaboration, and the dozen students
expected to conduct research in their labs on this project will reflect this
same combination of majors. In addition, the PIs developed a biophysics course
for first-year students based on the research, which culminates with a project
in which the students prepare a bacterial sample, image it with atomic force
microscopy, and then write a journal-style paper to present their research, thus
giving them an experiential taste of scientific research. This experience will
be offered to 48 first-year students during the term of the award.