* 1330139
* SBIR Phase II:  Extracting Valuable Information Automatically from Objects with Surface Impressions via Photographs and Interactive Digital Surrogates
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Donald Sanders, Learning Sites, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 905,399.00

The innovation, CUNAT (CUNeiform Automated Translator) attacks significant
problems in a discipline wedded to conservative manual methods. Ancient
Mesopotamian legal treatises, Egyptian medical records, and Roman political
accounts--telling us exactly what happened in the words of the very people whose
actions formed our history - languish untranslated, because there are too many
of them, translation takes too long, and there are too few linguistic experts.
"Cuneiform text genres include everything...from mathematical and grammatical
exercises, beer recipes, international treaties, musical scores, legal codes,
religious rituals, sales receipts, and astronomical tables....[M]useums...have
acquired approximately 400,000 tablets, with thousands being unearthed every
year.... [S]cholars continue to make unique and valuable contributions to the
study of history, law, religion, linguistics, mathematics, and science" (Digital
Hammurabi Project). CUNAT will allow anyone to create 3D models of artifacts and
extract meaning from their impressions more effectively and quickly than
existing tools. Phase II innovations include: extending the limits of image-
based feature detection through unique algorithms based on 3D models
automatically generated from photographs; isolating meaningful characters from
noise across an array of surface shapes; classifying the characters of many
dialects based on geometric characteristics; and performing automatic
translation using graph-based algorithms and rules engines rather than
traditional word-by-word methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial
impact of our innovation are new learning and analysis methods: a high-school
student enters an art museum and sees an object with triangular-shaped surface
incisions; the label reads "cuneiform tablet, 864BCE, Nimrud;" curious, the
student aims a smartphone camera at the object and clicks; the images are
uploaded into the project?s software app, which generates an interactive 3D
model and an English translation of the inscription. The student may become the
first person to have read the text and discover previously unknown astronomical
knowledge detailed by the ancient scribe. Their software gives this research
power and excitement of discovery to everyone, every institution, anywhere,
anytime, because neither expensive special equipment nor complex calibration or
lighting are necessary to produce results with unprecedented efficiency and
accuracy. The innovations will address critical needs across the field of
archaeology and produce a commercially viable product with applications to
problems in museum exhibition, numismatics, and digital art history. In
addition, accurate processes will be widely applicable, including forensics,
paleontology, auto mechanics, personalized 3D printing, and carpentry. Beyond
the insight into the past that will inevitably accrue, economic and
technological advantages will motivate commercial adoption within and beyond our
target market.