* 1330154
* SBIR Phase II:  Semi-Automated Masonry (SAM) Robotic System
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,04/30/2017
* Scott Peters, Construction Robotics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,455,234.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will focus on
the development of a commercially-viable robotic Semi-Automated Masonry (SAM)
system. This SAM system will revolutionize the construction industry by
significantly increasing the efficiency and throughput of brick wall
construction using automation. The SAM system will be leased or sold to masonry
contractors. The core technology being developed incorporates proprietary
sensing, control systems, and mortar dispensing to achieve computer aided design
(CAD)-driven, highly accurate automated bricklaying capability. The Phase II
project will focus on developing and integrating key technical components of the
system. The main technical objectives for the Phase II grant are to (1) fully
integrate a mortar pumping and measurement system, (2) achieve brick placement
accuracy during all jobsite conditions, (3) develop CAD to brick mapping
software, and (4) to prepare the product for commercial viability. In addition,
we will perform a number of site demonstrations to prove commercial viability.
This project will stretch the bounds of commercial robotics as well as expand
the scope of possibilities across the construction industry. Many new
technologies will continue to be developed during the Phase II project in order
to progress from prototyping to testing, and eventually commercial readiness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
a technology to revolutionize the masonry construction industry. The SAM robotic
system will provide many significant societal benefits including more
predictable and reliable work, less physical demand on masons, lower costs and
more design flexibility for the use of brick. By reducing the physical demands
on the mason and increasing the use of technology, it will provide significant
health benefits, effectively increasing the work life of older masons and
attracting younger masons to the industry. Brick-based construction represents a
significant portion of the global and U.S. economies, with over $20 billion
spent on all domestic masonry work, and over $5 billion spent on commercial
brick masonry alone. The significant increase in efficiency provided by this SAM
system will make brick masonry more affordable. This could potentially lead to
growth of the brick industry, resulting in many environmental and customer
benefits such as energy and resource conservation. Through commercialization of
the world's first robotic Semi-Automated masonry system, this project will help
to expand the capability of an industry and revitalize the masonry trade.