* 1330462
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Within- and Cross-language Ambiguity on Word Learning and Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Natasha Tokowicz, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 17,558.00

The majority of people in the world are bilingual, which gives importance to our
ability to understand how bilinguals and language learners process semantically-
ambiguous words both within and across languages. Cross-language translation
ambiguity occurs when a word in one language has more than one translation in
another language. Previous research indicates that within- and cross-language
ambiguity both affect the learning and processing of words in the first language
(L1) and in the second language (L2). However, little research has explored how
the similarity in meaning between ambiguous words' meanings affects the
acquisition and processing of semantically-ambiguous words and meanings in L1
and L2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Tokowicz, Chelsea
Eddington will examine these issues in three event related potential/behavioral
experiments. Experiment 1 will examine how semantic similarity impacts the
learning of novel meanings for previously-known unambiguous word forms. Memory
and semantic priming tasks will test how semantic similarity between the words'
novel and old meanings affects the learning and processing of these words.
Experiment 2 will examine how semantic similarity of L2 (German) vocabulary
affects the learning and processing of these words using vocabulary tests and a
semantic relatedness task. Experiment 3 will examine how learners of German
extend meanings from ambiguous English words to German vocabulary words by
teaching participants only one translation that corresponds to one meaning of
semantically-ambiguous words. Learners' semantic processing of the words will be
assessed using a translation-recognition task. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this study will provide a better understanding of how monolinguals and L2
learners process and learn semantically-ambiguous words, and will inform models
of monolingual and bilingual semantic memory. The project will also support the
scientific training of a promising linguistic scholar.