* 1330019
* Poising of RNA Polymerase II: Features and Functions
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Laurie Stargell, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2018
* USD 542,199.00

Intellectual Merit. The initial discovery of the occupancy of RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) at certain genes prior to their transcriptional activation occurred
over a quarter century ago in Drosophila. Due to recent advances in whole genome
analyses, occupancy of RNAPII in an inactive state can be detected in organisms
across the evolutionary spectrum and at diverse sets of genes. The goal of this
project is to investigate post-recruitment mechanisms of gene regulation by
focusing on poised RNAPII in yeast and the response to oxidative stress as the
regulatory system. These studies take full advantage of the available approaches
(genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, cell biology, genomics), and are
amenable to researchers at a variety of levels (graduate, undergraduate and
elementary school students). Thus, the transcriptional response to oxidative
stress will be investigated with a focus on the pre-bound and poised RNAPII
complex by testing two overarching hypotheses: 1) Poised promoters share common
features that are distinct from recruitment-regulated promoters; and 2) Poised
promoters offer functional advantage(s) for the regulation of gene expression.
Since post-recruitment regulation is widespread in humans and other organisms,
these findings will significantly impact the field of gene expression with
exceptional potential to alter our overall views. Thus, these studies are
extremely timely and highly significant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
The project has broad impact in at least four ways. First, the studies offer
suitable projects for undergraduate trainees, who may have time constraints as
well as limited laboratory experience. Second, studies with higher technical and
time demands provide outstanding cross-training experiences for graduate
students in a number of different disciplines (genetics, genomics, cell and
molecular biology). These techniques are highly versatile. Trainees will utilize
these techniques in the future if they choose to investigate other critical
genetic mechanisms (DNA repair, replication, recombination, RNA metabolism,
epigenetics, etc.). Third, to propagate the tradition of outreach, undergraduate
and graduate students will be involved in taking gene expression studies into
elementary school classrooms. As part of a previously funded NSF project, fifth
graders and their teachers helped to develop a novel outreach program called
'Biochemistry is Elementary'. This innovative program has eight separate 1 hour
sessions involving hands-on activities designed to explore basic concepts of
scientific reasoning involving biochemistry and yeast genetics. Due to the
inexpensive and biologically safe reagents and the detailed workbooks created
during the project, many scientists could offer something similar to their local
community if they received training on the program. As such, this program will
be expanded to include an interactive website. Finally, results from this
project will be published in broad based scientific journals, and presented at
local and international meetings. Taken together, this project directly supports
the mission of the NSF to advance discovery and understanding, while promoting
teaching, training and learning.