* 1330901
* SBIR Phase II:  Adaptive Mobile Applications for Beginning Early Reading Instruction, Progress Monitoring, and Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Alan Hofmeister, Academic Success For All Learners
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 755,000.00

The innovation combines mobile technologies becoming more widely used in
schools, an evidence-based beginning reading program with a long history of R&D
and widespread use in many settings, ongoing student progress monitoring and
assessment with results and instructional recommendations delivered in real
time, and instructional supports that assist teachers, paraprofessionals,
tutors, and parents in implementing effective, research-based teaching
strategies to efficiently help children learn to read. While substantial
evidence supports computer use in education, most software used for reading
provides only targeted skills practice and is "non-instructional". The beginning
reading curricula with student assessment and monitoring mobile applications are
innovative because they (a) include a complete evidence-based reading curricula
that is well-aligned with research-based teaching and learning strategies and
common core reading standards; (b) incorporate regular assessment to promote
mastery of reading skills; (c) adapt based on student responses and assessment
data to best meet students' needs; (d) include on-demand assistance to
instructors to effectively implement the program; (e) provide a simple yet
elegant interface that incorporates universal design features and promotes
effective use of technology for teaching; and (f) remain a cost-effective
alternative for efficiently teaching beginning reading skills.

The broader/commercial impact of beginning reading curricula with student
assessment and monitoring mobile applications is based on a demonstrated ability
to change reading outcomes. Many students are at high risk for reading failure
and need effective intervention in early grades. The Nation's Report Card
indicates 67% of fourth graders have only partial mastery of reading skills and
are struggling readers. Substantial evidence shows struggling readers are more
likely to drop out before graduating, become incarcerated, and experience
lifelong economic loss leading to poorer health, family, and social outcomes.
Additionally, research shows that early literacy skills predict later math and
science outcomes which are crucial for STEM participation. Societal implications
are clear: early reading success promotes better outcomes throughout lives,
while reading failure is costly to individuals and society. Yet, changing
reading trajectories for struggling readers is challenging, pointing to a strong
need for high-quality, intensive early reading instruction that incorporates
research-based teaching and learning strategies. The beginning reading curricula
with student assessment and monitoring mobile applications have clear
educational and societal significance. They are cost effective, evidence-based,
and provide innovative, adaptive, flexible and accessible mobile applications
that parents and school staff can use to efficiently teach early reading skills.