* 1330836
* RUI: Connecting Microtubule Mechanical and Structural Properties using a Novel Millimeter-length Gliding Assay
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Douglas Martin, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Most animal and plant cells contain a network of
small, tube-like structures, aptly named microtubules, that are involved in a
variety of cell functions, including organization of cell components, transport
within cells, and cell division. While microtubules in most cells have the same
diameter (approximately 25 nm), some specialized cell types contain microtubules
with different diameters. Cells implicated in mechanosensation in C. elegans,
for example, regulate microtubule diameters to be 40% larger than microtubules
in other cells in the same organism. One functional property of microtubules is
their stiffness or rigidity. Physical theory predicts that large diameter
microtubules should be substantially more rigid than small diameter
microtubules. This research seeks to understand whether the mechanical
properties (stiffness or rigidity) of microtubules with different diameters are
significant enough to play a role in different biological functions. In
particular, this work will measure the rigidity and diameter of single
microtubules with very high precision to determine whether mechanical
differences between microtubules with different diameters outweigh mechanical
variations of microtubules with the same diameter. If so, the increased rigidity
of large diameter microtubules is a candidate for biological function; if not,
the heterogeneity of microtubule rigidities suggests that microtubule diameter
is regulated for a non-mechanical purpose. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
involves development of new light microscopy tools capable of following single
molecules with nanometer precision as these molecules move through millimeter
distances. While these tools will be developed to address the question of
microtubule rigidity, they have applications beyond this work, potentially
including long-distance cell motility and intracellular transport.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide research
experiences, scientific authorship, and presentation opportunities for
undergraduates over three years, both during the summer and academic year.
Students from the physical sciences and life sciences will work together, with
an eye to developing a disseminatable model of interdisciplinary research at the
undergraduate level. Because of Lawrence University's increasing minority
enrollment (153% increase since 2000) and PI's record of mentoring women
students, this research will positively impact the engagement of
underrepresented groups in the PhD pipeline. The experimental apparatus
developed will also be used to recruit promising high school students to the LU
Physics and Biochemistry programs.