* 1330140
* SBIR Phase II:  Targeted Nanoparticle Delivery Agent for Treatment of Adult Leukemia
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Jon Nagy, NanoValent Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 510,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop targeted
nanoparticle delivery systems capable of delivering conventional cytotoxics
preferentially to tumor cells. While therapeutic nanoparticles have been
introduced into clinical practice (Abraxane(TM) and Doxil(TM)) and others are in
development, none have been developed that show tumor target specificity (as
opposed to increased affinity) or deliver multiple therapeutic agents (whether
conventional cytotoxic or targeted agents). The hypothesizias underlying this
project is that targeted delivery of cancer therapy via highly modular and
synthetically robust nanoparticles can improve therapeutic response while
minimizing systemic toxic effects of therapy for virtually any cancer. In the
Phase I study, the innovation of this approach was demonstrated by dramatically
reducing the tumor burden in a transgenic mouse model of adult leukemia with our
proprietary nanoparticle agents. The technical objectives in this Phase II
proposal are designed to refine and optimize the nanoparticle formulation to
treat adult leukemia. This Phase II proposal will enable the completion a
critical phase of the preclinical studies for the nanoparticle delivery vehicle
to anticipate applying for IND status for this new drug with the FDA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project offers a great opportunity to add value to nanomaterials. The broader
market for nanotech-enabled drug-delivery therapeutics was just over $1 billion
in 2010 and is projected to mushroom to $136 billion by the year 2021, with a
compound annual growth rate (CAGR) estimated at 49.96% over the same period.
Within the U.S. alone, there are an estimated 274,930 people living with
leukemia. In 2011, it is estimated that 44,600 people (25,320 men and 19,280
women) were diagnosed with leukemia, including 10 times as many adults as
children and adolescents. Also in 2011, 21,780 of those already afflicted with
leukemia were expected to die from the disease. The American Cancer Society
projects even higher figures for 2012, estimating that 47,150 people in the U.S.
will be diagnosed with leukemia and that approximately 23,540 patients will die
from it. The nanoparticle delivery system proposed here is well positioned to
advance the drug delivery field on a scientific level by demonstrating efficient
delivery of therapeutics to leukemia cells. Combined with effective tumor
delivery this technology could facilitate highly effective, ?personalized?
cancer therapy that is not currently possible with routine systemic therapy.