* 1330971
* SBIR Phase II:  Assistive Control System Harnessing Vestigial Neuromuscular Biosignals
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Sandy Heck, Reach Bionics
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2017
* USD 899,929.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will continue
the work started in the Phase I project to fully explore the extent to which
signals from the vestigial muscles around the ears can be repurposed as a new
human ability. Higher primates have not needed these muscles for millions of
years, yet they exist in nearly everyone and are controlled by nerves that come
directly from the brainstem, thereby bypassing the spinal to cord to remain
functional after even the highest spinal cord injuries. This project involves
the development of an optimized headset controller device, along with the
testing and evaluation of this new control modality in a variety of real-world
applications that would be useful for both paralyzed and able-bodied
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project will be significant in the assistive technology space.
Limitations of mobility and interpersonal interaction are primary factors
determining functional independence and quality of life in people with physical
disabilities, yet existing assistive devices remain cumbersome and usurp the
individual's few remaining still-functioning motor systems. This innovation in
assistive technology could bring a new controller to those with paralysis or
limb loss, and has the potential to change how anyone interfaces with their
environment. Users would, in essence, develop a new mode of command output that
can be operated intuitively, invisibly, and wirelessly.