* 1330801
* EXTREEMS-QED: LABORATORY FOR INTERDISCIPLINARY STATISTICAL ANALYSIS AND MATHEMATICS LEARNING THROUGH QUANTITATIVE EXPLORATION OF DATA (LISA-QED)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2018
* Xing Yang, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 02/28/2018
* USD 719,992.00

The focus of the project is on the design of efficient pedagogical pathways to
utilizing big data to educate the next generation of mathematics and statistics
undergraduates to confront new challenges in computational and data-enabled
science and engineering (CDS&amp;E). The main goals are to 1) build a culture of
training the next generation of mathematics and statistics undergraduate majors
to become interdisciplinary collaborators and promote the value of mathematical
and statistical thinking in advancing CDS&amp;E and 2) develop a new pedagogical
approach to teaching mathematics and statistics courses that complements
lecturing with experimentation where students engage in hands-on activities with
cyberinfrastructure (CI) enabling technologies. The project is interdisciplinary
and integrates research, education, training, and faculty professional
development/outreach components that subtly lead to the establishment and
sustainability of a CI resource center. The center coordinates the CI resource
needs and access to supercomputing centers and CDS&amp;E collaborators for the
research community at Jackson State University (JSU). The research component
focuses on the quantitative exploration of large data sets from climate, weather
and genomic acquired remotely through CI enabling technologies to explain the
known mathematical and statistical theories and to develop new algebraic and
statistical structures and theories. The main objectives are to: 1) Engage 28
undergraduate students majoring in mathematics or statistics, biology, and
meteorology in a year-long collaborative CDS&amp;E research for a minimum of two
years under the supervision of an interdisciplinary team of faculty mentors; and
2) Guide participating students to place in summer undergraduate research in
CDS&amp;E. The educational and training component focuses on developing a BS in
statistics and new pedagogical approaches to teaching mathematics and
statistics. The teaching combines lecturing with lab activities where concepts
learned in class are reinforced with CI lab activities connecting specific
mathematical and statistical concepts to genomic and meteorological
applications. The specific objectives are to 1) revise the course contents for
abstract and linear algebra, set theory and logic, modern geometry, ordinary
differential equations and mathematical modeling to integrate CDS&amp;E in
specific course topics for CI data and visualization activities; 2) develop a
curriculum for the Bachelor of Science degree in statistics; and 3) create a
LISA-QED lab equipped with the OptiPortal and associated technologies for local
and distant collaboration, access to NOAA resources and Extreme Science and
Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) systems to enhance CDS&amp;E
activities. The faculty professional development and outreach components focus
on developing mathematics faculty expertise in CDS&amp;E and creating awareness.
The specific objectives are to 1) Organize a series of Summer, Fall, and Spring
CDS&amp;E training workshops on bioinformatics, system biology, meteorology,
cyberlearning-XSEDE systems, and OptiPortal with follow ups sessions for
mathematics and other faculty members at JSU; 2) Organize CI Days events each
year to provide opportunities for faculty and students to share information
about CI resources and their use in research, present research posters, and
OptiPortal demonstrations; 3) Invite at least 30 mathematics faculty from six
HBCUs, K-12 and junior colleges to CI Days events; and 4) sponsor at least two
mathematics faculty and students on field trips to High-End Computing (HEC)
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities are structured to serve as a forum
for learning, discussion and exchange of information on the CDS&amp;E driven
undergraduate mathematics/statistics education guided by a combination of
lecturing and hands-on activities in a CI lab. The CDS&amp;E-based project
modules approach to teaching mathematics and statistics emphasize creative and
original applications in the use of CI technologies for visual analytic and
collaboration. The success of it requires a sound educational background of both
the faculty and the mathematics or statistics majors in the relevant biology,
computer programming, and meteorology disciplines. The engagement of 28
students, mostly minorities, through research, faculty as mentors, and open CI
Days events broadens both the CDS&amp;E education and expanded awareness. The
collaboration with Supercomputing Centers and HEC sites to gain access to
collaborators of CDS&amp;E will expose more students and faculty to CDS&amp;E
and contribute to increase in research productivity. Both faculty and students
will present their research at professional meetings. The structure of LISA-QED
and the BS in statistics will lead to significant curricula changes in both
qualitative and quantitative academic disciplines.