* 1330150
* Dynamics and Function of Proteins by NMR and Computation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Rafael Bruschweiler, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/2013
* USD 685,063.00

Detailed information about protein structure and dynamics at an atomic level is
of fundamental importance for understanding protein stability, interactions, and
function. The overall goals of this project are the development of new methods
for a comprehensive description of complex dynamics of proteins by combining NMR
spectroscopy with advanced computer simulations and the application of these
methods to biologically important molecular systems. To achieve these
objectives, NMR chemical shifts of all amino acid side-chains will be
quantitatively parametrized in terms of their structure and environment using
databank information and molecular dynamics trajectories into the microsecond
range. They will permit the rigorous assessment of the quality of protein
ensembles such as ones generated by long molecular dynamics trajectories. These
tools together with experimental NMR will be applied for the improvement of the
accuracy of low-resolution protein structures and for the characterization of
allosteric regulation and high-plasticity ligand binding. The project will
produce new algorithms, web servers, and software for the increasingly accurate
and realistic characterization of proteins in their native environment. The
combination of NMR spectrosccopy with high-performance computation will be
applicable to a wide range of biomolecular systems. These tools will be made
available to the structural biology, biophysics, and biomolecular NMR
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide interdisciplinary
training and research opportunities for undergraduate students in FSU's "Honors
in the Major program", graduate students, and postdocs at the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Florida State University (FSU), at the Institute
of Molecular Biophysics at FSU, and at the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory (NHMFL), with significant numbers of students from demographically
underrepresented groups. Research methods and results will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate courses on biophysics and biomolecular spectroscopy.
Selected examples of this research will be presented at the annual Open House at
the NHMFL, which attracts a broad cross section of the population of North
Florida and its vicinity, helping to increase scientific literacy of the public.
An assistant professor at Bethune-Cookman University (BCU), a historically black
college in Florida, will be provided space and resources to spend each summer in
the PI's lab, which will count toward his professional development activities.
He will bring minority undergraduate students with him from BCU to carry out
research on NMR parameter calculations and analysis.