* 1330856
* Structural Biochemistry of the UVR8 Photoreceptor Signaling Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Elizabeth Getzoff, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 540,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Plants must respond to environmental cues like light to
survive and flourish. Light sensors enable plants to react to sunlight by
triggering photosynthesis, UV sunscreen protection, and appropriate light-
activated growth and development (photomorphogenesis). The plant UVR8 UV-B
photoreceptive system initiates stress responses to promote survival using a
novel tryptophan pyramid as the intrinsic chromophore, then couples signaling
interactions to trigger massive gene expression changes. This light-activated
system, investigated by the application of state-of-the-art biophysical
techniques and a transdisciplinary approach will enable a mechanistic
understanding of a prototypic biological response pathway. Building on the first
crystallographic and solution structures of UVR8 determined in the Getzoff lab,
this research will integrate structural biology expertise in X-ray
crystallography and solution scattering; building of comprehensive biochemical
models; spectroscopy to assay light-activated mechanisms and phenotypes; and
strategic cross-disciplinary collaborations with plant biologists to inform and
be informed by molecular genetics in plants. The results will provide plant
biologists with a molecular-level appreciation of photomorphogenesis.
Characterization of UVR8 partners will provide information on structure,
interactions and activities of the beta-propeller WD40 domain, one of the top-
ten most abundant folds in eukaryotic genomes. The resulting mechanistic
understanding of how plants respond to sunlight provides insights into how crops
will react to climate change and to increased radiation resulting from depletion
of atmospheric ozone.

Broader Impacts: This project will bring science into the classroom by
providing genuine research experience to high school students. Learning
molecular biology techniques in their own lab, these students participate by
making structure-based mutants; growing protein crystals and seeing tangible
outcomes relevant to environmental problems. Thus, students actively apply the
scientific method and learn how to test biological hypotheses experimentally.
This project will facilitate continued PI involvement in the interdisciplinary
graduate program and support participation of underrepresented groups in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics. In the lab, students and post-
doctoral fellows will be trained in contributing to interdisciplinary,
international collaborations and mentoring junior interns in projects involving
the UVR8 plant photoresponse system.