* 1330205
* Collaborative Research:  Multiscale molecular simulations of protein-mediated bilayer fusion
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Cameron Abrams, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2018
* USD 350,852.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT Perhaps the most important structure for cellular life as we
know it is the lipid bilayer. Lipid molecules, consisting of a water-soluble
"head" and water-insoluble "tails", spontaneously assemble into sandwich-like
bilayer membranes, which surround all living cells and further compartmentalize
the cellular interiors of all eukaryotic organisms the domain of life to which
plants, fungi, animals, and humans belong. The network of membranes in a typical
eukaryotic cell is very complex and highly dynamic: small compartments bud off
from certain membranes like bubbles, carrying cargo from one part of the cell to
another, where they can fuse with yet other membranes, including the outer
membrane of the cell. Bilayer fusion is therefore a ubiquitous biological
process, tightly linked to the transport of material and information, and
therefore it is exquisitely controlled by several classes of membrane-associated
proteins. These proteins clearly perform work on the fusing membranes, but the
intricate sequence of geometric and topological shape transformations they
induce on the molecular scale are impossible to observe directly in experiment.
In contrast, molecular simulation offers a window onto these details, but until
now the relevant length- and time-scales have proven too big to observe even a
single fusion event for a realistic system size. This project establishes a
collaboration between two investigators with the aim to meet this challenge by
combining recent advances in multiscale coarse-grained modeling with enhanced-
sampling molecular simulation. Since this strategy allows incorporating
important chemical detail while simultaneously representing large-scale membrane
deformations, the investigators will be able to elucidate how molecular-level
mechanisms drive fusion events across the relevant physiological length- and
time-scales. The project proceeds through three phases, namely: (i) modeling the
fusion of pristine bilayers with enhanced sampling, (ii) development of coarse-
grained models of model fusogenic proteins, the SNARE system, and (iii)
combining these two steps into a single methodology. The project will pursue
many topics of energetic, morphological, and mechanistic relevance, in
particular questions revolving around the so-called hemifusion intermediate
state, for which the two outer bilayer leaflets have already fused but a
membrane formed by the two inner leaflets still separates the two compartments.

BROADER IMPACTS This project will impact many topics in the biological sciences
due to the central importance of bilayer fusion in a variety of biological
processes, including intracellular trafficking, viral entry, neurotransmitter
release, fertilization, and more. Beyond the specific questions under study, the
computational approach envisioned here takes early steps towards efficient
simulation of more complicated multiple-protein/multiple-membrane phenomena and
will therefore benefit future studies of a wider class of molecular biological
topics. To broaden applicability of the research outcomes, the simulation
framework developed in this project will be made freely available with tutorials
that will support efficient learning and facilitate the transformation of
existing techniques and modules towards novel applications. This project
establishes cross-disciplinary exchange between engineering and (bio)physics,
fostering a stimulating interdisciplinary environment for the academic growth of
students mentored in this project. It will further the transfer of theoretical
and computational methodologies from engineering and physics into the life
sciences and their increasingly quantitative set of problems. The ubiquity of
bilayer fusion and its connection to a wide class of fascinating themes in
biological physics, which is in itself an intriguing cross-disciplinary subject,
also present excellent opportunities for the expertise developed in this project
to feed outreach specifically tailored towards groups underrepresented in STEM
fields for instance through classroom material, lecture demonstrations, and
public talks and both investigators will implement such activities, building on
both their experience and existing successful programs at their respective
institutions.