* 1330966
* SBIR Phase II:  Electrostatic Normal Force Modulation for Haptic Touch Screens
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Gregory Topel, Tangible Haptics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,358,869.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance the
development of electrostatic surface haptics as a means of providing tactile
feedback for touchscreens. In electrostatic surface haptics, a user's finger(s)
are selectively pulled down to a glass surface by an electrostatic potential,
just as a capacitor's plates are attracted to one another. The enhanced normal
force leads to an enhanced frictional force when the fingers are moved across
the surface. By modulating the electrostatic force in response to finger
position and time, a great variety of compelling haptic percepts can be created.
In previous work, low voltage techniques, thin hard high dielectric coatings, a
way of avoiding the necessity of grounding the user, patterns of transparent
conductor that allow different fingers to experience different sensations, and
some of the software controls, were developed. In Phase II, methods of finger
position sensing that are fully compatible with haptic actuation will be
developed. The new methods also offer the possibility of discriminating multi-
touch fingers according to same or opposite hand, or the fingers of a second
person on the same touchscreen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project stems from enriched communication
with touchscreen devices. Already touchscreens are of immense commercial
importance. The worldwide market for touchscreen modules grew three-fold from
2009 to 2011 with smartphones, tablet computers, and automotive display
applications leading the charge. Consumers have been attracted to the
versatility of touchscreens as input devices, yet the absence of haptic feedback
has limited accessibility for low-vision populations, exacerbated safety
concerns in applications such as driving, and prohibited the aesthetics of touch
from being fully developed. Surface haptics technology has the potential to
address all of these weaknesses. It can be used to make user interface elements
operable by touch alone, to create new interaction metaphors, and to enhance the
overall user experience. By addressing known and latent needs in the
marketplace, surface haptics will foster new industrial growth.