* 1330905
* Simultaneous Integration of Combinatorial Histone Marks by the Atypical PHD-finger Protein EDM2 in Arabidopsis Thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Thomas Eulgem, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* william eggleston
* 02/29/2016
* USD 337,046.00

While the role of DNA in life processes is generally limited to the storage of
genetic information, proteins have many structural roles and control nearly all
biochemical processes in cells. Eukaryotic cells contain certain types of
proteins, termed histones, which physically associate with DNA. Originally
histones were found to be critical for the organized compaction of DNA that
enables the DNA to fit into the nuclei of eukaryotic cells and to be faithfully
transmitted (after duplication) to each of both daughter cells after cell
divisions. During the past decade, a new type of biological code critical for
the proper function of genes has emerged. This so-called histone or epigenetic
code is manifested in certain chemical modifications of DNA and DNA-associated
histone proteins. In contrast to the DNA code, which provides instructions for
the synthesis of proteins, the histone code defines the activity states of genes
and determines to what extent their genetic information is utilized. Numerous
types of chemical modifications that can mark histone proteins at defined
positions within their amino acid sequences have been identified. In some cases
defined histone marks have been associated with enhanced or suppressed activity
of genes. For example, the addition of an acetyl-tag to the 4th amino acid (a
lysine) of the histone type H3 is often found in highly active genes, while
methyl-tags at amino acid 9 (also a lysine) of H3 has been associated with
suppressed genetic activity. It is also well established that certain proteins
can ?read? this histone code and bind to these defined marks. When recruited to
defined DNA regions by docking to their cognate histone marks, such histone
binding proteins can alter activity levels of their respective target genes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit-&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
characterization of a new type of histone binding protein in Arabidopsis plants.
The EDM2 protein, which was originally identified as a critical regulator of
plant immune responses, was found by the PI?s laboratory to specifically bind to
the histone H3 protein bearing certain combinations of three different chemical
marks. Responsible for this unusual property is a part of EDM2 related to the
known-PHD finger domain. While conventional PHD-finger domains have been found
previously to dock to either single or double histone marks, it is remarkable
that the atypical PHD-finger domain of EDM2 appears to be unable to bind to
single or double marks, but is only able to ?read? triple histone modifications.
This novel mode of context-dependent histone binding behavior points to the
existence of an additional, so far unknown, layer of the histone code, which is
based on the combination of defined single marks. The PI proposes to perform a
detailed analysis of histone-binding characteristics of the EDM2-type PHD finger
domain. Besides biochemical experiments to understand how this type of ?histone
reader? module distinguishes between different combinations of histone marks,
studies will also be performed to identify which plant genes bear such ?higher-
level of histone code words? that can be read by EDM2. If successful, this study
will substantially advance our basic understanding of epigenetics, which is the
biological discipline focused on the function of histone marks and chemical
modifications of DNA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts-&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to its scientific significance, this project will have broader societal
impacts. An important component of the proposed project is an involvement of
undergraduate students, mainly from minority groups. The project will be linked
to classes on plant biochemistry, biotechnology and molecular biology taught by
the PI and the ongoing NSF-REU Plant Cell Biology program within the Center for
Plant Cell Biology at UC-Riverside. In addition, the proposed project will
provide a strong platform for training of a postdoctoral scholar and a graduate
student and prepare them for careers as senior researchers in academia or
industry. The goals of the America COMPETES Act of 2007 that emphasize the
importance of comprehensive professional training and awareness of the
responsible and ethical conduct of research are a top priority of this project.
By regulating an immune receptor gene, EDM2 has an important role in mediating
resistance of plants against diseases. Therefore, the significance of this study
goes beyond its impact on basic epigenetics and will likely benefit society by
allowing new solutions in crop disease protection.