* 1330036
* CPS: Breakthrough: Collaborative Research: Cyber-Physical Manipulation (CPM): Locating, Manipulating, and Retrieving Large Objects with Large Populations of Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Mac Schwager, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2016
* USD 236,917.00

This project develops the theory and technology for a new frontier in cyber-
physical systems: cyber-physical manipulation. The goal of cyber-physical
manipulation is to enable groups of hundreds or thousands of individual robotic
agents to collaboratively explore an environment, manipulate objects in that
environment, and transport those objects to desired locations. The project
embraces realistic assumptions about the communication, computation, and sensing
capabilities of simple individual robots, leading to algorithmic solutions that
intrinsically leverage population size in favor of complex agents. Cyber-
physical solutions for locating, grasping, and characterizing objects require
tools based on distributed computational geometry, while the tasks of planning a
path, initiating motion, and controlling the trajectory require tools from
decentralized control and consensus. The project lays the theoretical and
algorithmic foundations of cyber-physical manipulation, and proves the
feasibility of the concept experimentally in hardware tests with up to 100
individual robots. The project uses the problem of manipulation as a stage on
which to explore the deeper cyber-physical issue of information asymmetry; the
difference in the state of the world as perceived by different agents in the
system due to differences in their history of observations, and limitations in
their communication capabilities.

The object retrieval problem studied in this project is an elemental building
block for enabling more complex cyber-physical manipulation tasks. It provides
crucial algorithmic components for numerous applications of broad societal
benefit, including automated construction (in which hundreds or thousands of
robots fabricate large, complex structures), autonomous emergency response (in
which large teams of robots find and retrieve incapacitated human survivors
after a disaster), and automated environmental cleanup (in which robots secure a
dangerous environment by removing debris or hazardous substances). Furthermore,
distributed algorithms for multi-agent systems are of broad scientific relevance
beyond the realm of cyberphysical systems. The natural world is, in its
algorithmic essence, decentralized at many levels. Hence, any advancement in the
understanding of how groups of individual agents collaborate to accomplish a
coherent task will have broad scientific ramifications. The project has a robust
educational and outreach program. One aspect is a hands-on curriculum for
robotics outreach activities, called the 'Cyber-Physical Manipulation Lab.'
Using a custom-designed robot platform, this educational module introduces the
theory and practice of cyber-physical systems to young students to attract them
to STEM subject areas at an early age. Results of the project are also
incorporated into several graduate and undergraduate level courses at Rice
University and Boston University.