* 1330900
* SBIR Phase II:  Analytical Modeling and Performance Prediction of Remanufactured Gearbox Components
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Raja Pulikollu, Sentient Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2017
* USD 812,500.00

The Innovation of this Phase II project is developing physics-based analytical
models to analyze gearbox components for safety, longevity, reliability and cost
by predicting (1) New component performance, and optimal time-to-remanufacture,
(2) Qualification of used components for remanufacturing process, and (3)
Predicting the remanufactured component performance. Current industry approach
is to design, manufacture, operate, and retire assets based on traditional
methods, which typically rely on standards-based estimates, historical
data/domain experience, physical examination, testing, monitoring, and
inspection. This process is extremely time and resource intensive. Further, this
process often does not consider the opportunity to use remanufacturing processes
to extend/enhance product performance. Sentient technology will address these
issues and fulfill the industry requirements. Phase II will expand the Phase I
technology to include additional gearbox materials, damage modes and
remanufacturing processes in a more comprehensive design and analysis framework
capable of predicting optimal time-to-remanufacture and optimizing refurbishing
operations to extend the useful life of components. This SBIR technology reduces
physical testing using virtual testing, and will assist in remanufacturing of
high value, high demand rotorcraft, automotive and wind turbine gearbox
components. Hence, it decreases the energy, material resources, and costs
associated with manufacturing, and ensures that the product performance is
maintained/improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of the
SBIR technology is within aerospace, energy, and transportation industries on
high dollar assets that rely on the reliable function of highly engineered (and
thus expensive) gearboxes. Our new Advanced Manufacturing partnership based
application provides the US manufacturing supply chain a first mover and a
sustainable competitive advantage greater than the 6% offshore labor rate
advantage. This advantage comes through reuse of high value-added assets
optimized for maximum lifetime use, coupled with decreased time and costs
associated with traditional physical testing and analysis methods. This is
possible based on the high-level of detail included in physics-based models,
which (conceptually) decode material information at the microstructure level
just as the Human Genome Project decodes genetic information at the DNA level.
Our innovation enables the customer to rapidly, cost effectively, and accurately
predict a product?s lifecycle (design, manufacture, operation, degradation,
maintenance, repair/remanufacture, and retirement) at the material, component,
and assembly/system scales. We foresee a future opportunity due to the fact that
our innovation developed under this NSF grant will give us a competitive
advantage of lower costs to provide the software and service. Our cost to deploy
the technology is 10X lower than traditional companies in this space.