* 1330949
* SBIR Phase II:  Scratch and Abrasion Resistant Superhydrophobic Polymer Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2016
* Elizabeth Kujan, ARL Designs
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2016
* USD 939,993.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will leverage
the advances we&lt;br/&gt;made in fabricating flexible polymer surfaces that
shed water at low tilt angles while remaining&lt;br/&gt;superhydrophobic after
abrasion. In Phase I we developed a model which correlated
surface&lt;br/&gt;morphology with mechanical robustness. In Phase II we will
apply this model to the&lt;br/&gt;development of a processes compatible with
high speed, large-scale fabrication techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The roofing industry
seeks material that is self-cleaning, anti-fouling and is highly resistant
to&lt;br/&gt;weather events over time. A durable, superhydrophobic polymeric
roof membrane will meet&lt;br/&gt;this market need. Commercial success depends
on (1) qualifying production speeds up to 100&lt;br/&gt;feet/min, (2) proving
compliance to current product requirements and (3) showing value-
add.&lt;br/&gt;Phase II studies will elucidate the mechanisms that contribute to
the stability of the surfaces&lt;br/&gt;when exposed to UV light, allowing us to
improve weatherability. Having demonstrated the&lt;br/&gt;self-cleaning
properties of our polymer surfaces in Phase I, we will focus on anti-
fouling&lt;br/&gt;properties in Phase II (i.e. low bacterial adhesion and
reduced algae growth.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this SBIR Phase II project will be twofold. Foremost, a direct impact
will&lt;br/&gt;be revenue and job growth in the US manufacturing sector.
Secondarily, the technology will&lt;br/&gt;support federal policy goals on
energy and the environment. Approximately $40 billion is
spent&lt;br/&gt;annually in the US to air condition buildings. DOE funded
studies show that in warm climates,&lt;br/&gt;substituting a cool roof for a
conventional roof can reduce carbon emissions which drive&lt;br/&gt;climate
change. Cool roofs also relieve strain on the electrical grid by reducing peak
power&lt;br/&gt;demand. Widespread use of cool roofs can improve air quality,
hence human health, by&lt;br/&gt;slowing the formation of smog. Superhydrophobic
polymer membranes fabricated using&lt;br/&gt;technology developed in this
proposal will help keep roofs clean and better able to reflect
heat.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, coating of outdoor infrastructure equipment, such
as wind turbine blades and offshore&lt;br/&gt;energy exploration platforms, will
enable the safe operation of such facilities during icing&lt;br/&gt;conditions
due to the ability of the superhydrophobic surface to prevent ice accretion.
Field&lt;br/&gt;tests are underway. Food handling equipment will benefit from
reduced adhesion of bacteria &lt;br/&gt;to surfaces, thus improving food safety.