* 1330988
* Food Security and Parenting Practice in the Urban U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Jennifer Patico, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2017
* USD 90,743.00

Jennifer Patico of the Georgia State University will investigate how debates
about food security unfold in and across households in urban communities. Social
scientists agree that contemporary Americans tend to imbue both eating and
child-rearing with strong moral meanings. At the same time, they observe the
"time bind" faced by double-earner families, whereby parents balance ever-
lengthening professional work days with the labor of housekeeping and child-
raising. The charged issue of children's food provides a strategic opportunity
to examine standards for parental care and how these are negotiated under
conditions of material and/or temporal strain in the United States. Based in an
economically and racially diverse area of urban Atlanta, the study more
specifically investigates how parental and institutional concerns about
children's food might reinforce (or challenge) social inequalities by providing
an arena in which the experiences, knowledge and values of different groups are
communicated and/or evaluated. In-depth interviews will be held with adults from
a total of sixty households that reflect the economic diversity of a local
elementary and middle school. Other ethnographic methods include the observation
of food-related practices within a select sample of individual households.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will illuminate how measures intended to
improve the health of children - such as public service announcements or
guidelines for "healthy" school snacks - are perceived and managed by caretakers
and school employees. Further, it will show how these measures can have complex,
unintended effects on the ground. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Children's food has been
framed as an American "crisis" in recent years; it is a topic of active debate
in the mass media, in public health research, and at the community level. These
data will be of critical importance to public health professionals, school
administrators, parent activists, community organizers and others who seek to
mobilize concern around children's nutrition and find effective ways to shape
community initiatives.