* 1330954
* SBIR Phase II:  GigaShield USB Security
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Charles Herder, Gigashield Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,158,945.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address the
rapidly growing threats to endpoint security from attacks and data loss over
USB. At present, virtually all USB security measures are located as software on
the host or as a secured physical device. Neither of these approaches is truly
capable of addressing the vulnerability as a whole - software solutions can be
bypassed and a physical peripheral device cannot secure the data that is
transmitted on the bus. The proposed technology is located next to the host, so
it is capable of securing the entire bus. Our specific technical objectives
include the construction of a security device capable of stopping representative
attacks in the USB Threat Model that are not solved by existing solutions. Such
a device would enable a disruptive improvement in the field of USB
cybersecurity. The anticipated results for proposed project will be the
development of the product for deployment to customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project would be a disruptive change
to USB security. USB security has become critical for many organizations with
secure networks, especially healthcare, financial, and defense institutions. The
number of data loss incidents over USB has exploded with the availability of
smart devices and tablets. USB attacks compromised Predator drones in 2011 using
USB drives, and the Military has implemented USB bans, degrading productivity
and increasing costs. Despite USB bans, attacks and data loss over USB continue.
The proposed device is capable of providing unprecedented levels of security to
USB and a framework to build future security infrastructure. To stimulate
continued innovations in security and mobile devices markets, we plan to open
our platform to the greater scientific and commercial community to develop the
next generation of algorithms to stop attacks and data loss over USB. Since our
device provides access to USB data with an API, it can enable students and
professionals to rapidly ramp up their understanding of USB without the need of
expensive hardware and proprietary software. Our device can be integrated inside
PCs and smart devices, which would impact the security of every computer, smart
device, networks and the ?cloud?.