* 1330784
* Mapping the hydrolase-oxygenase boundaries and range of catalytic capabilities in the HD-domain dinuclear metalloenzyme superfamily
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Joseph Bollinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 720,000.00

MIOX is the founding and, to date, only established member of the nascent mixed-
valent di-iron oxygenase (MVDO) sub-family. It uses a Fe2(II/III) cofactor to
activate O2 at the Fe(II) site and myo-inositol at the Fe(III) site for a C-C-
bond-cleaving, four-electron oxidation. A recent paper and our preliminary data
on the P-C-bond cleaving enzyme, PhnZ, strongly suggest it is the second example
of an MVDO, and our analysis of available sequences and structures suggests that
several other proteins belong to this class. The mapping of the
phosphohydrolase-MVDO boundaries in the HD-domain superfamily and
characterization of new MVDOs will facilitate proper functional assignment,
expand the known catalytic repertoire of this new class of oxygenase, and shed
light on Nature's evolution of radically divergent functions within a common
protein scaffold. The project will likely uncover fundamentally new reactions
that will expand the known catalytic repertoire of a novel class of oxygenase
that at present consists of just a single documented member. It will yield
insight into how Nature remodels a protein scaffold and its metallocofactor in
seemingly subtle ways to create markedly different catalytic activities. Thus
this project addresses two central challenges in molecular biosciences: (1)
functional assignment of the huge number of proteins predicted within the
terabases of available DNA sequence and (2) understanding the evolution of new
functions within a "superfamily" of proteins sharing a common architecture. It
will also provide outstanding training in activities ranging from bioinformatic
analysis, to analytical and protein biochemistry, to enzyme kinetics and
mechanism, to protein crystallography, to biological spectroscopy. The
scientific project will infuse the primary outreach activity, a
~120-participant, biennial training "workshop" in modern metallobiochemistry,
with new case studies illustrating important concepts, and efforts to extract
such concepts and develop new case studies will sharpen the scientific focus of
the trainees.