* 1330914
* Synthetic Biology of Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2020
* Jay Keasling, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 5,712,872.00

Intellectual merit: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast) is one of the most widely
used microorganisms for production of commodity chemicals and fuels, and
proteins. This research will develop genetic, computer aided design, and strain
engineering tools for yeast and will demonstrate their use in expressing multi-
component polyketide synthases for the production of important chemicals. The
choice to engineer yeast for polyketide synthesis is derived from the fact that
the most useful natural products are polyketides and the biosynthetic enzymes
involved can be engineered to produce a broad range of pharmaceuticals,
commodity and specialty chemicals, and fuels. The expression of functional
polyketide synthases and the production of the necessary precursors to supply
the biosynthetic machinery is a challenging problem that requires a better
biological host and the appropriate gene expression tools. The specific aims of
the project are to 1) develop generalized methods for the rapid modification of
the S. cerevisiae genome to create modified versions of yeast strains that are
capable of growing and/or surviving extreme conditions; 2) create a suite of
gene expression control devices and demonstrate their utility for producing
polyketide synthase complexes for the production of specific commodity
chemicals; 3) construct pathways for the synthesis of polyketide precursors; 4)
create libraries of polyketide synthases for production of diverse chemicals;
and 5) develop computer aided design (CAD) software that will enable the rapid
construction of yeasts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The tools
developed for the synthesis of polyketides will be broadly applicable for the
engineering of yeast to produce a variety of products as well as exploring
fundamental yeast biology. This translational research effort will bring state-
of-the-art synthetic biology advances to an industrially-relevant organism. The
major potential benefits to society will be replacement of existing, petroleum-
based polymer monomers with monomers derived from renewable resources;
production of novel monomers for new materials that cannot be made; biological
components for engineering yeast for scientific projects and applications; and
computer-aided design tools for biology. The investigators will use
relationships developed through the Synthetic Biology Engineering Research
Center to help small and large companies grow the bioeconomy. The investigators
will use the research findings to teach and train a cutting-edge workforce of
post-docs, graduate students, and undergraduate students in this new area of
research. The project will support underrepresented undergraduate students
through established REU programs at UC Berkeley and MIT, and underprivileged
high school students through a novel high school program developed by post-
doctoral fellows in SynBERC.