* 1330528
* The Bacterial Nucleotide Excision Repair Pathway: Structure and Mechanism
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* David Jeruzalmi, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2019
* USD 510,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Understanding the biochemical pathways associated with how
genes and genomes are inherited, and changed, remains an urgent priority. The
goal of this work is to gain structure-based understanding of one such pathway
in bacteria, e.g., nucleotide excision repair (NER) of DNA damage induced by
exposure to ultraviolet light. The first steps of bacterial NER are performed by
three proteins, UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC, which associate into several dynamic
multi-protein complexes as repair proceeds. The UvrA-UvrB ensemble scans the
genome, distinguishing lesion-containing damaged DNA from native, and, then,
cooperates with the UvrC nuclease and other factors to repair the damage. This
work will test novel hypotheses for three incompletely understood mechanisms of
NER: a) discrimination of native from damaged, b) ATP/ADP dynamics during NER,
and c) localization of UvrB to the lesion. This study takes a multi-disciplinary
approach, integrating structural, biochemical, single-molecule, and biophysical
strategies to understand relationships between the structure, function, and
dynamics of relevant macromolecules as the genome is scanned for lesions.
Structure-based analyses of genetic mechanisms during NER will provide deeper
insights into the connections between DNA repair, DNA replication, inheritance,
and transcription. More broadly, analysis of the relationship between shape-
based recognition of DNA, proposed by the PI as a mechanism for discriminating
damaged and native DNA, and protein conformational changes will contribute to a
comprehensive understanding of fundamental principles that underlie the way that
DNA is recognized by proteins in biological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: One of the central challenges for science
education is how to impart quantitative skills to younger colleagues. The PI
approaches this problem by using research on DNA repair, a fundamental
biological process, as a platform to teach such skills. This project builds on
the PI's past efforts at Harvard University, which now continue at City College
of New York. CCNY is a public Ph.D.-granting institution that attracts
undergraduate/doctoral students from diverse socioeconomic strata, and ethnic
and racial backgrounds. Towards advancing education in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the PI will teach two courses at CCNY, into
which the described research will be integrated, and which will impact ~100
undergraduate/doctoral students. In addition, in partnership with The Urban
Assembly, the PI will perform educational outreach in the New York Public School
system, which will include meetings with students (grades 6-12), and
collaborations with teachers on lesson plans. The science performed in the PI's
group is multi-disciplinary and involves close collaborations between several
research groups. The PI actively mentors post-docs, and, they, in turn, teach
and mentor junior colleagues. The results of the research will be published in
peer-reviewed journals. Research materials will be made available to the
scientific community in several ways, including depositions to the Protein Data
Bank.