* 1330249
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Charge-Charge Interactions in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* George Makhatadze, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,186,571.00

The major goal of this research project, jointly funded by Molecular Biophysics
in the Division of MCB and Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of
Physics, is to understand the role of charge-charge interactions in determining
the thermodynamic stability of proteins and modulation of the folding energy
landscape. It relies on the synergy between computer simulations and
experiments. This study will test the hypothesis that charge-charge interactions
on the protein surface are important determinants of the folding energy
landscape. Approaches developed during the previous funding cycle significantly
advanced the ability to predict the effects of surface charge-charge
interactions on protein stability and provided an important tool that allows the
combination of computer simulations, inspired by the energy landscape theory,
with experimental measurements of the rates for protein folding/unfolding.
Specific questions that will be addressed are: What is the role of charge-charge
interactions in shaping the folding energy landscape? What is the effect that
electrostatic interactions have on defining the protein kinetic stability? What
is the role of salt-bridges in defining the stability of collagen molecule?

The PI is actively involved in curriculum development and serves as an
Undergraduate curriculum adviser for Biochemistry and Biophysics majors at RPI.
In addition he engages high school, undergraduate and graduate students in both
computational and experimental aspects of research in his laboratory. Over 50%
of trainees are females or members of underrepresented minorities. The majority
of the high-school and undergraduate students who were trained in the lab
continue their education in STEM disciplines. The research will provide a
systematic study of the mechanism of protein stabilization by charge-charge
interactions by uniquely combining a variety of biochemical, biophysical and
computational tools. As such, it is expected that the knowledge accumulated as a
result of these experiments will lay the foundation to future studies of these
fundamentally important issues with broad implications for many different areas
of biotechnology that use proteins including development of next generation of
biosensors, environmentally friendly catalysts and robust biomaterials.