* 1330975
* SBIR Phase II:  Bio-inspired Multilayer Contact Lens to Treat Contact Lens-Induced Dry Eye Disease
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Karen Havenstrite, Tangible Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,367,124.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a bio-inspired contact lens that closely mimics the structure of natural tear
film, and prevents contact lens-induced dry eye disease (CLIDE). CLIDE is a
serious problem faced by 50% of contact lens wearers. In spite of advances in
materials and lens design, an estimated 10% of patients discontinue use each
year due to CLIDE symptoms of dryness and discomfort. The architecture of the
proposed lens minimizes tear film disruption through the use of a high water
content polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel that interfaces with the ocular
environment. The unique multi-layered design will enable a new paradigm in
contact lens design, which so far has relied on modifying copolymer blends
rather than making use of discrete layers of bulk materials. The objectives of
this research project are to develop and optimize scalable manufacturing
processes to produce the lenses and validate their safety in animals. The
results of this project will enable efficacy studies in human subjects.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be
a contact lens that alleviates dryness and discomfort. The global contact lens
market is $6.8 billion dollars annually, with an estimated $680 million dollars
in revenue lost from patients discontinuing lens wear due to discomfort. In
addition to the significant commercial potential, and ability to improve patient
comfort, development of this contact lens will have broader impacts in the
ophthalmology and medical device fields. Through better understanding of the
tear film-lens interactions, more reliable, objective, and quantifiable metrics
to predict success and segment patients will be possible. The new lens
architecture also may enable a better understanding of the various metrics used
in comparing the comfort of contact lenses. In addition, this device will
validate the use of this unique material/design for other potential medical
device applications. The novel processes and technology under development in
this project for thin film hydrogel deposition has broad application both in
clinical science and fundamental research.