* 1330606
* Aptamers in model organisms
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Andrej Luptak, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 11/30/2017
* USD 509,999.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;RNAs are remarkable because they can be both
information carriers and structured functional macromolecules. They play a wide
variety of roles in biology, including in gene expression regulation by
riboswitches. Riboswitches are metabolite-dependent functional RNAs composed of
aptamer domains and expression platforms, which bind small-molecule targets and
regulate gene expression, respectively. Most riboswitches have been found in
bacteria, with a single example known in plants, fungi, and algae, where it
regulates alternative splicing and transcript stability. To discover more
eukaryotic riboswitches, small-molecule aptamers need to be mapped out and
tested for regulatory functions. Recently, adenosine aptamers were discovered in
the human genome and preliminary results indicate that they sense ATP through a
kinetic mechanism. The objective of this project is to measure the distribution
of a variety of metabolite aptamers in genetic model eukaryotes. The aptamers
will be detected using in vitro selections from a metagenomic genomic library
and tested for potential roles as riboswitches. Adenosine aptamers, together
with new aptamers found using SELEX will be tested for gene regulatory
functions. Altogether, this research will contribute to the fundamental
understanding of eukaryotic RNA biology and help define the roles that non-
coding functional RNAs play in gene regulation and other cellular mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance our
understanding of regulatory roles that RNAs play in eukaryotic model organisms,
including plants. Throughout the project period undergraduate and graduate
students will be trained in molecular and cellular biosciences, providing them
with sets of broadly applicable problem-solving skills on both in both
experimental and computational biology. In addition, a large numbers of young
students from local middle schools, many of them from backgrounds that do not
emphasize education and from schools that lack the resources for laboratory
experimentation, will be exposed to the thrill of molecular biology to encourage
them to consider higher education in the sciences