* 1330840
* Collaborative Research: Dakota Bioprocessing Consortium (DakotaBioCon)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Philip Boudjouk, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Timothy VanReken
* 07/31/2016
* USD 3,000,000.00

The Dakota Bioprocessing Consortium (DakotaBioCon) brings together researchers
from four institutions in two neighboring states, North Dakota and South Dakota,
with similar geographical, socio-economic and environmental diversity: North
Dakota State University (NDSU), South Dakota State University (SDSU), University
of North Dakota (UND) and South Dakota School of Mines &amp; Technology (SDSMT).
The vision of DakotaBioCon is through cutting-edge research and development to
become a recognized intellectual leader in biomass bioprocessing that can help
the region, nation and global society transition to a bio-based economy. The
primary goal of DakotaBioCon is to establish a multi-state, multi-institution,
multi-disciplinary, collaborative infrastructure to enable and facilitate the
development of novel bioprocessing technologies for sustainable production of
high-value chemicals and materials from renewable resources, with emphasis on
lignin-derived products as economically viable substitutes for imported fossil-
fuel based chemicals. DakotaBioCon achieves its goal of regional infrastructure
development in the area of lignin bioprocessing through the accomplishment of
several integrated objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Convert lignin into low
molecular weight chemical fractions using a suite of novel processing methods,
including high-temperature liquefaction and biodegradation of lignin, and
analytical methods, (chromatography, spectrometry and chemical methods) to
enable mass balance closure;&lt;br/&gt;2) Decipher the reaction mechanisms
associated with the proposed lignin disassembly methods as a means to optimize
and channel lignin fragmentation reaction pathways;&lt;br/&gt;3) Design
process/purification schemes to convert precursor chemicals into valuable
products;&lt;br/&gt;4) Develop new monomers/polymers and composites from lignin-
derived aromatics/phenolics;&lt;br/&gt;5) Develop and upgrade the research and
education infrastructure through joint collaborative activities that include
sharing of data, knowledge, expertise, equipment, facilities, and educational
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impacts of DakotaBioCon are far-reaching, and
extend beyond the award period. Bioprocessing of renewable resources addresses
strategic national security priorities by reducing national dependence on
imported oil and creates new jobs. To ensure continuation and long-term
sustainability, DakotaBioCon leverages existing partnerships within UND's
Sustainable Energy Research Initiative and Supporting Education (SUNRISE),
SDSU's SunGrant Initiative, and SDSMT's Center for Bioprocessing Research and
Development (CBRD) and future commercial intellectual
property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;DakotaBioCon
focuses on bioprocessing of lignin to renewable phenolics, aromatic chemicals
and green polymers with potential uses as chemical and polymeric alternatives to
petrochemicals. New knowledge and scientific contributions to the field of
lignin bioprocessing are being generated. The intellectual merit of the proposed
research approach is: 1) the potential for development of new, more cost-
efficient and environmentally-friendly methods/agents for lignin
depolymerization; 2) the potential for development of a suite of novel
analytical methods enabling detailed product analysis; 3) the potential for
deciphering the mechanistic aspects of lignin thermochemical and biological
fragmentation to attain enhanced conversion rates and/or generate new lignin
building-block precursors for industrial chemical processes; and 4) the
potential for development of new, green materials with improved chemical and
physical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;DakotaBioCon infrastructure supports basic and applied
research programs and offer expanded education, training and workforce
development opportunities for a diverse cohort of K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students. It contributes to meeting national energy and economic
security needs. These programs are leveraged to enhance collaboration,
knowledge, and resource-sharing in the growing interdisciplinary field of
renewable energy and materials. The education and workforce development strategy
of DakotaBioCon are characterized by an interdisciplinary approach and a unique
web of partnerships that helps advance these programs to the next level of
performance and delivery. Research findings are widely disseminated to the
scientific community and public through website, news media, radio, public
databases, presentations at national and international meetings, and peer-
reviewed publications in journals of international repute.