* 1330903
* SBIR Phase II:  A Real Time, High Sensitivity Atmospheric BTEX and 1,3-butadiene Vapor Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,11/30/2017
* Anthony Miller, Entanglement Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,418,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address the
need for analyzers to detect the toxic species benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene,
xylene, (BTEX) and 1,3-butadiene in ambient air. These toxic volatile organic
compounds (VOC) are released during incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, the
manufacture of a range of chemicals, and the process of petrochemical refining.
Entanglement Technologies proposes to complete development of a BTEX and
butadiene vapor analyzer based on the combination of cavity ring-down
spectroscopy (CRDS) and diffusion time-of-flight (DiTOF). CRDS provides
extremely sensitive detection while diffusion provides specificity. The research
objective of this project is to demonstrate the full capabilities of this
analyzer technology. The project will comprise building a prototype CRDS/DiTOF
analyzer to perform laboratory and field trials of the technology. The
anticipated benzene sensitivity is 10 parts per trillion by volume in a
measurement of less than 10 minutes, surpassing existing technologies. The
outcome of the project will be a design for a manufacturable analyzer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to extend the sensitivity of state-of-the-art commercial CRDS
analyzers have for small molecules (e.g. carbon dioxide or ammonia) to the
detection of more complex molecules. DiTOF provides the ability to distinguish
among larger molecules (benzene and other aromatics, aldehydes and ketones) that
CRDS alone does not possess. The CRDS/DiTOF analyzer design developed in this
project will be Entanglement Technologies? commercial platform design, easily
adapted to many different trace gases, including atmospheric and building-
interior pollutants, and combinations of trace gases. Such a family of analyzers
will impact pollution research, control, and mitigation as much as existing
commercial carbon dioxide, methane, and water CRDS analyzers are currently
impacting the study of greenhouse gases and climate change. In the long term,
CRDS/DiTOF technology will be applied to biomedical science, industrial process
monitoring, environmental remediation and explosives detection. For example, the
diffusion-based selectivity will prove critical to the separation and
quantification of the many hydrocarbon gas components in human breath useful for
non-invasive diagnosis of disease. Similarly, CRDS/DiTOF can enable sensitive
chemical analysis of liquids such as blood.