* 1330970
* SBIR Phase II:  Cyber Security Monitoring for Critical Embedded and Wireless Systems Using Power Fingerprinting
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Carlos Aguayo-Gonzalez, Power Fingerprinting, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,780.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project should provide a
novel cyber security solution for Industrial Control Systems (ICS) based on
Power Fingerprinting (PFP) technology. PFP provides integrity assessment and
intrusion detection for embedded and resource-constrained platforms by using an
external device to monitor side-channel information and applying signal
processing techniques to determine the execution status of a processor. Because
PFP monitoring is performed by an external device, it can be applied to
platforms with constrained computational resources, such as Industrial Control
Systems, for which solutions based on traditional cyber security approaches are
practically inexistent. There are no commercially available solutions capable of
monitoring the execution and detecting intrusions directly in core ICS elements,
such as Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs). The objectives of this Phase II
effort include: 1) Develop a PFP monitor prototype for ICS by integrating
commercially available components, 2) Develop the necessary software tools to
support ICS monitoring, and 3) Validate the prototype using representative ICS
platforms used in critical infrastructure. At the end of Phase II, the prototype
PFP monitor will be demonstrated detecting malicious intrusions in blind tests,
serving as stepping stone to bring this technology into
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this
project is the development of an innovative cyber security solution for ICS in
critical infrastructure. PFP can prevent well-funded adversaries from
compromising critical systems without being discovered. The PFP monitor can
assess the integrity of core elements in ICSs for which there are no commercial
solutions available. PFP can be applied to embedded platforms and can coexist
with traditional cyber security solutions adding an extra layer of protection in
a defense-in-depth approach. These characteristics make PFP a powerful tool for
detecting sophisticated covert attacks to ICS, such as the recent Stuxnet worm.
Traditional cyber security approaches, such as anti-virus and firewalls, are
being adapted for ICS with very limited success. Thus, PFP addresses a growing
need to secure ICSs in critical infrastructure and directly monitor their
execution. PFP has dual application in the commercial and government markets,
particularly for resource-constrained and embedded platforms. PFP has the
potential to become a fundamental player in cyber-security by protecting the
nation?s infrastructure and promoting further development of the economic base
and employment.