* 1330803
* Metabolism of Aromatic Ring Precursors in Coenzyme Q Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Catherine Clarke, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 833,485.00

Scientific Merit: The controlled burn of carbohydrates (sugars) or lipids (fat)
generates ATP, the cell's energy currency. Coenzyme Q (also known as ubiquinone,
CoQ or Q) is an organic molecule essential for production of ATP. CoQ is also a
crucial antioxidant that can protect cell membrane lipids from damage mediated
by free radicals. From a chemical standpoint, the CoQ molecule has two parts:
(1) a long carbon containing "tail" that anchors it in the membrane, and (2) an
aromatic ring structure (benzoquinone) with properties that allow it to ferry
electrons and protons essential to its function in ATP formation, and also
donate H atoms essential to its function as an antioxidant. Cells are generally
thought to produce the benzoquinone ring from the precursor 4-hydroxybenzoic
acid (4-HB). The investigators identified a new pathway for biological formation
of CoQ in baker's yeast, emanating from para-aminobenzoic acid or pABA, long
thought to be dedicated exclusively to the biosynthesis of folate.
Interestingly, unlike folate, CoQ is devoid of nitrogen in its chemical
composition. Elucidating the biological steps or sequence by which the amino
group that contains the nitrogen is removed is a key goal of this project. New
evidence indicates that certain plant metabolites may also serve as potential
ring precursors of CoQ, suggesting there are even more routes to generate CoQ.
This project will investigate these new possible pathways and also determine
whether they operate in other organisms.

Broader Impacts: In this project graduate and undergraduate students are trained
as researchers, and graduate students are also trained in the art and teaching
of science. Graduate students have the opportunity to teach and mentor
undergraduate students, and undergraduate students are active participants in
the scientific discovery process. Instead of learning about metabolism as
previously characterized textbook pathways that must be memorized, students
learn that there are many unsolved problems and other routes yet to be
discovered. This leads them to question the textbook pathways, and ask, "How do
we know? How do these pathways differ? Why have more than one pathway?".
Undergraduate students, including underrepresented minority students, learn to
characterize mutants, use isotopes in metabolic labeling experiments, and
prepare and analyze lipid extracts in the laboratory and learn science by doing.
Students also see how interdisciplinary interactions among the project faculty
with interdisciplinary expertise in organic synthetic chemistry, biochemistry
and cell biology advances scientific research. Students present their research
findings at undergraduate conferences, UCLA symposia, and at national and
international meetings. This project identifies new pathways required for energy
generating processes in living cells. Besides enhancing knowledge regarding the
biosynthesis of the essential molecule CoQ, results may also lead to
applications in agriculture, as the enzymes involved in this pathway are
potential targets for herbicides.