* 1330287
* SBIR Phase II:  A novel economic, efficient, environmentally benign, and sustainable multi-component separation technology based on acoustophoresis
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Jason Dionne, Flodesign Sonics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1,486,654.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on a
novel ultrasonic acoustophoretic separation technology that is economic,
efficient, sustainable, and environmentally benign. Current technologies, e.g.,
hydrocyclones, and membrane filtration, suffer from problems, such as high
energy costs, use of consumables, fouling, and limited efficiency in separation
of micron-sized particles. The proposed technology does not generate waste, does
not use consumables, operates at a low energy cost, and provides efficient
separation for micron-size particles. Ultrasonic standing waves are used to trap
secondary phase particles in a fluid stream, when the acoustic radiation force
exerted on the particles is stronger than the combined effect of fluid drag and
buoyancy. The action of the acoustic forces on the trapped particles results in
agglomeration and/or coalescence of particles and droplets. Heavier than water
particles are separated through enhanced gravitational settling, and lighter
particles through enhanced buoyancy. During Phase I, successful prototypes were
designed with a separation efficiency of more than 90% of a 1000 ppm emulsion at
flow rates of 2500 Liters per minute. Phase II focuses on the development of a
system capable of processing 4 gpm, with fully integrated customized
electronics, and testing of the system on real-world emulsions.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the novel
acoustophoretic separation technology provides for a cheaper and lower cost of
energy separation of multi- component phase mixtures. It can function as a drop-
in replacement for conventional separation technology, such as hydrocyclones and
other methods. The societal impact is the development of separation technologies
that are sustainable and environmentally benign since they do not generate any
waste or use consumables. Enhanced extraction of micron-sized oil droplets from
water offer opportunities for enhanced oil recovery and oil-spill cleanup and
reduce the emission of micron-sized oil droplets into the environment. This
project increases the science and technology behind the use of acoustic
radiation force on large volume flow rate. Full numerical models will be created
to use in conjunction with experimental results. Dissemination of this work will
be done by publishing our results in peer reviewed journals and conferences.
This project provides several internships to undergraduate engineering students,
an opportunity to learn and practice engineering, innovation, and
entrepreneurship at a small start-up company. FloDesign Sonics has a strong
history and commitment to integrating undergraduate students in the development
of their technology through offering internships and providing supervision for
senior capstone design projects.