* 1330789
* BSF:2012166:A Framework for Composite Techniques in Motion Planning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Kostas Bekris, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2018
* USD 40,000.00

This project is funded as part of the United States-Israel Collaboration in
Computer Science (USICCS) program. Through this program, NSF and the United
States - Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
collaborations among US-based researchers and Israel-based researchers. This
project aims to design a framework for the integration of advanced foundational
methods from computational geometry with effective sampling-based methods from
motion planning. This will allow the practical use of these techniques in
important applications and the development of useful educational experiences.
Motion planning, in its basic form, corresponds to the problem of finding a
collision-free path for a robot in a workspace cluttered with static obstacles.
It is important for many application domains, such as manufacturing and
warehouse management, product assembly, surgical planning, architectural design,
graphical animation, computer games, and computational biology. The
collaboration of the US and Israeli researchers will impact the application
areas through the development of novel efficient tools based on sound theory for
motion planning of complex systems. Furthermore, the availability of these tools
can have an impact in educational efforts in the areas of algorithms,
computational geometry and robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards achieving
these objectives, the investigators will implement and evaluate composite
methods for motion planning, that lie at the intersection of computational
geometry and sampling-based planning. In particular, the investigators will
utilize foundational methods to compute compact motion planning representations
that provide optimality guarantees, based in part on recent advances in summary
of big data in other fields. The collaboration can also lead to advances in the
area of multi-robot motion planning, by taking advantage of recent progress in
combinatorial solvers and transferring these results in the continuous motion
planning domain. Overall, the integrated framework will allow advances in
geometry-based algorithms to be readily available to the motion planning
community, especially in sampling entire low-dimensional manifolds of the
configuration space instead of individual configurations, collision detection
and space decomposition.