* 1330488
* Structural and dynamic characterization of 2/2 hemoglobins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2020
* Juliette Lecomte, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,300,000.00

Intellectual merit The physical properties of globular proteins are a topic of
intense investigation and practical importance. Multiple approaches have been
deployed to understand the determinants of stability and plasticity of these
vital biomolecules. Among the methods that are most useful, but so far much
underutilized, is nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) at high
pressure. The combination of gentle perturbation and residue-level description
afforded by this technique has excellent potential for exposing novel
architectural principles in proteins. The proposed research will combine
molecular biology, amino acid sequence analysis, and high-pressure NMR methods
to explore the native state of a set of monomeric bacterial and algal
hemoglobins. The work will investigate the original notion that a common
internal cavity network is a crucial entity governing conformational changes
concerted with ligand binding and volume dynamics. Studies will be extended to
related proteins from organisms that live in high pressure environments to
enhance the description of the molecular attributes of globins functioning under
extreme conditions of pressure and low temperature. Because the globins of
interest are enzymatic and of ancient origin, the results will pertain to
multiple fields of inquiry besides protein physical chemistry, including
phylogenetics, heme chemistry, and molecular evolution. These ramifications
offer an opportunity for laboratory and classroom training of students with
diverse interests.

Broader impact The broader impact of the proposed research will be achieved
through a combination of teaching, training, outreach, and dissemination.
Research results will be incorporated in a biophysics undergraduate course in
spectroscopy and in a graduate course in biophysical methods. Training will be
provided to graduate and undergraduate students, including REU summer students,
working directly on the project. Participation in outreach activities will
include lab tours for high-school students along with research and career
presentations to attract women and underrepresented groups to STEM fields.
Participation in the Biophysics Research for Baltimore Teens summer program
(organized by the Program in Molecular Biophysics of Johns Hopkins University)
will focus on introducing selected high-school students of Baltimore City to
scientific research. Dissemination will be through publications, lectures at
other institutions, participation in conferences, and database depositions.