* 1330880
* SBIR Phase II:  Photonics Enabled Extreme Bandwidth Wireless Communications Receiver
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2018
* Kristian Merkel, S2 Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,058,002.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will adapt a
photonics based signal processor to propel applications in extreme bandwidth
spread-spectrum wireless communications. The signal processor prototype known as
the spatial spectral holographic (S2H) extreme bandwidth analyzer / correlator
(EBAC) will function as a correlating receiver for low probability of intercept
(covert) and interference immune spread-spectrum communications in any radio
frequency/millimeter wave (RF/MMW) band. The Phase I effort proof of concept
demonstrations showed correlation and demodulation of &gt;4 GHz bandwidth
signals with processing gain exceeding 40 dB. The Phase II project will
demonstrate continuous transmission signal generation and receiver processing
prototype hardware with the ability to demodulate extreme instantaneous
bandwidth up to 20 GHz spread-spectrum communications signals with long duration
spreading waveforms up to 1 ms, with high data rates (1-1,000 Mb/s), and
flexible frequency coverage exceeding 40 GHz. For particular intensive signal
processing functions such as spectral analysis and correlation the S2H EBAC
analog signal processor demonstrates higher performance and power efficiency
than traditional digital signal processing. The intellectual merit of this
project is in the advancement of the core technology and application to new
real-world applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project include opportunities for major academic and
commercial developments in communication technology, spectrum analysis, and
spectrum enforcement with wide operating bandwidths from 0.5-40 GHz IBW. Initial
commercial market would be for spectrum analysis systems with a customer base in
electro-magnetic environment testing, tactical DoD next-generation wideband
passive surveillance systems, law enforcement surveillance, and intelligence
community spectrum sensing. In wireless communications, this technology has the
potential extend the reach of spread spectrum communications to new operational
paradigms. Beyond communications, commercial applications include test and
measurement systems, magnetic resonance imaging, weather radar, earth mapping,
navigation, and spectrum use enforcement (the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) in the U.S.). The enabling technology has commercial, military and
intelligence community benefits in the form of geo-location, direction finding,
data selection and filtering, navigation, and imaging. With the collaboration
with our university partner on this project, we will also support unique
applications focused research experience opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students in STEM fields.