* 1330214
* TWC SBE: Option: Frontier: Collaborative: Towards Effective Web Privacy Notice and Choice: A Multi-Disciplinary Prospective
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2021
* Thomas Norton, Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,340.00

Natural language privacy policies have become a de facto standard to address
expectations of notice and choice on the Web. Yet, there is ample evidence that
users generally do not read these policies and that those who occasionally do
struggle to understand what they read. Initiatives aimed at addressing this
problem through the development of machine implementable standards or other
solutions that require website operators to adhere to more stringent
requirements have run into obstacles, with many website operators showing
reluctance to commit to anything more than what they currently do. This project
offers the prospect of overcoming the limitations of current natural language
privacy policies without imposing new requirements on website
operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This frontier project builds on recent advances
in natural language processing, privacy preference modeling, crowdsourcing,
formal methods, and privacy interfaces to overcome this situation. It combines
fundamental research with the development of scalable technologies to semi-
automatically extract key privacy policy features from natural language website
privacy policies and present these features to users in an easy-to-digest format
that enables them to make more informed privacy decisions as they interact with
different websites. Work in this project also involves the systematic collection
and analysis of website privacy policies, looking for trends and deficiencies
both in the wording and content of these policies across different sectors and
using this analysis to inform ongoing public policy debates. An important part
of this project is to work closely with stake holders in industry to enable the
transfer of these technologies to industry for large-scale deployment.