* 1330560
* Cellular Crowding Effects of Biomolecular Stability and Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Michael Feig, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2018
* USD 705,854.00

Intellectual Merit: Cellular environments consist of dense, heterogeneous
solutions of biomolecules that differ significantly from the dilute, homogeneous
conditions typically considered in structural biology. A consideration of the
resulting crowding effects is essential to fully understand biomolecular
function in cellular environments. Simulations with realistic models of cellular
proteins and nucleic acids are used to examine the physicochemical effects of
crowding. The main goal is to better understand the role of intermolecular
interactions and altered solvent properties on biomolecular stability upon
crowding. The simulations carried out involve models ranging from fully
atomistic explicit solvent representations to multi-scale models where solvent
and/or crowders are modeled in a simplified fashion. The results from the
simulations are essential for developing effective models of cellular
environments that are unavailable at the time but urgently needed for large-
scale simulations of cellular dynamics.

Broader Impacts: The broader impact to society will be a more comprehensive
understanding of cellular processes from a physical perspective. More
specifically, the research aims to connect the detailed molecular-level
understanding of biology to processes occurring on cellular and systems levels.
Ultimately, such insight will allow the development of detailed in silico
cellular models based on physical principles that can be queried to understand
complex biological processes. A number of more specific broader impacts will be
catalyzed by the research proposed here: Interdisciplinary training of students
at the interface of physical, biological, and computational sciences, both
graduate students and teams of undergraduate students from physical and
biological sciences; promotion of the involvement of women; focused efforts to
recruit undergraduates from underrepresented minorities through the IDEAS
program at MSU; enhancement of widely used modeling software; promotion of an
international collaboration with RIKEN in Japan including short-term research
visits abroad for students involved in the project; and broad dissemination of
research results through traditional channels as well as public outreach through
public presentations to lay audiences.