* 1330650
* SBIR Phase II:  Development and manufacture of a new class of high-figure-of-merit bulk thermoelectric nanomaterials
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Rutvik Mehta, ThermoAura Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,407,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to enable
the commercialization of a scalable bottom-up microwave synthesis process
invented and demonstrated for obtaining bulk thermoelectric nanomaterials with
25% higher figure-of-merit ZT at 50% cost savings than the state of the art. We
anticipate the results of the project to expand the scope of, and transform,
high efficiency thermoelectric refrigeration and waste-heat harvesting
technologies. In particular, this project aims to transmute our synthesis
approach to a manufacturing technology that consistently yields ton-scale
nanothermoelectrics with ZT&gt;1. The objectives are to 1) Complete the design
of, and implement a microwave manufacturing platform with a 10 tons/year
capacity, 2) Develop protocols for industrial-scale wafer production from the
nanomaterials for device fabrication, and 3) Devise methods to further increase
ZT through process optimization. The knowhow generated from the demonstration of
kilogram-scale production shown in Phase I provides the foundation for the Phase
II effort. We will focus on the widely used bismuth and antimony tellurides, and
their alloys. We will strive to maximize process flexibility to facilitate
greater ZT gains through process optimization and to facilitate the adaptation
of our process technology to other thermoelectric nanomaterials for
refrigeration and waste-heat harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be to unlock and access the
multi-billion dollar potential of thermoelectrics for transforming solid-state
cooling. Thermoelectric materials already support a ~$1B/year industry, but has
promise to be multi-fold higher if the conversion efficiency is increased just
two-fold by using nanomaterials. The project will scale-up a nanomaterials
manufacturing technology targeted to create new high efficiency solid-state
cooling devices that can replace the current refrigeration and air-conditioning
technologies based on environmentally unfriendly gases, and create high-
efficiency electricity generators from waste heat, significantly expanding the
thermoelectric markets and impacting global energy usage and addressing global
environmental concerns. The work performed in the project will result in low-
cost high-value thermoelectric nanomaterials manufacturing to replace extant
energy-intensive methods that cannot cost-effectively produce high-efficiency
materials. This will lead to introduction of a new class of nanomaterials with
superior properties than that available currently in the marketplace. The work
will expand the scope of thermoelectric device applications, paving the way for
power generation technologies through implementation of our manufacturing method
for other materials systems. The project is anticipated to create 10-25 jobs in
3-5 years besides making New York State a global player in thermoelectrics
innovation and nanomaterials manufacturing.