* 1330427
* Mitonuclear Interaction and the Genetic Architecture of Phenotypic Evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2013,11/30/2017
* Suzanne Estes, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 11/30/2017
* USD 750,000.00

This project will evaluate how mitochondrial dysfunction and mitochondrial-
nuclear interaction contribute to evolution across three levels of biological
organization - molecular-genetic, cellular, and organismal. The PIs will study
evolutionary process within the context of the mitochondrial electron transport
chain (ETC). Evolution experiments using ETC-deficient Caenorhabditis elegans
nematodes will be combined with whole-genome sequencing, bioinformatics and
mitochondrial phenotyping to study the genetic bases of maladaptive and
compensatory adaptive evolution - the process whereby natural selection favors
changes at loci that compensate for the deleterious effects of a mutant allele.
The ETC is crucial for eukaryotic life and its proper functioning relies on the
maintenance of favorable mitonuclear interactions; it is thus ideal for studying
the patterns and functional bases of both forms of evolution and the role of
mutation in shaping mitonuclear genome integration. Further, ETC dysfunction is
a proposed cause of variation in genome-wide spontaneous mutation rates. This
work will reveal the effects of different forms of ETC damage on nuclear and
mitochondrial genome stability and concomitant changes in mitochondrial function
and organismal fitness. Because few studies have addressed the population-level
consequences of compensatory mutation or the genetic mechanisms of compensatory
evolution in eukaryotic systems, and because mitochondrial metabolism and ETC
function are highly evolutionarily conserved, findings are expected to be of
broad interest and relevant to other eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The project will train students in cutting-edge genomics research,
provide important data and resources to the scientific community, and expand
both PIs' educational and outreach activities. Minority and other students with
gain meaningful research and science education experience. The PIs will co-train
graduate and undergraduate students, participate in science outreach to minority
student groups and a local Native American high school, and develop
bioinformatics learning modules based on the research to be taught in their
respective undergraduate Genetics courses at Portland State University and
Oregon State University.