* 1330557
* Molecular Regulation of Epigenetic Inheritance
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Fei Li, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 11/30/2017
* USD 510,000.00

Intellectual Merit: In eukaryotes, DNA is packaged together with histone
proteins into a highly complex structure called chromatin. Chemical
modifications to DNA and histones play a key role in the control of chromatin
structure and gene expression. These modifications, known as "epigenetic marks",
can be faithfully inherited through many generations. During DNA replication,
chromatin is disassembled ahead of the replication fork and then reassembled
into its original epigenetic state behind the fork. Key questions on how
epigenetic marks, particularly histone modifications, are inherited onto newly
replicated chromatin, remain poorly understood. The goal of this project is to
understand the fundamental principles underlying the inheritance of epigenetic
marks. Fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe) will be used to address this
important gap in knowledge. Fission yeast is a simple, genetically tractable
model organism that contains many of the epigenetic components present in higher
eukaryotes, and has thus recently emerged as a premier model for epigenetic
study. In fission yeast, the methylation of histone H3 at lysine 9 (H3K9) is
enriched in heterochromatin, the highly condensed and transcriptionally silent
part of chromatin. This conserved epigenetic hallmark of heterochromatin is
stably inherited from generation to generation, and provides a valuable
framework for understanding the mechanisms behind epigenetic inheritance in
eukaryotes. In this project, a combination of approaches, including genetics,
biochemistry, and cytology, will be used to determine the role of proteins
involved in DNA replication in the inheritance of H3K9 methylation. These
findings will identify a key mechanistic link between DNA replication and the
inheritance of H3K9 methylation, and provide important insights into how these
two processes are coupled. This research will contribute to the understanding of
the molecular mechanisms governing the inheritance of epigenetic
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The epigenetic mechanisms
found in S. pombe will likely apply to multicellular eukaryotes. Defects in the
regulation of epigenetic marks often result in genomic instability and
developmental disorders in both plants and animals. This study thus has
important implications for agriculture, ecology and economy. This project will
train post-doc researchers, graduate students, and undergraduates in cell
biology, genetics, and biochemistry. The PI will continue to recruit
underrepresented minority and women students to participate in research. This
project will also serve as a teaching resource for courses that the PI teaches
at New York University and for an outreach program aimed at encouraging K-12
students to consider careers in science.