* 1330995
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Keeping It Together?: State Centralization and Everyday Life in a Peripheral Neighborhood of Copan, Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2016
* Kristin Landau, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2016
* USD 25,200.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Cynthia Robin, Kristin Landau will carry out an
archaeological mapping and excavation project at the ancient city of Cop치n,
located in the Maya area of western Honduras. Cop치n was one of the most
important polities during the Classic period (AD 400-900), and today is a UNESCO
World Heritage Site. The site is unique for its two generations of intensive
research and hieroglyphic decipherment within the city center, which has
revealed a wealth of information relating to political events. However,
archaeologists understand much less about everyday life for the majority of
people and how they related to central administration. Landau's research
investigates the full history of the "San Lucas" neighborhood of Cop치n to
determine if and how local residents were affected by the political events
discussed in the hieroglyphs at the city center. This goal will be achieved by
re-mapping the neighborhood from a local -not city-wide - perspective, targeted
excavations of select buildings, and new and exciting lab
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploring the dynamic relationship between a
city's central administration and its component neighborhoods improves knowledge
of how cities work. Instead of following previous research that draws stark
distinction between states that are either centralized or decentralized, this
project argues that centralization fluctuates over time; determining when, how,
and why centralization fluctuates will lead to better understandings of cities'
and states' past and present. Additionally, the archaeology of neighborhoods is
a newly emerging research focus that emphasizes both a specific geographic area,
and daily social interaction on a local level. Despite the previous
identification of distinct subsections of Cop치n settlement, no archaeological
excavation of a full neighborhood has ever been conducted. Detailed re-mapping
of San Lucas, targeted digging of excavation pits to reveal ancient households,
and dating of building phases and special features will allow the investigators
to understand in depth the history of one neighborhood, and relate it to major
political events at the city center. Bayesian statistical analysis will increase
the accuracy of traditional radiocarbon dating; microartifact analysis will
point to possible crafting activities; a portable x-ray florescence will
indicate the geological origin of craft materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, this project seeks to improve the relationship between modern
communities and archaeological research through close involvement with Honduran
students. Project members have already begun to teach a formal course on
anthropological theory and method at the high school located near the excavation
site. These current classroom sessions will be complemented by the students'
participation in excavation and lab analysis once the archaeological project
commences. Students will receive official recognition and support from the
Honduran government, motivating them to complete school, and possibly attend the
first-ever anthropology program at the national university. The results of the
academic research and community activism will be disseminated through public
talks, formal conferences, and peer-reviewed publications, in English and
Spanish in the US and Honduras.