* 1330956
* SBIR Phase II:  A Perfusable, Revascularized, Cardiac-Derived Patch for the Treatment of Heart Disease
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,10/31/2017
* Jeffrey Ross, Miromatrix Medical Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovations Research Phase (SBIR) II project is to support
the continued development of using proprietary perfusion decellularization
technology to create a fully revascularized cardiac patch for the treatment of
ischemic heart disease and congenital heart repair. Current surgical approaches
for cardiac reconstruction utilize synthetic materials that do not have the
ability to grow and remodel with the patient. Feasibility will be demonstrated
by in-vitro and in-vivo characterization to create a perfusable cardiac-derived
revascularized cardiac patch to promote faster reconstruction of functional
tissue by providing a fully perfusable scaffold with a composition and
architecture similar to native cardiac tissue. This product will have
significant advantages over existing technologies, including: 1) full thickness,
biological, cardiac-derived matrix material; 2) vascular supply to support
migrating cells and remodeling; 3) superior mechanical properties; and, 4) no
need for immunosuppressive therapies. Moreover, this will be the first cardiac-
derived, revascularized patch available for treating ischemic areas of the
heart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project, if successful, is the development of a revascularized cardiac patch to
treat ischemic heart failure and congenital repair in a way that is superior to
existing technologies. While medical advancements have decreased the overall
mortality rate for acute myocardial infarction patients, therapeutic options are
lacking to address the underlying loss of myocardial tissue, resulting in a
mortality rate greater than 33% at five years. Inhibiting the onset or delaying
the severity of heart failure will have a significant effect on lowering this
mortality rate and reducing the treatment cost of heart failure, which currently
is estimated at over $37 billion annually. The use of this product will further
enhance the medical and scientific understanding of the mechanisms by which
damaged cardiac tissue may be restored/repaired and patient life may be extended
following myocardial infarction.