* 1330991
* SBIR Phase II:  Roll-to-roll Production of Uniform Graphene Films at Atmospheric Pressure and Low Temperature
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Bruce Willner, Graphene Frontiers LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,151,526.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
and develop technology for the roll-to-roll production of continuous graphene
films. The graphene production technology is based upon innovations in the
graphene synthesis and graphene handling, addressing critical deficiencies
limiting industrial manufacture of graphene. The synthesis process is performed
at atmospheric pressure, allowing roll-to-roll graphene formation on continuous
tapes of copper foil passed through the growth region. This eliminates the need
for an expensive vacuum furnace and allows fabrication of graphene films larger
than the furnace size. The graphene handling process developed during Phase I
enables the transfer of graphene sheets from the metal catalyst to nearly any
smooth surface without any high temperature steps and without the use of harsh
chemicals. Most importantly, the graphene transfer preserves the original metal
substrate for reuse. The reusable substrate dramatically reduces the cost of
graphene production and eliminates the largest source of waste in the process.
In Phase II, we will demonstrate the continuous film processes for graphene
synthesis and transfer to new surfaces and design a large area roll-to-roll
graphene production system.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is through the
industrial scale availability of high quality, low cost graphene sheets.
Transparent, electrically and thermally conductive, strong, flexible, and gas
impermeable, graphene is an emerging ?super material? with innumerable proposed
applications including flexible transparent conductors for displays and
photovoltaics; high frequency electronics for communications; chemical and
biological sensors; corrosion barrier; filtration and water desalination; energy
storage; and many more. Industrial quantities of graphene films will enable the
development of these and other applications, with substantial benefit to
society. The technology that we will to develop has advantages of cost, quality,
and design flexibility over competing concepts. Successful completion of this
SBIR project will establish Graphene Frontiers as a leading commercial supplier
of high-quality graphene to the business and research communities at an
attractive price. Our business model includes revenue from sale of the graphene
material, licensing of our proprietary growth technology, and specialized
products. Our first graphene-based product, TEM grids for electron microscopy,
is already on sale with a development partner. These advances will position
Graphene Frontiers to attract additional funding from investors, customers, and
other non-SBIR sources.