* 1330663
* EAGER:   Dynamic Affinity for Regulation of Cell Signaling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Cheng Dong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2017
* USD 212,000.00

PI: Cheng Dong Proposal ID: 1330663

Overview:

The ability to understand cell-microenvironment communication is important in
not only basic life science research, but also various biomedical applications
such as cancer research and regenerative medicine. Because cell receptors are
the major players for a cell to sense its microenvironment, the understanding of
cell-microenvironment communication needs deep insights into molecular
interactions between cell receptors and their ligands that can be cell receptors
of another cell, free biomolecules, or extracellular matrix components. However,
current understandings of these biomolecular interactions come primarily from
the examination of the properties of cell receptors at a fixed or optimal
functional state despite the dynamic nature of cell receptors and their ligands.
Few if any studies have been carried out to understand how dynamic affinities
drive intercellular communication that eventually regulates intracellular
signaling pathways. Therefore, this proposal is aimed at exploring how dynamic
affinity determines intracellular signaling by using both engineering and
biological methods.

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this proposal is to discover and understand
a new mechanism for the regulation of cellular signaling transmission driven by
dynamic affinities. To achieve this objective, CD82 and integrins will be used
as a receptor model, and tumor cells and endothelial cells will serve as a cell
model. Previous studies including those performed at PI's lab have suggeste that
CD82 is associated with integrins that molecular interactions may influence cell
phenotypes. However, it remains largely unknown on whether integrin binding
affinities alter endothelial signaling due to a lack of experimental techniques
to perform these analyses. Supported by these previous studies, it is
hypothesized that increase of inducible CD82 expression decreases integrin-
binding affinities, which inhibits tumor induced gap formation and tumor cell
extravasation. Two high-risk tasks are proposed to validate this untested
hypothesis. The first task aims to develop a new and innovative quasi-3D
microscopy imaging technique to interrogate how integrin conformational states
or binding affinities change with the level of CD82 expression. The second task
is to understand how the dynamic change of integrin binding affinities
determines intracellular signaling pathways and actin dynamics. It is expected
that the study of this model system would lead to deep insights into the
interactions between tumor cells and endothelial cells. Specifically, it will
provide valuable insights into the mechanisms by which integrin-binding affinity
affects endothelial cell strains in the actin cytoskeleton, protein kinase
activity, and changes in VE-cadherin disassembly near the endothelial cell
junctions over time.

Broader Impacts: Education and outreach: The PI plans to build a new
interdisciplinary research and education program, which aims to improve the
participation of students at different levels, particularly underrepresented
minorities and persons with disabilities in science and engineering. Students
will be recruited through existing outreach programs from predominantly teaching
institutions in Pennsylvania. Students will form research teams to develop
computer programs, conduct laboratory work, analyze experimental results, write
research papers, present findings in conferences, and maintain a web-based
dissemination of results.

Interdisciplinary and Transformative Traits: This high risk and high payoff
project reflects a new paradigm, as prior studies were only focused on how
binding affinities regulate cell adhesion rather than intramolecular cell
signaling, which is the focus of this EAGER project. A new interdisciplinary
research direction will be opened at the interface of engineering, biology,
physiology, and biophysics. Importantly, the success of this proposal holds
great potential to transform the ways that cell-cell communication is studied,
and current / future bioengineering is developed for biomedical applications.
Thus, the proposed research may not be viewed as "regular" questions or
approaches, and has an appropriateness of the EAGER mechanism.