* 1330470
* Collaborative Proposal: Time Allocation: Gender Differences in Propensity to Receive and Agree to Work-Related Requests
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Lise Vesterlund, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 223,201.00

Despite significant advancement in women's educational attainment, gender
differences in labor market outcomes persist. Horizontal as well as vertical job
segregation is substantial, causing men and women to have very different labor
market experiences. Common explanations for these differences are discrimination
and that men and women differ in their abilities and preferences over jobs. This
project aims to determine if differences in task allocation at work may help
explain why women advance at a slower rate than men in the work place.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most professional occupations, workers have some
discretion over the allocation of their time. A worker can allocate her time to
tasks that are likely to improve her performance evaluation ("promotable tasks")
or to tasks that, while benefitting the organization, are unlikely to affect her
evaluation and advance her career ("non-promotable tasks"). When presented with
requests for non-promotable tasks it is essential that the individual properly
assess whether she has the discretion to say "no" and whether it is in her
interest to do so. Individuals who find it difficult to decline requests to
perform non-promotable tasks may hamper their career advancement and job
satisfaction, and this could cause them to reduce their commitment and
investment in the organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
surveys, experiments and secondary data to examine if, relative to men, women
are more likely to agree to and receive requests for work-related tasks that are
unlikely to lead to their promotion. The former is referred to as the supply of
non-promotable work-related tasks and the latter as the
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In examining the supply, a survey is first
conducted to determine how individuals perceive requests for tasks that they
would prefer to decline. Preliminary results reveal that women find it more
difficult to say "no", and that they are more concerned about the negative
ramifications of doing so. A laboratory experiment is then used to examine if
such concerns translate into behavioral differences. An experiment is designed
to capture the incentives members of a group face when asked to deliver a
volunteer for a task that they prefer another member of the group undertakes
(such as writing a report, serving on a committee, organizing an event etc.).
Pilot data suggest that women are almost twice as likely to volunteer for such
tasks, and that they, in repeated interaction, continue to volunteer at a higher
rate. Conducting the experiment with both mixed- and single-sex groups reveals
that the willingness to undertake the task (for both men and women) decreases
with the number of women in the group. Thus group composition plays a central
role, suggesting that women are more likely to agree to requests for non-
promotable tasks in male-dominated environments. The proposed work will examine
what gives rise to these differences. Of particular interest is the extent to
which the documented differences can be explained by differences in preferences
(e.g., altruism) or in the beliefs individuals hold about the actions of others.
The examination of the response to requests will also be extended to settings
where requests are made explicit and where the decision to volunteer is made in
actual work environments (e.g., ad hoc tenure review committees). Finally,
additional surveys will be conducted to explore the decision-making processes
men and women use when deciding whether to decline requests for non-promotable
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differences in the demand for non-promotable work-
related tasks will be examined by first extending the laboratory study to a
setting where one member of a group is given the option of asking another group
member to volunteer. Pilot data suggest that when given the choice between
asking a male and a female candidate to volunteer, men are more likely to ask
the female to do so. Second, a diary study of faculty members will be conducted
to assess the frequency with which they receive requests for tasks that do not
advance their career. Finally, several laboratory and survey studies will be
done to determine if individuals who are asked to distribute tasks across
individuals tend to assign the less desirable tasks to women rather than
men.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By documenting and bringing attention to gender
differences in task allocation through the academic and popular press, the
proposed studies will create awareness of these differences among managers who
assign tasks and among women and men who decide how to allocate their time. Such
awareness may help decrease the gender gap in career advancement, and help
secure that the full potential is reached for women, men and society as a whole.