* 1330151
* SBIR Phase II:  Biomolecular Cell Injection With Nanofountain Probe Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Juan Giraldo, INFINITESIMAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2016
* USD 485,094.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed at
increasing the throughput of a novel single-cell technology based on
nanofountain probe electroporation (NFP-E). Progress in biotechnology research
in recent years has shown promise for cell reprogramming and extremely sensitive
medical diagnostics, yet this research requires effective, precise, and gentle
transfection of cells - for which a robust tool is currently lacking. The NFP-E
technology is capable of filling this need by enabling single-cell
electroporation for dosage-controlled transport of biomolecules, proteins, or
drugs into a cell. By applying a low electric potential to a target cell, small
pores in the cell membrane are generated, which allows for delivery of molecules
into cells in a way that is more efficient and less invasive than any other
method of transfection used today. This proposed project has three primary
goals: to establish protocols for various cell types and transfection agents, to
fabricate a microwell plate that couples with the NFP-E, and to develop software
algorithms to automate alignment and electroporation control. These developments
will create a robust system with exceptional process control and cell viability
that is suitable for relatively high throughput single-cell transfection
applications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project stems from the
unprecedented capabilities that the novel tool will provide to researchers and
biotechnology companies for manipulation and interrogation of cellular
processes, benefiting fundamental biology research and the development of
personalized medicine applications. This project will enhance the scientific and
technological understanding of fundamental electroporation mechanisms and single
cell analysis techniques by combining nanofabrication, microfluidics,
biophysics, and molecular biology aspects. The NFP-E tool will allow scientists
to use primary cells for research applications, providing a more meaningful link
between laboratory research and human disease pathophysiology. In addition, this
new tool could make the promise of personalized medicine feasible and practical
by enabling new capabilities in biotechnology and providing a robust commercial
instrument for single-cell studies toward discoveries that elucidate disease
mechanisms, focus drug discovery efforts, and personalize disease diagnosis and
therapies.