* 1330685
* Preparing for a warmer future: Conformational ensembles, dynamics and interactions from variable temperature crystallography
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Robert Thorne, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 660,535.00

An understanding of the 3D structure of proteins and other molecules of life is
essential to understanding their function and to the design of new medicines.
Most atomic-resolution protein structures are determined using X-ray
crystallography. But while proteins function at biological (generally, near
room) temperature, in the last decade nearly all X-ray crystallography has been
performed on protein crystals cooled to cryogenic temperatures, where many
important details of structure and dynamics may be compromised. This project
will explore the wealth of additional information that may be accessible using
protein crystals with liquid solvent. Structural data sets collected at
temperatures between ~330 and 200 K will allow exploration of how protein
conformational ensembles and energy landscapes evolve, and of the signatures of
and interactions leading to cold denaturation. Ultra-fast and variable-rate
cooling will be used to characterize timescales of large and/or highly
correlated protein motions, and to better preserve room temperature structure
for examination at 100 K. The project builds on recent developments in sample
handling and data collection and in refinement and analysis tools, and aims to
substantially extend these developments.

Broader Impacts This project will enable a broadening in the scope of
crystallographic studies of proteins, and contribute to a comprehensive
understanding of the relation between protein structure and function, relevant
to the understanding biology and to the development of new biologically active
compounds. It builds on past efforts in fundamental studies and methods
development that have led to commercial tools used by crystallographers
worldwide. Undergraduate and graduate student researchers will receive cross-
disciplinary training in advanced methods and will be critical in propagating
these methods to the broader structural biology community. This research program
is complemented by vigorous efforts in undergraduate introductory course
curriculum reform aimed at improving the retention and subject mastery of life
science and engineering students. It is also complemented by a broad effort in
STEM teacher recruiting and training and in institutional change that provides a
model for how research-focused STEM departments can address critical teacher
shortages in our middle and high schools.