* 1331353
* Hazards SEES Type 1: Persistent Volcanic Crises in the USA: From Precursors to Resilience
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Bruce Houghton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 291,722.00

This project brings together a new research team to: 1) quantify and reduce
uncertainties in physical and social/behavioral data sets for our active United
States volcanoes; 2) analyze the complex processes of decision-making during
volcanic crises, and 3) utilize Bayesian approaches to cope with incomplete,
sometimes contradictory inputs into decision-making during these events. This
project will begin a new, large collaboration between the Volcanic Hazards
Program of the U.S. Geological Survey and seven academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve the
relationship with restless, potentially dangerous active volcanoes in the United
States. Moderate to large volcanic eruptions are infrequent but high-consequence
events of long duration and with multiple hazards. They carry a host of
volcanological, engineering, mathematical, societal, planning, and economic
problems, along with very high levels of uncertainty in all types of data.
Amongst large geological hazards, they are almost unique in being preceded by
weeks or months of clearly recognizable precursors which offer the potential for
successful early interventions. The impacts of volcanic eruptions should be, for
this reason, amongst the easiest to mitigate of all the great natural hazards.
Nevertheless, the costs of volcanic disasters are often out of proportion to the
magnitude of the parent eruptions.