* 1331208
* Student Support for the Fifth International Brain-Computer Interface Meeting
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Melody Jackson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2014
* USD 33,116.00

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) translate signals recorded from the brain into
useful outputs such as control of the movement of a computer cursor, selection
of letters or icons on a computer screen, or even operation of a
neuroprosthesis. Thus, BCI technology is a potentially powerful communication
and control option for people with severe motor disabilities or disorders such
as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), brainstem stroke, cerebral palsy, and
spinal cord injury, who may have little or even no muscle control and therefore
no means of communication with the external world. The success of this exciting
work depends on close and productive multidisciplinary interactions among
researchers working in neuroscience, psychology, engineering, mathematics,
computer science, and clinical rehabilitation. Because no standard venue existed
to bring these groups together to share results, to exchange ideas, and to
develop the requisite close and productive collaborations, the NIH sponsored and
the Wadsworth Center in Albany NY organized the First International BCI Meeting
in 1999, which was followed by additional meetings in 2002, 2005 and
2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is funding to support the Fifth International
BCI Meeting, which will be held June 3-7, 2013, in Asilomar, California. Because
of the growth in the field of BCI research 300 or more participants are expected
to attend, including investigators from at least 100 BCI research groups. All
attendees commit to the entire meeting, from the opening reception and dinner on
the evening of Monday, June 3, through the final summary discussion at breakfast
the morning of Friday, June 7. The schedule for the days in between includes, on
Tuesday morning, brief summaries scientific and technical advances by
representatives of selected BCI labs. Tuesday afternoon includes innovative
applications and protocols for BCIs, as well as a panel on BCI performance
metrics. Wednesday starts with a special breakfast for women in the BCI field,
and continues with a session on Clinical Translation and Dissemination. After a
poster and demo session, there will be a Town Hall meeting focused on forming a
BCI Society. On Thursday up to 15 workshops proposed by researchers in the BCI
field will run concurrently, each workshop to combine invited talks, targeted
discussion, and sharply focused debates. Thursday's sessions will conclude with
a discussion of the State of the Art and future workshops for BCI technologies.
On Friday morning there will be a plenary session of all meeting attendees, in
which leaders of each workshop will present a 15-minute summary presentation.
The primary source of funding for the meeting will once again be the National
Institutes of Health. NSF funds will enable the conference organizers to support
about 30 additional students (including undergraduate and graduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows), to attend and participate in a special pre-conference
seminar as well as the conference itself. More information about the conference
may be found online at http://bcimeeting.org/2013/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Students will be encouraged to participate in all aspects of the
conference. The laboratory research reports of the first day will expose them to
the breadth and variety of BCI research going on around the world. The informal
workshops will familiarize them with the issues now being addressed on the
cutting edge of the research and with the different viewpoints on those issues.
Students will assist in workshop planning; participate in the workshop
discussions; and may assist in the preparation of summary reports. In
preparation for the main meeting, a special colloquium will be held for students
on the afternoon of June 3 with the purpose of presenting a big picture, as well
as filling in gaps in their understanding before they move into specialized
sessions on various aspects of the field. On Monday and Wednesday afternoons,
students will attend special "talk back" sessions where established researchers
will be available to answer questions and to lead discussions. Students and
post-doctoral fellows will present posters on their research, which will be
judged by a panel of senior BCI researchers on the basis of innovation and
scientific or technical merit. With all participants housed on site and all
meals for all attendees taken together on site, there will be ample opportunity
for informal discussions. This creates a unique opportunity for students and
trainees to mingle with and learn from established researchers. Student
participation is a critical feature of the BCI meetings, allowing students to
meet potential mentors and collaborators. Many students who attended the first
four BCI meetings have gone on to pursue BCI as their chosen field of research.
The PI will make a special effort to encourage participation by members of
traditionally underrepresented groups.