* 1331006
* WORKSHOP: Envisioning the Future of Online Graduate Education in the 21st Century Research University
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Debasish Dutta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2014
* USD 39,886.00

This workshop is bringing together academic, industry, and government leaders
with researchers to chart possible future courses for research universities in
an environment of rapidly growing Massively Open Online Courses (MOOCs).
Participants will examine the relative advantages of outreach through
traditional avenues and MOOC platforms while continuing to support traditional
university commitments to research, discovery, and knowledge development. They
will also consider how the new opportunities will serve or hinder the nation's
goals of reaching a broader and more diverse audience, and how lifelong learning
needs can be met through new partnerships with academia, industry and
government. A broad diversity of participants is included in this important
dialogue. The results of the workshop will enlighten policy discussions at the
state and national levels. The results of the workshop will be captured in a
report and widely disseminated to a diversity of stakeholders in higher
education: universities, federal agencies, state governments, and professional
and academic associations.

The workshop will also serve to inform the NSF WIDER program (Widening
Implementation and Demonstration of Evidence-Based Reforms), which seeks to
significantly scale up the use of evidence-based instruction at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. WIDER's focus on evidence-based approaches
includes online as well as traditional pedagogical approaches.