* 1331362
* AGS-PRF:   Improving Tropical Cyclone Risk Assessment by Incorporating Storm Size Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Daniel Chavas, Chavas                  Daniel         R
* Fellowship Award
* Edward L. Bensman
* 10/31/2015
* USD 172,000.00

This postdoctoral fellowship award provides funding to enhance current tropical
cyclone (TC) risk assessment methodology by incorporating physics-based TC size
information into existing risk modeling frameworks. There is a lack of
fundamental understanding of TC size and that leads to an inability to fully
quantify the risk of damage from landfalling TCs. The overarching goal of the
project will be to demonstrate a skillful physics-based explanation of the
observed distribution of TC size, as well as of the size of an individual storm
at genesis and during its lifecycle, for integration into a TC risk assessment
framework. The project will make use of a combination of observations, high-
resolution weather forecast model output, idealized modeling studies, and theory
to elucidate the physics underlying the observed distribution of TC size. The
results will then be used to develop and incorporate storm size physics into
comprehensive TC risk assessments. Progress towards these objectives will be
assessed by statistical verification of the skill of the size predictors in
observations and weather forecast models.

The broader societal impacts of the project will be through better assessment
and potentially mitigation of damage risk in both the short (e.g. emergency
management) and long-term (e.g. infrastructure planning). The project will also
enhance collaborative efforts between scientists and risk managers and support
an early-career scientist.