* 1331490
* Hazards SEES Type 2:   Hazard Prediction and Communication Dynamics in the Modern Information Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2021
* Chris Snyder, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2021
* USD 3,168,582.00

When hazards threaten in today's world, information abounds. Scientific
predictions are improving rapidly, and information and communication technology
has dramatically changed how people access, combine, and share information. Yet
existing paradigms for hazard preparedness and warning provide limited knowledge
and tools for understanding how forecast and warning information is communicated
and used. To address this gap, this project will investigate how interactions
among different sources and types of information influence risk interpretations
and behavioral responses as a hurricane approaches and comes onshore, in the
context of evolving meteorological predictions and modern information-delivery
systems. This project brings together concepts, methods, and expertise from
computer and information science, atmospheric and related sciences, and social
and behavioral sciences to address three research questions: (1) How does
evolving information about hurricane risk propagate through the information
system as a hurricane approaches? (2) How does communication of risk in the
modern information environment alleviate or exacerbate societal vulnerability to
hurricanes in general, and of the most vulnerable members of the public in
particular?; and (3) Given ongoing developments in science and technology, how
can hurricane forecast and warning information and its communication be
improved? These questions will be investigated by integrating the study of the
real-world hazard information system with computational physical and social
modeling. Researchers will collect and analyze data from social media streams,
interviews, and focus groups that include an emphasis on more vulnerable
populations. This research will be combined with high-resolution ensemble
hurricane and storm-surge modeling, as well as experiments in a computational
laboratory that couples the hurricane and storm surge modeling with agent-based
modeling of social actors who pursue, process, and transmit such
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort rests
both in advancement of fundamental knowledge in each sub-discipline and in
forging new connections among disciplines to address integrative questions in
hazards research. The social media, interview, and focus group research will
build new understanding of how hazard information from different sources, in the
digital and non-digital spheres, is accessed, combined, interpreted, and acted
upon. This work will also advance vulnerability science by combining theory from
several fields to examine how risk communication, information and communication
technology, and social networks influence vulnerability and adaptive capacities
as a hazard approaches. Associated weather and storm surge modeling research
will build fundamental understanding about coupled probabilistic hurricane and
storm surge forecasting and the predictability of storm surge across lead times.
Scenarios derived from the output of this modeling will be used to develop
visual risk communication prototypes that combine geospatial physical and
societal information in new ways. Coupled hurricane/agent-based modeling
experiments will enable a novel exploration of information system dynamics and
emergent behaviors in a controlled setting. Through integration across research
components, this project will build new understanding of how physical sciences,
social and behavioral sciences, and human-centered computing can join to
transform hazard risk communication and help prevent hazards from becoming
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relative to Broader Impacts, findings from this
project are expected to be of utility to operational weather and storm surge
forecasters, public officials, emergency practitioners, media personnel, and
members of the public to improve how they create and communicate information
about approaching hurricane risks. These improvements will motivate actions to
reduce harm from hurricanes, enhance capacities, reduce vulnerabilities, and
over time contribute to increased sustainability. These findings will also be
applicable to other hazards for which there is some predictive skill. To promote
application of findings, the project includes collaborations with practitioner
partners in the hurricane forecasting, emergency management, media, and digital
volunteer communities. The project will also cross-train senior and postdoctoral
researchers and graduate students in interdisciplinary approaches and methods,
helping to build an interdisciplinary workforce capable of solving the complex
issues of hazard resilience and sustainability.