* 1331610
* Collaborative Research: CyberSEES: Climate-Aware Renewable Hydropower Generation and Disaster Avoidance
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,01/31/2018
* Paul Bogdan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2018
* USD 228,159.00

Water, solar and wind are essential for a sustainable transformation of our
energy systems. Distributed solar and wind farms proliferate, but energy
harvesting from water is trapped in a century-old damming paradigm with high up-
front costs and ecological impacts. And yet, as a river runs down to the ocean,
there is enormous amount of kinetic energy that could be sustainably harvested,
if done without impoundments that break up the run of the river. An
environmentally friendly alternative, known as hydrokinetic or run-of-the-river
power extraction, harvests a portion of the kinetic energy in the river at
relatively small, local scales at multiple places along the river. However,
these projects are characterized by uncertainty in generated output and strong
weather/climate dependence. They are typically developed in an ad-hoc manner
without prior large-scale analysis of determining optimum locations, online
analysis of the produced output, or effective decentralized control of
distributed hydrokinetic generators. Furthermore, climate change introduces
highly variable weather patterns that alternate benign conditions with
catastrophic levels of wind, precipitation, temperature extremes, and
droughts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates climate-aware modeling,
analysis, and control for large-scale sustainable energy harvesting in river
networks. The project goals are: (i) modeling of time-space varying river
network flow conditions and water levels both with and without multiple
hydrokinetic generators; (ii) determining optimum locations for hydrokinetic
units in a distributed river network based on economic, reliability-driven, and
environmental criteria; (iii) evaluating environmental sensor requirements for
demand/response or environmental disaster avoidance; (iv) predictive matching of
hydrokinetic power generation and time-varying demand in complex river networks
with geospatial and temporal dependencies; and (iv) climate-aware planning for
distributed hydrokinetic power generation resources and avoiding catastrophic
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential societal impacts of this research
include flood disaster avoidance and guidance on small footprint hydropower
project development. Given that the estimated hydrokinetic resource potential in
the United States is roughly four times the amount of hydroelectricity currently
produced each year, small footprint hydroelectric projects could create enough
low-carbon energy to power an economy the size of Virginia's while minimizing
the impact to the surrounding environment and nearby communities. While the main
goal of the research is determining in a climate-dependent manner the production
output and identifying any imbalance between production and demand or the
control mechanisms to match one by the other, the approach is sufficiently
general to be applied to a more diverse body of applications where deterministic
small-scale processes need to be upscaled for effective feedback response and
control. The educational and mentoring component incorporates multidisciplinary
collaboration across electrical, civil and energy/public policy engineering in
creating large-scale complex system models that cross traditional boundaries of
both academia and industry. Through its educational component the project
involves a diverse student body, while expanding the project's outreach beyond
the typical undergraduate and graduate demographics to high-school and middle-
school student population.