* 1331856
* Christina River Basin CZO: a whole watershed approach to integrating feedbacks between water, mineral and carbon fluxes in human landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* James Pizzuto, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 12/31/2015
* USD 700,000.00

This 1-year project represents a plan to complete the investments made in the
Christina River Basin (CRB) Critical Zone Observatory (CZO) with NSF award
0724971. The overarching scientific objectives of the CRB-CZO were established
in 2009 to test two related hypotheses: 1) Hydrological, chemical, and
biological processes that produce and mix mineral surfaces and organic carbon
are rate limiting to watershed scale chemical weathering, soil production, and
carbon sequestration; and: 2) Humans accelerate rates of carbon-mineral mixing,
resulting in anthropogenic carbon sequestration significant to local, regional,
and global budgets. The extended CRB-CZO team examined these hypotheses within
the 6th-order CRB watershed of Southeastern Pennsylvania and Southern Delaware
with a suite of long-term studies organized into 4 inter-related objective
areas: 1) Carbon-mineral-microbe-water interactions, 2) Co-evolution of critical
zone structure, hydro-bio-geo-chemical function and carbon complexation, 3)
Mobilization, transport &amp; depositional controls on carbon-mineral supply,
mixing, and burial, and 4) Saprolite to sea integration of erosion-driven carbon
sequestration. CRB-CZO studies investigate scales varying from individual
mineral grains to entire watersheds, and involve field, lab, and modeling
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 1-year award will fund 14 investigators
from 5 institutions to finalize ongoing research on these topics. In addition,
the CRB-CZO team will also finalize installation of sensor stations in the
streams draining study watersheds with different "endmember" land uses (forest,
agriculture, and disturbed) as an investment in future studies. The research
plan also outlines opportunities to pursue ongoing funding beyond the NSF CZO
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRB-CZO research activities under this 1-year
award will finalize training of approximately 8 PhD students and result in
numerous publications in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at scientific
meetings. CRB-CZO will, to the extent possible, continue to communicate and
coordinate with the national CZO network (including the national CZO office).
Investigators will also organize a Christina River Basin Science and Management
Symposium in the Fall of 2014. The Symposium will highlight CRB-CZO research to
a variety of stakeholders, including the Christina Basin Water Quality
Management Committee, which includes representatives from 15 federal, state, and
local environmental resource agencies.