* 1331021
* EXTREEMS-QED: Computational and Statistical theory and techniques in the study of large data sets
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Gexin Yu, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2019
* USD 879,498.00

The proposed EXTREEMS-QED program at the College of William and Mary is an
integrated program for the training, research and education of mathematics
majors to enhance their ability to deal with new challenges in computational and
data-enabled science and engineering (CDS&amp;E). Data-driven and data-intensive
teaching modules and material will be embedded into courses in linear algebra,
statistics, probability and data analysis. New courses in complex networks,
graphical models, matrix and graph theory techniques in statistics, quantum
graphs, topological techniques and data analysis, bioinformatics and self-
organization in biology and marine science will be developed. Some of these
courses will eventually be integrated into the regular curriculum. Student
research will focus on two areas:(i) the intersection of graph theory,
statistics, matrix theory, operations research, and newly emerged networks
science; and (ii) spatiotemporal pattern formation, detection and recognition
requiring a blending of differential equations, statistics, dynamical systems,
and computational topology. New theoretical results will be formulated and
connected to large data sets collected from research in medical science,
ecology, and marine science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program includes
an eight-week summer research component in which undergraduate students and
faculty advisers form interdisciplinary research teams to work on projects on
various theoretical and applied scientific problems. Seminar series and study
groups for faculty members from different disciplines will reinvigorate their
CDS&amp;E knowledge, and student seminars, colloquium series and short courses
will open up new horizons of CDS&amp;E research to the students and the general
public. The planned activities are centered in the Department of Mathematics at
William &amp; Mary, but also involve collaborators in the departments of Applied
Science, Biology, Physics and Virginia Institute of Marine Science. We will use
the expertise and experience of the faculty involved to train students through
research in CDS&amp;E to prepare them for graduate study in the sciences and
mathematics, or for professions which require computational and data analysis
skills in industry or the national laboratories. The training and educational
programs will equip a large number of undergraduate mathematics majors with
knowledge necessary for future career challenges in computational and data-
enabled science and engineering. Students will be exposed to the theoretical and
practical aspects of data-driven computational problems, which will attract and
prepare them to pursue graduate study and related careers. The new results and
techniques discovered will be presented and published in conferences/journals of
various disciplines to have sustained and wider impact in the science community,
and the analysis of data sets from medical science, ecology, molecular biology
and marine science will lead to new advances in these research frontiers.
Proposed seminars, lectures, and courses will be open to the general public so
they can keep track of new scientific progress in big data analysis. A
partnership with several southeast Virginia historically black colleges and
universities including Virginia State University, Hampton University, and
Norfolk State University will bring minority students and faculty advisers from
these institutions to William &amp; Mary for the proposed activities and joint
summer research program, which will help to achieve the goal of President
Obama's 2010 Executive Order on Promoting Excellence, Innovation, and
Sustainability at Historically Black Colleges and Universities.