* 1331712
* CyberSEES:Type 1: Integrated Management of Data Centers, Electric Grid, and Transportation for Cyber-Enabled Sustainability
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Xiaorui Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 307,096.00

The future power grid features advanced sensing capabilities, increased level of
automation, and faster information exchange enabled by digital communications.
With this modernized infrastructure system, energy consumption and management
across different sectors are inherently interlinked. This creates abundant new
opportunities to coordinate different types of energy consumption for maximized
societal benefits. This project is motivated by these opportunities, and seeks
to develop an integrated energy management framework to jointly manage power
consumption in data centers with other energy consumers surrounding the data
center, such as electric vehicles and residential loads. The framework will be
developed based on advanced feedback control theory and optimal control theory.
The goal is to reduce electricity cost and environmental impacts of the
integrated system, and to enable the system to provide green frequency
regulation service to the grid to support high penetration of renewable energy
resources.

This project is an early example of how to explore the deep interdependencies
between data center power consumption and other nearby energy consumers. Its
novelty lies in investigating the potential of using data centers, along with
other assets, to jointly provide frequency regulation services to the grid. This
will lead to much lower emissions than the traditional approach which is mainly
based on coal and natural gas fired generators. The project will also involve a
number of education and outreach activities such as participation of
undergraduate and under-represented students in research, inclusion of research
results into courses, and the involvement of high school students.