* 1331284
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Three Case Studies of Natural Disasters
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Adam Sundberg, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 16,331.00

Overview

This STS Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant supports archival research to
investigate a series of natural disasters that occurred in the Netherlands; one
the deadliest floods in European history (the Christmas Flood), rinderpest
epidemics that destabilized agriculture, and the arrival of invasive mollusks
that jeopardized the entire Dutch coastal defense system. Historical studies
thus far consist of case studies highlighting the local and immediate economic
effects of individual events. These studies posit no relational connections to
these events and offer limited evaluations of their role in the development of
Dutch hydro-engineering and medicine. As a result, the impact of these events
remains largely provincial and under appreciated. This study will show that
these disasters had profound economic, cultural, and environmental implications.
The award will support two archival research trips to the Netherlands for
collection and analysis of documents pertaining to the historical and spatial
dimensions of the proposal plus funding for conference travel to disseminate the
results.

Intellectual Merit

The proposed project contends that these events constituted a unique disaster
period in Dutch history with significant implications for Dutch society,
culture, and environment. It conceives of these seemingly singular disasters as
a synergistically connected and ultimately affecting Dutch adaptation resulting
in a massive redesign of Dutch water defense and new methods of combating
disease. This study is grounded in the methods of historical disaster studies,
climate change research, and European historical geography; the researcher has
training in environmental history and experience teaching global environmental
studies. The final product will argue that these disasters prompted a reordering
of the Dutch physical environment, the cultural rationale for understanding risk
and calamity, and the place of science and technology in Dutch society.

Broader Impacts

By tackling issues like the cultural construction of risk and the socio-
historical elements of innovation in engineering, the project may have broader
significance in risk and hazard research and the history of science and
technology; it may provide information relevant to discussions of current
natural disasters. In addition, the project will provide opportunities for
international education and show the value of cross-cultural understanding,
perhaps culminating in a partnership between Dutch and American scholars. The
socio-cultural experience of climate change is globally variable which could
lead to interesting and provocative discussions between students in the two
countries. Whereas flooding, invasive species, and disease are common to both
areas, they have very different impacts on culture and engender different
responses. Bridging this gap in environmental awareness is one goal of this
proposal.