* 1331167
* RAPID: The 2012-2013 eruptions of Copahue volcano, Argentina
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2013,05/31/2014
* Johan Varekamp, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2014
* USD 28,273.00

Volcanic eruptions impact global climate, geothermal energy is derived from
volcanic heat, and many ore bodies are formed through volcanic processes. Active
volcanism provides a direct means to study how our planet functions. Copahue
volcano in Argentina (37.8 oS, 71 oW) started a new eruption on December 22,
2012 and is still active at low level today. This volcano emits compositionally
extreme hydrothermal fluids that derive directly from a very acid and hot
magmato-hydrothermal system at 1-2 km depth. Such fluids are thought to be
responsible for epithermal ore deposits, eg. gold, silver and lead and may
overly systems that form porphyry ore bodies. The composition of these fluids
changes with the state of activity of the volcano: shallow intrusions lead to
hotter and more concentrated fluids that are expelled into the ambient and
acidify local rivers and lakes. Monitoring the composition of such streams
during a period of volcanic activity aids in developing tools for eruption
forecasting. Data collected on fluids during the 2000 eruption of Copahue
suggested several parameters that indicate the intrusion of shallow magma prior
to an eruption. The 2012-2013 eruptive period provides an ideal venue to test
and refine these ideas. A large glacial lake that is stratified during the
austral summer contains compositional information of the pre-eruptive fluids in
the bottom waters, whereas the surface waters represent recent inputs. It is
imperative to sample the lake prior to its seasonal overturn in late April, when
the water column homogenizes and all detailed information is lost. A workshop
with scientists from Argentina, Italy and the USA is convened for March 2013 to
discuss the eruption, its hazards and monitoring efforts, and US scientists with
an extensive research record on Copahue should participate and contribute to
this event.

The research activities will contribute to the science of eruption monitoring
and forecasting, which is beneficial for many people living on volcanoes
worldwide. It also promotes collaboration between local Argentinian and US
scientists. The local authorities plan to establish a small volcano observatory
near Copahue, but data are needed to make the best possible choices of
monitoring parameters. Besides the bilateral collaboration, two female US
students (one undergraduate, one graduate) will collect samples on site and
analyze those at Wesleyan University for their senior and MA theses. Training of
US students in research on active volcanoes is important to keep the USA in a
scientific leadership position with respect to assessments of both natural
hazards and formation of natural resources.