* 1331080
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socio-Technical Practices in the Context of Marcellus Shale Water-Quality Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Kirk Jalbert, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 14,881.00

Overview

This STS Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant will fund research to examine
the tension between the drive toward bigger and more complex environmental
information systems and local needs for knowledge about polluting industries.
Computing technologies have enabled the development of big-data systems to
analyze natural and built environments; whereas, non-scientists are increasingly
involved in gathering evidence of pollution in their local communities. Thus,
while lay citizens seek local empowerment through participatory environmental
science, their contributions to data gathering efforts serve to amplify the
importance of big data in making scientific knowledge claims.

Intellectual Merit

The research is a study volunteer water monitoring groups that respond to
pollution threats from natural gas extraction in New York and Pennsylvania. The
study will follow five capacity building organizations that play an important
role in developing volunteer monitoring protocols, aggregating data, and
determining how data will be used in public data portals. The study addresses
several issues, such as explaining the diversity of monitoring practices, data
aggregating strategies, and data sharing practices that are used by capacity
building organizations, and explaining the difficulties water monitoring
communities have faced in creating a standard, shared, water-quality database.
To answer these questions, the research uses mixed-methods including qualitative
interviews with members of multiple stakeholder groups, and participant
observation of strategy sessions held between capacity building organizations.
The study will contributes to STS literature on citizen science and a growing
body of research on big-data informatics.

Broader Impacts

The results of this research will have potential to impact technical practices
and information management strategies of civil society groups. It will make
significant contributions to volunteer water-monitoring communities by
contributing knowledge to capacity building organizations, volunteer groups, and
other stakeholder groups that participate in the study. The study will also
inform the practices of regulators and research scientists who are seeking
effective ways to interact with new information systems that are coming online
to support citizen science groups.