* 1331019
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:   Influences on Nutritional Status among Alaska Native Older Adults of Anchorage, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Deborah Crooks, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/28/2015
* USD 26,500.00

This award will support research to examine the sociocultural factors that shape
diet and physical activity practices as they influence nutritional status
outcomes among Alaska Native elders (adults aged 65+ years) living in Anchorage.
This project will (1) identify and evaluate the influence of sociocultural
factors on dietary and physical activity patterns among urban Alaska Native
elders, and (2) identify relationships between the sociocultural environment,
diet, physical activity, and nutritional status outcomes (BMI) in this
population. This 9-month long mixed-methods research study employs participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, questionnaires, and anthropometric
techniques. Ten to fifteen interviews will be conducted with Alaska Native
elders in Anchorage to identify the sociocultural factors that influence diet
and physical activity practices. From these data, the investigator will finalize
the questionnaires which measures typical foods eaten (food frequency),
engagement in physical activities, and the strength of sociocultural influences
on these dietary and activity practices (a cultural survey). This questionnaire
will be orally administered by the researcher as a structured interview and
anthropometric measurements (height, weight, and waist circumference) will be
taken with a representative sample of 75 Alaska Native elders in Anchorage.
Anthropometric measurements will be used to determine BMI and the prevalence of
under weight, normal weight, overweight, and obesity and will be tested with
multiple regression techniques to determine the nature of the relationship
between sociocultural factors and nutritional status outcomes in this
population. The research project has the potential to contribute to a deeper
understanding of the social and cultural context of aging and health among urban
Alaskan Native elders.