* 1331615
* Hazards SEES Type 2: WIFIRE: A Scalable Data-Driven Monitoring, Dynamic Prediction and Resilience Cyberinfrastructure for Wildfires
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Ilkay Altintas, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 09/30/2018
* USD 2,651,758.00

The University of California at San Diego (UCSD) is awarded a grant to build an
end-to-end cyberinfrastructure (CI), called WIFIRE, for real-time and data-
driven simulation, prediction and visualization of wildfire behavior. San Diego
Supercomputer Center (SDSC) and Calit2's Qualcomm Institute will build this
integrated CI system for supporting social-ecological resilience to the changing
fire ecology regime in the face of urban dynamics and climate change, together
with collaborators from UCSD's Jacobs School of Engineering and UMD's Department
of Fire Protection Engineering. The WIFIRE CI integrates networked observations,
e.g., heterogeneous satellite data and real-time remote sensor data, with
computational techniques in signal processing, visualization, modeling and data
assimilation to provide a scalable, technological, and educational solution to
monitor weather patterns to predict a wildfire's Rate of Spread. Our
collaborative WIFIRE team of scientists, engineers, technologists, government
policy managers, private industry, and firefighters will architect and implement
CI pathways that enable joint innovation for wildfire management. Scientific
workflows will be used as an integrative distributed programming model and will
simplify the implementation of engineering modules for data-driven simulation,
prediction and visualization while allowing integration with large-scale
computing facilities. WIFIRE will be scalable to users with different skill-
levels via specialized web interfaces and user-specified alerts for
environmental events broadcasted to receivers before, during and after a
wildfire. The approach is scalable which allows many sensors to be subjected to
user-specified data processing algorithms to generate threshold alerts within
seconds. Integration of this sensor data into both rapidly available fire image
data and models will better enable situational awareness, responses and decision
support at local, state, national, and international
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The products of WIFIRE will be initially
disseminated to project collaborators (SDG&amp;E, CAL FIRE, USFS), covering
academic, private, and government laboratories while generating value to
emergency officials, and consequently to the general public. WIFIRE may be used
by government agencies in the future to save lives and property during wildfire
events, test the effectiveness of response and evacuation scenarios before they
occur and assess the effectiveness of high-density sensor networks in improving
fire and weather predictions. WIFIRE's high-density network, therefore, will
serve as a testbed for future applications worldwide. The team is inclusive
across a spectrum of collaborators and will create an open-source CI environment
with intuitive workflows that lead to reusable software components for a wide
range of science and engineering disciplines that can be extended to secondary
education. Results are disseminated via an interactive website at SDSC in which
students from high school to graduate level can participate in uploading their
own data logging, data processing or data-driven alerts.