* 1331974
* STTR Phase I:  Metabolic engineering of photosynthesis for improved biomass accumulation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Benjamin Gray, Benson Hill Biosystems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 268,170.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
improve intrinsic crop yield through metabolic engineering of photosynthetic
pathways. Genes encoding five rate-limiting enzymes for photosynthesis and
starch synthesis will be co-expressed constitutively or in a cell-specific
manner in a model C4 plant species. Multiple metabolic pathways will be altered
to simultaneously relieve multiple rate-limiting steps for carbon assimilation.
The effects of enzyme accumulation on photosynthetic performance, plant growth,
and biomass accumulation will be assayed, and optimal combinations of enzymes
and relative enzyme levels will be determined. The effects of constitutive
enzyme accumulation will be compared with cell-specific enzyme accumulation to
determine whether a targeted expression profile can deliver a more substantial
improvement in carbon assimilation rates and plant growth than constitutive
enzyme accumulation. The results of this work will identify key rate-limiting
enzymes in the photosynthetic machinery, optimal enzyme expression profiles, and
optimal enzyme concentrations to improve photosynthetic performance, carbon
assimilation, and yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project, if successful, will be to identify novel ways to
improve crop yields in a range of both food and non-food crops. Photosynthetic
engineering for improved carbon assimilation is a promising, but underexplored,
method for improving intrinsic crop yield. Traditional plant biotechnology
approaches have sought to protect yield, e.g. through insect resistance and
herbicide tolerance. Utilizing synthetic biology to engineer primary metabolism
and increase intrinsic crop yields will work in tandem with existing yield-
protecting technologies. Modeling and initial proof-of-concept studies have
confirmed that photosynthetic pathways can be engineered for greater efficiency,
resulting in yield improvements. The results of this work will significantly
enhance our understanding of the rate-limiting steps of photosynthetic carbon
assimilation, providing insight into the most promising reactions and metabolic
pathways for these engineering approaches. Translating the results of this Phase
I work to crop plants will result in improved crop harvests without expanding
the agricultural footprint, translating to enormous commercial benefits to the
agricultural, food, and energy sectors.