* 1331906
* Critical Zone Observatory for Intensively Managed Landscapes (IML-CZO)
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2021
* Elmer Bettis III, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2021
* USD 6,499,955.00

Critical Zone Observatory for Intensively Managed Landscapes (IML-
CZO)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intensively managed landscapes, regions of significant
land use change, serve as a cradle for economic prosperity. However, the
intensity of change is responsible for unintended deterioration of our land and
water environments. By understanding present day dynamics in the context of
long-term co-evolution of the landscape, soil and biota, IML-CZO aims to support
the assessment of short- and long-term resilience of the crucial ecological,
hydrological and climatic services. These include freshwater quality and
quantity, provision for food, fiber and (bio)fuel, nutrient transformations, and
terrestrial carbon storage. The goals of this project are to quantify the fluxes
and transformations, as well as interactions, thresholds, and dynamic feedbacks
of water, nutrients, and sediment in IMLs, and to characterize how rapid land
use changes have altered the vulnerability and resilience of these systems. An
observational network of two sites in Illinois (3,690-km2 Upper Sangamon River
Basin) and Iowa (270-km2 Clear Creek Watershed), and a partner site in Minnesota
(44,000-km2 Minnesota River Basin), which together capture a range of geological
diversity of the low relief glaciated and tile-drained landscape in the Midwest,
will drive the scientific and technological advances. The guiding hypothesis for
the scientific effort is that through human modification, the critical zone of
IMLs has passed a tipping point (or threshold) and has changed from being a
transformer of material flux, with high nutrient, water, and sediment storage,
to being a transporter. This change threatens the resilience of the landscape to
accommodate future impacts associated with ongoing human activity, including
climate change and bioenergy crop production. Further, it increases the
vulnerability of IMLs by compromising the sustainability of key critical-zone
services on which ecological systems and human populations depend. Understanding
and quantifying shifts in the response of the critical zone to human development
remains a challenge, and current assessments are at best qualitative. IML-CZO
research will identify threats to resilience of the critical zone, and will also
inform management strategies aimed at reducing the vulnerability of the system
to human activities that threaten sustainability. We will develop methods and
knowledgebase that are broadly applicable across the Midwest and similar low-
gradient landscapes worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide
leadership in developing the next generation of work force and informing
sustainable management strategies. The IML-CZO will be a launch pad for several
new educational and outreach initiatives, and it will be an integral resource to
connect and partner with existing organizations. It will draw on and add to
several resources and programs available throughout the region. The CZO will
provide a testbed for student-led sensing and data collection initiatives, and
is expected to stimulate new research ideas and further advance the sensors and
measurements curriculum. The CZO will also work to bring together collaborations
with National Great Rivers Research and Education Center, IOWATER, Minnesota and
Illinois RiverWatch Volunteer programs to enlist "citizen scientist" (age 10 -
70) in the work of the CZO. IML-CZO will also serve as a training ground for
several undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctoral research
associates by engaging them in interdisciplinary research.