* 1331135
* CSCL 2013: Learning across Levels of Space, Time, and Scale Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Carolyn Rose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 05/31/2014
* USD 40,000.00

This project is providing support for travel and registration for U.S.
participants in a key global venue for research and training in the learning
sciences via the Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshops at the Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2013 conference in Madison, WI. Prior
versions of these workshops have had a significant impact on the career and
research of pre- and post-PhD scholars in the learning sciences from diverse
domains such as computer science, information science, education, psychology,
and cognitive science. The intellectual merit of this project rests in its
selection of top-quality pre- and post-doctoral candidates whose research in
computer-supported collaborative learning addresses the conference theme:
"Learning across Levels of Space, Time, and Scale." Their participation in the
conference provides opportunities to improve the dissertations of approximately
fifteen graduate students and the research agendas of approximately fifteen
early career, post-doctoral scholars. As such it is an important capacity-
building project that leverages the expertise of the CSCL community and the
outcomes of previous workshops held in conjunction with the International
Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS). The broader impacts of this project
include multiplying opportunities to develop international collaborations in the
field of CSCL, and supporting the career development of some of the next
generation of researchers in multiple disciplines who work in the CSCL area.