* 1331352
* BSF:2012362:Parallel GPU Algorithms for Proximity Analysis of Freeforms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Sara McMains, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2019
* USD 40,784.00

This project is funded as part of the United States-Israel Collaboration in
Computer Science (USICCS) program. Through this program, NSF and the United
States - Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
collaborations among US-based researchers and Israel-based researchers. The
objective of this research project is to collaboratively design efficient
algorithms to compute distance structures for analyzing 3D solid models. These
structures are essential building blocks for algorithms in numerous application
areas, including shape analysis, segmentation, proximity queries, meshing for
finite element analysis, pattern recognition, and motion planning, with wide-
ranging societal and economic benefits ranging from security to drug design.

The proposed approach builds on the collaborating PIs preliminary results that
introduced an algorithmic approach that combines lower-envelope methods and
massively parallel Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) computations. New algorithms
will be developed to compute distance structures directly from the curved
surfaces defining CAD models, including the defacto industry standard of Non-
Uniform Rational B-Spline (NURBS) surfaces. This problem was previously
considered intractable because of the resulting high order surfaces if solved
analytically. The proposed GPU-based approach will address issues of speed and
robustness by analyzing the curved surfaces directly, instead of using
piecewise-linear approximations of the input. The research will encompass both
theoretical error analysis of worst-case error and measurement of the
approximation error in practice so as to optimally address the speed versus
accuracy tradeoff.