* 1331915
* CyberSEES:Type 2: Precipitation Estimation from Multi-Source Information using Advanced Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Xiaogang Gao, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,060,000.00

This project will develop a cyber-enabled, data-driven modeling system that will
use the vast amount of earth and environmental observational data to estimate
precipitation, with the goal to further freshwater resource sustainability. One
of the major objectives of this research is to innovatively apply advanced
machine learning techniques to predict complex natural phenomena. Identification
of current machine learning algorithms' representational and computational
limitations when applied to earth and environmental data that are required for
accurately estimating precipitation will also be explored. Specifically, this
project will explore image-based feature extraction techniques and so-called
"deep belief" models for interpreting important features within weather and
climate data to estimate and predict precipitation. Features to be investigated
include appearance, texture, shape, dynamics, and regional weather and climate
signatures. The project will use data from ground-based radar, satellite-based
sensors, and Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models, as well as physical
characteristics from land surface datasets. Image-based extraction techniques
will produce feature maps, which in turn will be used as input into a Deep
Boltzmann Machine (DBM) model, a modern version of neural networks. A DBM
represents a probability model over a collection of visible units and hidden
units and produces as output a target variable (in this case, precipitation).
This model is particularly suitable for the proposed modeling approach and for
large-scale data. Once this system is developed, we will utilize a wide variety
of earth science data to provide accurate, high-resolution global precipitation
estimates. Verification methods to be used for evaluating precipitation
estimates will include general statistics, precipitation intensity distribution,
and regional analysis methods used by the atmospheric and hydrological sciences.
The project will focus on verification over the United States, where high-
resolution ground-based radar data are available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent decades, extreme flooding and droughts have become more frequent and
severe. Changing patterns in precipitation, which are attributed to climate
variability, are responsible for these hydrologic extremes and contribute to
uncertainties in freshwater resource management and planning. In the face of the
planet's growing population and stresses on water resources, it is important to
minimize these uncertainties and the social impacts of these natural hazards.
These goals can only be accomplished through accurate precipitation measurements
and forecasts. Satellite platforms and advanced numerical models produce massive
amounts of global high temporal and spatial resolution data that can be used for
this purpose, but analyzing these data remains a challenge. Recent innovations
in computational sciences and machine learning have extended our capability to
harvest from remotely-sensed data critical information that is essential to
understanding cloud-precipitation systems. This project will adapt and improve
satellite-based precipitation estimation algorithms by using computational
science, statistical modeling techniques (machine learning), remote-sensing
observations, and numerical models to develop cyber-enabled modeling systems
that can effectively analyze the massive amount of observational data to improve
the global estimation of precipitation at high spatial and temporal resolutions.