* 1331784
* SHINE:  Instability of Large-Scale Current Sheets, Plasmoid Formation, and Particle Acceleration in Coronal Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Amitava Bhattacharjee, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 03/31/2015
* USD 157,775.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) will study magnetic reconnection as a
fundamental and ubiquitous process in solar coronal plasmas. Fast magnetic
reconnection is widely believed to play an important role in triggering eruptive
solar flares and accelerating solar energetic particles (SEPs). Using resistive
magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) and electromagnetic particle simulations, this
project will investigate the connection between the so-called 'super-Alfv√©nic
instability' (also known as the 'plasmoid instability') of extended current
sheets and the onset and dynamics of eruptive flares. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
effort will include studies of the saturation mechanisms for the plasmoid
instability, the role of the instability in loss-of-equilibrium models, and the
effect of self-consistently generated plasma turbulence. The PI will also study
the relative importance of collisional and collisionless reconnection regimes,
as well as the transition between them, in controlling the rapid onset of
eruptive flares. He will then use fully kinetic electromagnetic particle
simulations to investigate the role of magnetic reconnection and multiple
plasmoid formation in accelerating particles to high energies. Finally, the PI
will compare the predictions of his theory and modeling efforts with
observations made by spacecraft. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize
state-of-the-art high performance computing tools and develop interdisciplinary
applications for the study of laboratory and space plasmas. The effort will
integrate teaching and research in a university environment, involving
postdoctoral research scientists and a graduate student pursuing a Ph.D. thesis.
The PI will also help educate high school students in a summer institute at the
University of New Hampshire known as 'Project SMART' (Science and Mathematics
Achievement through Research Training). Project SMART provides exciting research
experiences for local high school students in New Hampshire.