* 1331332
* US-Taiwan Planning VIsits: Novel Sensor Designs for Three-Dimensional Integrated Circuits
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Yiyu Shi, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2015
* USD 66,290.00

The goal of this CNIC proposal is to catalyze an international collaboration
between Missouri University of Science and Technology (USA) and Industrial
Technology Research Institute (Taiwan). The focus of the research effort is to
design test chips along with silicon measurements to preliminarily demonstrate
the efficacy of two novel sensor designs for three-dimensional integrated
circuits (3D ICs): a temperature-stress co-sensor and a crack sensor. The former
is the first-of-its-kind that avoids the conventional time-consuming sensor
calibration process by self-calibrating based on the reciprocity between
temperature and stress. The latter is the first-of-its-kind that detects cracks
based on a single DC voltage measurement, which eliminates the need of
conventional X-ray or other optical imaging equipment. Both sensors are small in
size, which allows for massive on-chip deployment. &lt;br/&gt;3D ICs are already
available in the low-power embedded domain. In addition, low-power hand-held
devices are expected to commercialize this technology in 2013-2014. There is
also a significant interest from the high-performance computing domain on this
technology. Moreover, the 3D IC industry is actively engaged in research and
development activities to identify and overcome manufacturing challenges.
However, little is known on what design and post-silicon technologies are
available and required to improve thermo-mechanical reliability of 3D ICs. This
collaborative research effort will initiate a new research direction to fill a
critical gap that is delaying the mainstream acceptance of 3D IC technology. In
addition, the proposed activities will expose the associated graduate student to
international research experience; they will enable a solid long-term
collaboration with ITRI; and they will provide US students with rich IC design
knowledge from Taiwan?s semiconductor industry through webinars. This CNIC award
is funded by the International Science and Engineering (ISE) section of the
Office of International and Integrative Activities, with co-funding from the
Communications, Circuits, and Sensing-Systems (ENG/CCSS).