* 1331852
* CyberSEES: Type 2: Towards Sustainable Aquatic Ecosystems: A New Adaptive Sampling and Data-Enabled Monitoring and Modeling Framework
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Elena Litchman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2016
* USD 800,000.00

Exploiting advances in underwater robotics, sensor networks, signal processing,
and biophysical modeling, the goal of this award is to create a novel paradigm
for monitoring and understanding aquatic ecosystems and thus enable sustainable
management of water resources. In this paradigm, schools of autonomous gliding
robotic fish adaptively sample the water environment. The collected measurements
are used to reconstruct high-resolution data fields with advanced
multidimensional signal processing algorithms. The reconstructed data fields,
along with the data samples, facilitate the monitoring of aquatic ecosystems and
enable high-fidelity, mechanistic modeling of the underlying biophysical
processes for accurate forecast. The objectives of this award include addressing
fundamental problems at the interfaces between the building blocks of the
paradigm, and demonstrating a proof of concept for the latter. Specifically,
five highly integrated research thrusts are pursued: (1) developing path-
planning and control algorithms for the robots to realize information-driven,
energy-efficient sampling, (2) developing robust communication protocols and
effective in-network parameter-estimation algorithms, (3) establishing tensor
sparsification-based frameworks for data-field reconstruction using limited data
samples, (4) exploiting reconstructed data fields and network-estimated sub-
models to create accurate mechanistic models, and (5) evaluating and
demonstrating the integrative paradigm in the monitoring and prediction of
Harmful Algal Blooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is expected to result in
a new, holistic framework for monitoring, understanding, and managing freshwater
and marine environments, with a myriad of applications in oil spill response,
ecosystem monitoring, and drinking water safety, to name a few. The project
provides interdisciplinary training opportunities for students, including those
from underrepresented groups. Robotic fish demos, museum exhibits, and teacher-
training activities are offered to engage K-12 students, teachers, and the
public, and to pique their interest in science and engineering. Besides the
dissemination of research findings through conference presentations,
publications, and workshops, commercialization of the developed technologies is
pursued to facilitate their practical adoption.