* 1331010
* EXTREEMS-QED: Research and training in computational and data-enabled science and engineering for undergraduates in the mathematical  sciences at NJIT
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2021
* Michael Siegel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2021
* USD 874,946.00

The NJIT EXTREEMS program builds upon the established record of the Department
of Mathematical Sciences at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in
interdisciplinary research involving the computational analysis of data and the
modeling and simulation of complex systems. The program will immerse
undergraduates in courses and group projects relating to mathematical
computation and data analysis, and promote faculty professional development
through participation in workshops on computational science education. Students
will be exposed to computational issues in multidisciplinary situations,
including in industrial settings. The program includes the development of new
courses and enhancements of existing ones that will permanently enrich the
Computational and Data Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) curriculum at
NJIT. Some of the enhancements are in courses that are taken by students in a
wide variety of majors, and the changes will impact their careers in science and
technology. The group research projects will use and develop fast and accurate
algorithms to study problems in medicine, fluid dynamics, acoustics, climate
modelling, and risk assessment. Many of the projects will lead to improvements
in computational techniques for data analysis such as dimension reduction, data
assimilation, and Monte Carlo methods. Valuable information will be gained and
disseminated on effective ways to educate students in these computational
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational tools are increasingly important
in a broad number of areas in science and technology. For example, computer
algorithms are used to predict the spread of an oil spill, investigate the
properties of DNA, process and sharpen radar images, and assess the risks of
investment portfolios and nuclear power plants. In many fields, extremely large
data sets are being collected or generated, posing significant challenges to
modeling, computer simulation, and data analysis. This five year EXTREEMS
program will significantly enhance the exposure of undergraduate mathematical
science students at NJIT to topics in CDS&amp;E. This exposure will come from
the broad infusion of CDS&amp;E topics into the curriculum and a rigorous
interdisciplinary research program that will introduce students to computational
tools for the analysis of large data sets and modeling and simulation of complex
systems. An important component of our program is the group nature of the
proposed activities, including team projects supervised by multiple faculty, and
participation of industrial partners. With expertise in scientific computation
and data analysis and their honed leadership and communication skills, EXTREEMS
students will emerge from this program with unique interdisciplinary skills and
are expected to become future leaders in the mathematical sciences both in
industry and in the nation's graduate programs. This project is jointly
supported by NSF's Division of Mathematical Sciences and Division of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.