* 1331390
* CyberSEES: Type2: In-Situ, Wireless, Energy-Harvesting Soil Moisture/Nutrient Sensors for Managing Agricultural Resources &amp; Environmental Impact
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Robert Weber, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,050,000.00

The project will address Cyber-Enabled Nutrient Management for Sustainable
Agriculture through precise spatial/temporal control of agricultural inputs for
optimized resource utilization and minimized environmental impact. There is a
critical need for the development of cyber technologies in production
agriculture that allow automated collection of real-time spatial soil and crop
data while advancing a deeper understanding of the fertilizer inputs and
nitrogen (N) cycling. This project aims to develop: (1) In-situ, accurate, self-
calibrating, self-localizing soil sensors for monitoring soil properties such as
soil moisture and nitrates, (2) Small antenna technologies for underground
communication so the sensors do not interfere with agricultural operations, (3)
Effective techniques for broadband energy-harvesting from vibrational sources
(eg., thunder and farming operations); (4) Modeling and analysis methods for
understanding the underlying nitrogen cycling at high spatial/temporal
resolutions, and information management and decision-making tools for precise
agricultural control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Managing the nitrogen Cycle is one of
the grand challenges identified by the National Academies. Nitrogen fertilizers
from farm fields are major source of water quality impairment and the leading
contributor to hypoxia. The project is a step towards developing deeper
understanding of agricultural N cycling process while developing precise
controls over N fertilizer inputs that are key to sustainable agriculture. To
enhance educational and workforce development efforts, the PIs will contribute
to a graduate minor in Sustainable Agriculture by introducing new curriculum
material on Bio-Chemical Sensors. PhD students of the funded research will
enroll in the Sustainable Agriculture minor, thus developing a new generation of
workforce trained in the aspects of cybersystems, agroecosystems, environmental
monitoring, and sustainable cultivation. To achieve wider awareness and
reception, PIs will work closely with industry and government organizations in
the agricultural sector, several of whom have expressed interest through
supporting letters.