* 1331463
* Hazards SEES Type 2:  From Sensors to Tweeters: A Sustainable Sociotechnical Approach for Detecting, Mitigating, and Building Resilience to Hazards
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Louise Comfort, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,000,000.00

Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the national challenge of
defining and building resilience to hazards that would engage the ?whole
nation,? including scientists, governmental agencies at all levels of
jurisdiction, private and nonprofit organizations, and communities. To meet this
challenge, it is essential to define, design, and demonstrate an
interdisciplinary, dynamic process that will transform societal understanding of
risk and enable self-organized, collective action to support the resilient
management of hazards. This study will identify and model the interactions among
physical, engineered, and sociotechnical systems that occur in hazard emergence
and response as a complex, adaptive system of systems (CASoS) to enhance
resiliency in practice and enable communities to manage the risk of hazards
within existing resource and time constraints. It will use the threat of Near-
Field Tsunamis (NFTs; i.e., waves generated within 200 miles of shore) in a
location prone to this risk, Padang, West Sumatra, Indonesia as a case study to
investigate methods of assessing accurately and efficiently the dynamics of NFTs
generated by undersea earthquakes or landslides as they impact human
communities. This process is an iterative search for information under evolving
conditions to inform decisions at multiple levels of action in response to
shared risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five basic research questions drive this
project:&lt;br/&gt;1.What instruments, metrics, media, tools, and technologies
are most effective in enabling communities at risk to collect, access, and
exchange information about risk?&lt;br/&gt;2.What types of information and what
forms of communication contribute most effectively to collective recognition of
risk, creating public awareness of a shared threat to safety?&lt;br/&gt;3.To
what extent does investment in data collection, analysis, search, and exchange
enable more informed decision making in community environments exposed to long-
term risk, and reduce the potential for ecological, social, and economic losses
from episodic catastrophes?&lt;br/&gt;4.What causal models, based on combined
real-time and stored data for social and physical systems, offer alternative
strategies for collective action to protect community population,
infrastructure, and resources?&lt;br/&gt;5.How can the proposed resilience
models, methods and tools for collective action be used to assess accurately and
efficiently the dynamics of NFTs generated by undersea earthquakes or landslides
and enable collective action to manage the impact of hazards on coastal
communities?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the following four
hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;1.Computational modeling of complex adaptive relationships
under uncertain conditions increases collective understanding of tsunami risk
and increases collective problem solving capacity. &lt;br/&gt;2.Multiple
patterns of information dissemination regarding risk among community residents
increase the efficiency of self-organized collective action.&lt;br/&gt;3.Timely,
accurate transmission of tsunami risk increases efficiency in targeting
evacuation procedures to diverse community groups and areas with different
degrees of exposure.&lt;br/&gt;4.Detecting the temporal rate of seismic motion,
or source slowness, discriminates tsunami earthquakes from non-tsunami
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This study envisions
communities that learn to assess hazards endemic to the environment and that
have the capacity to make collective decisions informed by scientific knowledge,
leading to timely, effective risk reduction. Findings from this project will
redefine the science of community resilience and enable at-risk communities to
create learning environments in which they collectively assess, respond, and
recover from extreme events. Models for collective action demonstrated in this
project will increase collective problem solving capacity for minimizing losses
and maximizing actions for innovative, sustainable risk reduction. The most
vulnerable groups in society--women, children, minorities, elderly?will benefit
as communities initiate risk reduction measures, and as leaders trained in
interdisciplinary skills guide citizens in responsible management of resources
and risk assessment. Developing dynamic methods for managing sociotechnical
systems will enhance SEES education. The CASoS prototype, deployed and tested in
Indonesia, will benefit the global society.