* 1331872
* Reynolds Creek Carbon Critical Zone Observatory
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2013,05/31/2024
* Kathleen Lohse, Idaho State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Yuretich
* 05/31/2024
* USD 3,755,249.00

Most of the world's terrestrial carbon is found in the Critical Zone as soil
carbon. Indeed, soils store approximately three times more carbon than the
atmosphere. Yet large uncertainties exist as to whether soils will release
carbon to the atmosphere faster than they can take it up when disturbed or
experiencing new environmental conditions or extremes. These uncertainties arise
owing to an incomplete understanding of the processes controlling soil carbon
fate and the challenge of scaling up estimates of soil carbon from the plot to
the landscape or global level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators are
establishing the Reynolds Creek Critical Zone Observatory (RC CZO) to address
the grand challenge of improving prediction of soil carbon storage and the
processes governing its fate at the plot to the landscape scale. The RC CZO will
be co-located with the Reynolds Creek Experimental Watershed (RCEW) in southwest
Idaho, which has been administered by the United State Department of Agriculture
-Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS) for over 50 years. The RCEW is
particularly well suited for the CZO because of its strong gradients in climate,
vegetation, and distributions of soil organic and inorganic carbon. The
observatory will leverage existing scientific infrastructure that includes long-
term, spatially extensive meteorological and soil
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary team of scientists from
Idaho State University, Boise State University, and the USDA-ARS will focus
their initial efforts on extensive characterization of above and below ground
plant biomass and soil carbon amounts and characteristics across the watershed.
An intensively instrumented set of sites (CORE) along an elevation gradient will
include measurements of evapotranspiration and the associated land-atmosphere
exchange of carbon, sap flux, soil respiration, soil moisture, soil temperature,
and other essential climate variables. Experimental research will include
investigation of prescribed fire and grazing on soil carbon and processes. The
CORE site data will support efforts to improve modeling of the soil-vegetation-
atmosphere system and provide a rich dataset for collaborations. A suite of
simulation tools will be used to distribute controlling climate input variables
at a sufficiently high resolution to capture the natural heterogeneity on the
landscape and predict the distribution of soil carbon and other key ecological
and hydrologic stores and fluxes throughout the watershed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CZO will produce one of the largest coupled soil
carbon- environmental variable datasets available. The dataset will provide a
unique calibration target to develop and test modeling tools critical for
regional and global climate and biogeochemical modeling. The intermediate scale
research at the RC CZO will improve our ability to scale local observations to
the landscape and the globe; an essential step to support accurate Earth system
modeling. Evaluation of simulations at the intermediate scale will reveal areas
of weakness in process representation and allow researchers to identify critical
research needs. This CZO will become a community resource for carbon cycling
research and education, and a magnet for global soil modeling community research
to address the grand challenge of understanding soil carbon behavior. This
observatory will also improve understanding of how land management activities
like prescribed fire and grazing alter soil properties, carbon inputs and the
fate of soil organic carbon at the landscape level. In additional to traditional
training, this CZO will develop a field methods course on critical zone
processes and develop K-12 curriculum to improve literacy of soils in the
critical zone.