* 1331782
* Collaborative Research: CyberSEES:Type 2: Framework to Advance Climate, Economics, and Impact Investigations with Information Technology (FACE-IT)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* James Jones, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anita  Nikolich
* 09/30/2016
* USD 302,710.00

Issues relating to climate change and food security require an understanding of
the interaction between the natural world and human society over long time
scales. Understanding climate change, its impacts on the natural world and
society, and the tradeoffs inherent in societal responses demands an
unprecedented degree of cooperation across academic fields. New data sources on
expected future climate, soil characteristics, economic activity, historical
weather, population, and land cover, provide a potential basis for this
cooperation. New methods are needed for sharing within and across communities
not only data but the software used to generate, synthesize, and analyze it.
Progress on these research challenges is hindered by the extreme difficulties
that researchers, collaborators and the community experience when they
collaborate around data. Multiplicity of data formats, inadequate computational
tools, difficulty in sharing data and programs, lack of incentives for pro-
social behavior, and large data volumes are among the technology barriers. The
FACE-IT project employs an integrated approach to cyberinfrastructure to advance
the characterization of vulnerabilities, impacts, mitigation, and adaptation to
climate change in human and environmental systems. Leveraging existing research
cyberinfrastructure the project will create a full-featured FACE-IT Platform
prototype with new capabilities for ingesting, organizing, managing, analyzing
and using large quantities of diverse data. The project team will collaborate
with two distinct interdisciplinary communities to create specific FACE-IT
Instances that will both advance their research and enable at-scale evaluation
of the utility of the FACE-IT approach.

Many important and challenging problems facing humankind occur at the
intersection of the social, physical, biological, and computational sciences.
The proposed methods and approaches have general applicability for advancing the
use of research information across diverse communities.