* 1331009
* CAREER: Application and Theory of Geometric Shape Handling
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Carola Wenk, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 12/31/2013
* USD 63,316.00

The objective of this research is to help increase speed, quality, and
productivity of shape handling in practice. Geometric shapes are at the core of
a wide range of cutting-edge technological sectors including computer vision,
computer aided design (CAD), robotics, bioinformatics, computational biology,
medical imaging, geographical information systems (GIS), and drug design, in
which a multitude of tasks for manipulating and handling geometric shapes have
to be performed efficiently and reliably.

This research is based on two research tracks: (i) shape handling applications
and (ii) shape handling theory. The investigator will continue to foster
interdisciplinary communication, contribute more theoretical soundness to
applied problems, and pursue a stronger theoretical foundation which can be the
basis for a wider range of applications. Specifically, this research involves
several applied projects including, but not limited to, computational
proteomics, computational neuroscience, and spatiotemporal traffic databases.
Semi-automatic algorithms will be combined with theoretical expertise in order
to pave the road for high-throughput processing in areas with very noisy data.
Theoretical projects include matching and distance measure problems for curves
and surfaces, multi-curve matching, initiation of a general study of geodesic
distance measures in which distances are measured using shortest paths on a
surface, and shape simplification. Lower bounds will be investigated in order to
gain better insight into the structure of the problems, and application-friendly
algorithms such as output-sensitive algorithms and approximation algorithms will
be devised in order to better cope with outliers and noisy inputs.

