* 1331097
* US-Brazil Collaborative Research on Intelligent Industrial Maintenance Strategies
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2015
* T. Warren Liao, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles H. Estabrook
* 09/30/2015
* USD 21,497.00

This CNIC proposal seeks support for a five-day planning visit by two Louisiana
State University (LSU) faculty members, Drs. Marcio de Queiroz and Warren Liao,
and one LSU graduate student to the Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina
(UFSC) in Brazil. The aim of the travel is to initiate research collaboration
with UFSC faculty member, Dr. Joao Carlos E. Ferreira and his group, in the area
of intelligent equipment maintenance strategies for industrial
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industrial equipment maintenance is often a big
factor in production costs and also affects the quality of products and the
production time. Thus, a company can gain a competitive edge by having an
effective maintenance strategy in place. The objective of this research is to
advance the state-of-knowledge in the design of equipment maintenance systems by
exploiting the trend towards e-maintenance and recent progress in intelligent
systems and manufacturing integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSU-UFSC team
has the necessary technical background for successfully tackling these topics,
including the right combination of analytical and computational skills. The
Brazilian collaborator brings experience in the general area of manufacturing
engineering and heads the Manufacturing Integration Lab at USFC, plus maintains
close ties with industry. Dr. Ferreira and his group have developed an automated
distributed system that has the potential to be generalized into an intelligent
maintenance strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help to start a
long-term research and educational partnership between LSU and UFSC that will
integrate research and education activities. Furthermore, the equipment
maintenance strategies to be developed are applicable to the numerous
petrochemical plants in both countries.