* 1331355
* AGS-PRF:  Understanding the Nature of Turbulent Fluctuations in the Near Sun Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2014,05/31/2016
* Kristopher Klein, Klein                   Kristopher     G
* Fellowship Award
* Carrie E. Black
* 05/31/2016
* USD 172,000.00

This is a 2-year postgraduate fellowship research project to study turbulence in
the near-Sun plasma and its role in solar corona heating and in solar wind
acceleration. The project aims both to predict the qualitative properties of the
turbulent fluctuations that will be measured in situ by the upcoming ESA/ Solar
Probe Plus and NASA/ Solar Orbiter missions near and within the Alfven critical
point and to create a theoretical framework for the interpretation of these
measurements. Utilizing the ?synthetic spacecraft data method? developed by the
PI during his graduate research, together with various turbulence and coronal
heating models, three specific objectives will be pursued: 1) Quantifying
changes in the measured power spectra near and within the Alfvenic critical
point due to the violation of Taylor's Hypothesis and using these changes to
verify the presence of whistler and/or kinetic Alfven waves; 2) Compiling a set
of observable signatures which can be used with in situ observations to
distinguish between various coronal heating mechanisms; and 3) Using nonlinear
simulations as a separate check of the validity of the synthetic data method.
The work will be carried out at University of New Hampshire under the mentorship
of Professor Chandran.

The role of turbulence in plasma heating and acceleration are fundamental plasma
physics problems that are of interest to a broad scientific community working on
astrophysical plasmas (e.g. accretion disks and magnetospheres of young stars),
space physics (e.g. solar wind and planetary magnetospheres), and laboratory
plasmas (e.g. fusion reactors). The work will be done by a recent Ph.D. graduate
as his introduction into a teaching and research career in the geospace
community.