* 1331817
* STTR Phase I:  STTR Proposal on Atmospheric Water Capture using Advanced Nanomaterials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Constantine Megaridis, NBD Nanotechnologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project aims to
significantly enhance water condensation heat transfer through the application
of patterned surface coatings. These patterned coatings are expected to reduce
unnecessary energy consumption caused by film-wise condensation mechanisms,
typical in modern condenser systems. Instead, the proposed surfaces promote
sustained drop-wise condensation, a mechanism that is, according to theory, 10
times more energy efficient than film-wise condensation, thus leading to
significant reductions in material and operating costs. State-of-the art
commercial coatings that promote drop-wise condensation have limited operating
lifetimes of only 100 h. Therefore, a durable coating that facilitates sustained
operation for longer durations is highly desirable for commercial applications.
The technology proposed in this grant application involves the manufacture of
surfaces with patterned hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions through the
deposition of a hydrophobic coating that can be thermally decomposed locally via
a carbon dioxide laser affording spatial resolutions below 100 micrometers. The
methods selected to manufacture, apply, and pattern the coatings are standard
industrial large-scale processes and are amenable to scaling up. The patterned
wettability coatings are anticipated to improve the energy efficiency of
condensation surfaces by a factor of 2 - 4 times from the current state-of-the-
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project affects a number of large market segments that depend on condensation
processes, from small household dehumidifiers and HVAC systems, to large scale
desalination plants. Condensation is an extremely energy intensive process.
Thus, any costeffective performance enhancement facilitates numerous
applications, such as enhanced dehumidification, HVAC and atmospheric water
generation. The dehumidifier market alone represents a global market of $7
billion. By incorporating NBD coatings into existing commercial units, energy
costs may be reduced without compromising condensation output, thereby
disrupting the market with new energy efficient devices. The proposed technology
also has civilian, humanitarian and military applications because it recovers
water from the natural humidity in the atmosphere in virtually any region of the
world. It will enable the US to increase its national security by enabling
efficient water harvesting, lend goodwill through support of humanitarian needs,
improve our nation's economic competiveness, and ultimately bring more STEM jobs
to America. Enhanced condensation can have a significant logistical impact for
any remote operation worldwide where water is not readily accessible. Other uses
can enable increased global sustainability for capturing potable water for
human, animal and plant consumption.