* 1331975
* STTR Phase I:  High yield production of boron nitride nanotubes for advanced heat management in sustainable technologies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Dongyan Zhang, Nano Innovations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2014
* USD 240,490.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project focuses on the
growth of high quality Boron Nitride Nanotubes (BNNTs). BNNTs have both high
thermal conductance that is an order of magnitude higher than aluminum, and also
have an electronic bandgap of about 6 eV that makes them an excellent electrical
insulator. These unique properties promise many exciting applications.
Unfortunately, BNNTs are notoriously difficult to grow, which means that they
cannot be produced in the quantities necessary to fulfill industrial needs. The
objective of this project is to further advance a recently developed growth
technique for high quality BNNTs. If successful, this will allow for a thousand-
fold increase in the BNNT growth rate over the standard chemical vapor
deposition growth methodology. Furthermore, the grown BNNTs will be used to
create composite materials, which will be tested for use as thermally conductive
materials in thermal management of electronic systems.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project stems from the
successful increase in the growth rate of high quality BNNTs. Heat management of
electronic systems is one of the most pressing challenges facing the industry.
Most electronics systems use plastic materials both as mounting material and as
packaging to electrically isolate the electronic components. However, these
materials cause heat bottlenecks that require expensive workarounds and bulky
cooling systems. For this reason, a large amount of industrial research is
focused on solving these heat management challenges. When the growth rate of
BNNTs has been successfully scaled up, and the feasibility of the BNNT
composites are established, it will allow for wide scale production of thermally
conductive, electrically insulating plastic composite materials. These materials
can be used in everything from electric engine controllers to high-efficiency
light emitting diode units to alleviate the buildup of heat in electronic
systems. Widespread use of BNNT composites will allow for decreased electronic
component failure rates, decreased need for bulky cooling systems, etc. In
addition, these composites will open up the door for new innovations, such as
three-dimensional electronic system architectures.