* 1331252
* WORKSHOP: Conference & Workshop Support: Science for the People, April 2014 at UMass Amherst.
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Sigrid Schmalzer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 24,813.00

Project Overview

This award is to support a three-day conference on the history of the
organization Science for the People (SftP), which was active during the 1970s
and 1980s, and its relevance for the interface of science and society today. The
conference will bring together veteran members of the organization and other
scientists, STS scholars, and students. The conference will include keynote
speakers offering SftP and STS perspectives, and panels on the historical and
contemporary significance of SftP to issues that the organization addressed in
the past and continue to face society today.

Intellectual Merit

The conference will contribute to three areas of growing importance within STS.
First, it will support the effort to replace the simplistic understanding of
"science communication" promoted by mainstream "public understanding of science"
circles with a more sophisticated analysis that accounts for political,
economic, and social power structures. Second, it will provide additional
resources for the study of science and political engagement. Third, it will
offer a venue for the further exploration of what some STS scholars have termed
"activist-oriented STS," an area that has witnessed a number of rigorous and
influential contributions recently. A major lasting contribution will be the
compilation of written historical narratives by former members of SftP with
analysis by STS graduate students.

Broader Impacts

The conference will benefit scientists and students. Scientists will gain
exposure to SftP history and STS perspectives, and so they will acquire a better
understanding of the social, political, economic, and cultural contexts of the
problems they seek to address through their scientific work. Students will
encounter in SftP participants successful examples of people who have put their
science education to work in ways consistent with their social and political
goals. The conference website is already serving to bring members of these
groups into productive conversation. After the conference, the website will
provide the public with accessible scholarly analysis of the history of SftP,
historical materials produced by SftP in text-searchable pdf format, a summary
of the conference?s major themes, panel descriptions, and video recordings of
the panels.