* 1331176
* BSF:2012304:Methods for Preprocessing Population Sequence Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Eleazar Eskin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 40,000.00

This project is funded as part of the United States-Israel Collaboration in
Computer Science (USICCS) program. Through this program, NSF and the United
States - Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
collaborations among US-based researchers and Israel-based researchers.

In recent years, many genetic studies have been performed, revealing many new
associations between human genetic variation and complex diseases. These
studies, referred to as genome-wide association studies, are limited to common
genetic variants because the technology which collected the genetic variation
was limited to only collecting common variants. There is evidence suggesting
that rare variants have an important role in disease architectures. Recently,
sequencing technologies have been introduced which are capable of collecting
both genetic common and rare genetic variation. Sequencing technologies generate
enormous amounts of data, raising new computational challenges. In this project,
the PIs will develop methods for addressing these computational challenges
including the design of efficient algorithms and the modeling of the sequencing
process. In addition, the researchers will develop methods for incorporating
rare variants into the analysis of genetic studies. The immediate broader impact
of our project is the availability of these tools for general use by
geneticists, leading to an improved understanding of the disease genetics.
Particularly, the PIs will apply their methods to studies of non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, bipolar, dyslipidemia, neurodegenerative dementia, and Tourette
syndrome, which will result in a direct impact on our understanding of these
particular conditions.

Current computational methods for the analysis of sequencing data exist, however
they are limited to the analysis of a single sample. In this project the PIs
will design efficient computational methods for the analysis of sequence data
across a population. For population samples, the tremendous size of the data
requires the design of highly efficient algorithms in terms of memory and
runtime. Specifically, the PIs propose to design algorithms for the compression
of sequencing data, for the search of regions identical by descent across
multiple samples, and for high-resolution haplotype inference from sequence
data. The PIs will explicitly model rare variants and the sequencing process,
and use machine learning techniques and convex optimization to estimate the
model parameters efficiently. These methods will allow for a fine-scale analysis
of population data, resulting in improved understanding of complex diseases and
human history. The collaborative nature of the project will expose the students
involved in the project to the medical and genetics worlds, both in Israel and
in the US, and it will improve their abilities to design and implement solutions
to complex algorithmic problems. The methods developed in this project will be
part of the teaching material of courses in UCLA and Tel-Aviv, and these
materials will be made publicly available.