* 1331260
* AGS-PRF:   Refining the Climate Role of Tropical Cyclones: Key Constituents of the Hadley Cell?
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2015
* Benjamin Schenkel, Schenkel                Benjamin       A
* Fellowship Award
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 11/30/2015
* USD 172,000.00

Recent research on the relationship between tropical cyclones (TC) and climate,
suggests that years with enhanced TC activity may lead to decreased atmospheric
poleward heat transports during the following winter possibly due to significant
atmospheric poleward heat transports by TCs. Supporting this hypothesis are
several studies showing that TCs are responsible for significant short-term
reductions in hemispheric zonal available potential energy due to poleward moist
static energy transports by TCs. Past research by the Principal Investigator
(PI) has also shown that Western North Pacific TCs are responsible for
significant cross-hemispheric transports of dry static energy into the Southern
Hemisphere. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will undertake a
comprehensive quantification of meridional energy transports by TCs to serve as
a foundation for establishing the climate role of TCs. He will test the
hypothesis that Northern Hemisphere TCs constitute a significant portion of
global atmospheric dry static energy (DSE) transports from the Northern
Hemisphere to the Southern Hemisphere during boreal summer and fall due to the
upper tropospheric equator ward outflow jets associated with the TCs. Analyzing
the composited meridional DSE transports by TCs within the Eastern North
Pacific, North Atlantic, and West Pacific, the PI will determine whether the
mean response is significant within each basin. Next the PI will quantify
zonally integrated cross-hemispheric DSE transports at the equator by each Best-
Track TC from reanalysis to determine the significance of aggregate dry static
energy transports relative to the total atmosphere on time scales ranging from
weeks to years. Finally the PI will examine Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project (CMIP5) simulations to compare results from reanalysis to determine the
fidelity of the role of TCs as evidenced in general circulation models.