* 1331552
* Collaborative Research:  S2I2:  Conceptualization of a Center for Biomolecular Simulation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2017
* Vijay Pande, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,117.00

This award will support the planning for a scientific software Institute in the
area of computational chemistry. Molecular simulation is an integral part of
contemporary chemistry due to its broad adoption by academic researchers and
industries that use molecular mechanics and dynamics methodology to advance
their science. The major molecular software programs have been downloaded by
every major research university and biotech and pharmaceutical companies, and
their wide usage is well exemplified by the ~30% of awarded cycles on the NSF
compute platforms. However, development, testing, and validation of biomolecular
simulation software, and the realization of high-throughput production runs made
available on various hardware architectures, is something that the user
community wants and requires, but is not something that has been adequately
supported in a sustained way in the academic
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning meetings will enable invaluable
graduate training by inviting local graduate students in the computational
sciences and provide them an opportunity to understand the landscape of research
opportunities at the interface of cyberinfrastructure and biomolecular sciences.
The second workshop will examine education, outreach and training opportunities
that an Institute of such scale and scope provides. The blueprint for the
Institute will highlight multiple inter-disciplinary research problems and
agenda; collectively, this will contribute to the training of the next-
generation computational scientists and application-oriented cyberinfrastructure
experts.