* 1331454
* Archiving Information on the Quality of Survey Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Duane Alwin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

SES-1331454&lt;br/&gt;Duane Alwin&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State University,
University Park &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the reliability
of measurement in social surveys. There has been much written about the sources
of measurement errors in surveys and best practices in developing high quality
survey instruments, that is, good questionnaires. The overarching goal of the
project is to establish a factual basis for conjectures that exist in the survey
methods literature concerning what are the qualities of good survey questions.
The project will build a publicly accessible data base of information for
roughly 900 questions representative of typical questions used in social science
surveys. The data base will contain estimates of question-specific
reliabilities, along with detailed coding of attributes of the questions (e.g.
content, response formats, and question length), which can be used to evaluate
the optimal properties of survey questions with respect to levels of measurement
error. Through an analysis of the reliability information and the attributes of
survey questions from several large-scale panel studies, practical suggestions
will be made about the attributes of survey questions that will improve the
quality of survey data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on prior NSF
funding, which relied on six nationally (or regionally) representative panel
surveys of the American population, all involving probability samples -three
National Election panels, the American's Changing Lives panel study, and the
Study of American (Detroit Area) Family panel study -which produced question-
specific reliability estimates for more than 450 questions. The present study
has three major objectives, as follows: (1) extending an existing data base on
the reliability of survey measures, (2) replicating prior findings using
question-specific reliability estimates for an additional 400 survey questions
or more from two new studies (using new analyses of the Health and Retirement
Study and General Social Survey panel studies), and (3) developing a long-range
plan for a publicly available archive of information on the reliability of
survey measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will significantly increase the social
science research infrastructure by providing a publicly available data base on
reliability estimates for a representative pool of survey questions. Given that
survey measurement is a key ingredient in the majority of social science
research, the broader impact of the proposed research lies in its contribution
to the uses of virtually all types of survey data, which can be evaluated in
terms of the results of this study. The research will add to our current
knowledge by making the reliability estimates obtained in the prior NSF-
supported research, along with the extension proposed here, available to the
public in a manner that allows users to search, filter or query the data base in
investigating the question reliability of types of survey questions of interest.
Thus, the long-range goal of the proposed project to create a public archive of
the levels of reliability for the typical kind information gathering approaches
used in surveys can have an impact on the development of survey questions for
new surveys, as well as increase our understanding of the quality of existing
surveys.