* 1331043
* I/UCRC FRP:  Multi-scale investigation of adhesive bond durability
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Arijit Sinha, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 196,191.00

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Wood Based Composites (WBC)
located at the Oregon State University (OSU). Funding Requests for Fundamental
Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 11-570. The
solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-defined
fundamental research.

This project will test the hypothesis that the ability of a wood-adhesive bond
to resist degradation due to water intrusion is dependent on penetration of the
resin into the cell walls of wood. The project proposes to quantitatively
measure adhesive penetration in 3D and in multiple scales, and then correlate
the results with adhesive bond performance. Multiple spatial scale of analysis
is needed to detect moisture-induced deformation of adhesive bonds and
interaction of pre-polymer with the cell wall. This effort is a fundamental
approach to solving the long-standing problem of durability of wood-based
composites and it compliments an ongoing research project sponsored by the
I/UCRC for Wood-Based Composites (WBC).

The proposed research will support the development of better wood composite
materials and directly assist manufacturers of wood composites and adhesives.
The impact of the research will be realized through direct involvement of the
industry members of the WBC, technical reports to be distributed to the WBC
members, publication in technical journals and conference proceedings to a
broader science and technology audience, as well as inclusion in college courses
and short courses. Student involvement in research is a point of emphasis for
the WBC, and recruitment efforts place high priority on inclusion of women and
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines. If successful, results from the
proposed project will remove speculation concerning influence of cell wall
penetration on moisture resistance of adhesive bonds in wood and provide
guidance for new adhesive formulation to improve moisture resistance or reduce
adhesive costs.