* 1331256
* Standard Research: Global Governance and Science in Complex Regulatory Regimes
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* David Winickoff, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 298,725.00

Overview

This STS research project is a study of policy and science; specifically, it
will examine regulatory science in the governance arenas of biofuels and geo-
engineering. Its primary goals are to produce generalizable knowledge about how
science operates within complex (multi-level and multi-sector) regulatory
frameworks for emerging technologies, and to conceptualize and evaluate the
legitimacy of regulatory science within these evolving regimes. To obtain that
knowledge, the PI will analyze legal documents (such as case law, litigation
briefs, expert testimony, legislative history, and legal commentaries) and non-
legal documents (including reports, media accounts, industry lobbying documents,
and press releases). He will also conduct a series of semi-structured interviews
with key actors involved in national and international policy related to
sustainable biofuels and geo-engineering.

Intellectual Merit

The results of this project will enrich existing accounts of the role of
expertise in global governance and produce policy relevant ideas in the arenas
of biofuels and geo-engineering. Global governance has largely moved away from
international treaty structures to complex (pluralist and fragmented) treaty
structures. In the complex context, regulatory science and diverse forms of
technical reasoning move across levels of government, and they span the private
and public sectors. Understanding what ideals of democratic governance mean in
such contexts requires sharper theoretical tools, which the PI plans to develop
by synthesizing intellectual approaches from STS and law; the resulting hybrid
approach will facilitate a deeper understanding of the interrelated dimensions
of legal jurisdiction, scientific authority, and democratic governance.

Broader Impacts

This project will serve to address an urgent need for good public policy on the
governance of biofuels and geo-engineering by providing tangible ideas for
improving the legitimacy of administrative process. It also promises to provide
a more systematic understanding of science and democracy, which is expected to
advance relevant academic fields; and it will provide useful resources for
policymakers, including a deeper analytic and practical toolkit. Finally, the
project will build human capital and infrastructure by training graduate
students and a postdoctoral fellow, and strengthening academic and policy
networks across nations.