* 1331023
* EXTREEMS-QED: Data Analytics Throughout Undergraduate Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Bruce Piper, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2017
* USD 550,000.00

The Data Analytics Throughout Undergraduate Mathematics Program (DATUM) develops
an integrated education/research program aimed at training students to become
versatile in the philosophy and tools of data analysis and modeling for Computer
and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&E). We define data analytics to
include modeling, simulation, and analysis of mathematical models based on data
and observations. The anchor of the educational program is a new sophomore level
course, "Introduction to Data Mathematics" (IDM), which introduces high-
dimensional data modeling and its interdisciplinary application to CDS&E. To
provide exposure to data for Freshman, the program will include capsules for the
Calculus and Linear Algebra course sequence that introduce CDS&E applications as
well as labs in the Introductory Biology course devoted to Data Analytics. Upper
class students that have completed IDM, can choose from 5 existing mathematics
courses enhanced to include data modeling with CDS&E applications and projects
as well as a co-developed Information Technology "Data Analytics" course.
Further, learning communities will be established in the residence halls led by
advanced undergraduate "Math Mentors" with experience in data analytics
research. After completing IDM, math majors/minors, possibly teamed with other
majors, can submit research proposals on data analytics to participate in a
summer undergraduate research program. A capstone senior research project and
participation in research symposia will culminate the research experience.

There is an urgent need for people who are fluent in data modeling, analysis,
and simulation in science and engineering disciplines. This project rapidly
transforms the mathematics curriculum and culture to provide an undergraduate
experience where students develop an exploratory mindset that enables them to
independently translate real-world problems and real-world data sets into
mathematical models that they can analyze to produce answers and insights.
Enabling students to do analysis of real-world problems as part of the
undergraduate curriculum provides an intriguing vehicle for attracting more
students to majors in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. An
increased pool of deep analytic talent can accelerate discovery in science,
engineering, and medicine and increase the global business competitiveness of
the United States.