* 1331499
* Hazards SEES Type 1: Predicting Landslide Runout and Granular Flow Hazard: Enhanced-g Centrifuge Experiments, Contact Dynamics Model Development and Theoretical Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Hoe Ling, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,748.00

The broad goal of this project is to address the unpredictability of landslides
and debris flows and to boost societal resilience and sustainability in the face
of growing landslide hazard and risk across the world. Landslides and debris
flows are frequent agents of natural disaster and they pose a particular
challenge because their timing, location, size and impact on infrastructure and
people are notoriously hard to predict. Such unpredictability undermines
society's ability to make accurate risk assessments, to frame safe design
principles or to enforce sound engineering codes. This project is being tackled
by an interdisciplinary team of computer scientists, engineers and geoscientists
working together on laboratory experiments and numerical simulations. The
research is framed around enhanced-g experiments conducted on a state-of-the-art
geotechnical centrifuge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These experiments are designed to
measure the forces driving and resisting landslide motion across a range of
simulated scales, to guide development of numerical algorithms to simulate such
motion, and to help in the framing of continuum models that can be applied
simply to real world problems. The experimental results are to be disseminated
as part of a new community initiative for establishing best practices for the
sharing of laboratory data. Cutting-edge, open-source, 3d contact dynamics code,
tailored to handling eroding granular flows and their impact on the environment,
provides a valuable new cross-cutting resource. The project fosters new
international collaboration with overseas engineers and geoscientists engaged in
both experimental studies and in field assessments of granular flow hazards
following recent typhoon and earthquake disasters. Mentoring is provided for two
early career researchers and a graduate student in a project of unusual
disciplinary breadth.