* 1331110
* WORKSHOP: An Interdisciplinary Conference on the Nature and Reality of Race bringing together Philosophical and Biomedical Perspectives, University of San Francisco, Spring 2014.
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Quayshawn Spencer, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 21,514.00

Project Overview &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI requests support for a two-day
conference to bring philosophers of race into conversation with biomedical
researchers. Within the last 20 years, there have been substantial developments
in the use of race as a biomedical category as well as in the philosophy of
race, but there have been few meaningful exchanges between scholars in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference agenda is designed to promote effective, fruitful discussions. It
will create a structure for potentially transformative discussions between
highly qualified and well-situated key actors in each field. It will do so by
implementing a novel strategy for promoting interaction; particular positions
are to be assigned to invited guests who are then to argue for or against
particular points of view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will promote interdisciplinarity and will
involve participants with very substantial racial and ethnic diversity. In
addition, the PI will videotape the conference proceedings, and she will post
them on a web site. An edited collection will also be published consisting of
workshop proceedings. These materials will be of broad interest well outside of
the disciplines involved in the conference including members of the general
public.