* 1331633
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Module-Centric Approach to Integrated Adaptation of Assembly Products and Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jeffrey Abell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2016
* USD 142,323.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to develop new modeling methodologies for concurrent
product assembly module design and supplier selection. Such methodologies will
support quick and efficient adaptation of product assembly modules for high
product variety, and allow identification of key interrelation between product
module re-configurations and supply chain performance. The approach of this
research is to develop three methods and integrate them: (1) graph theory based
assembly representation method incorporating product and supply-chain
information, (2) subassembly generation method by hierarchical multi-layer
assembly decomposition, and (3) mathematical models for linking subassembly
modules with suppliers for supply chain efficiency using multi-objective
computation methods. Case studies will be conducted jointly by participating
universities and industry partners in order to validate the above methods.
Deliverables of this research include mathematical models, heuristics
algorithms, software and materials for education and technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this research project will
transform assembly decomposition and supply chain design from disjointed
processes into an integrated decision-making process, providing a more holistic
view of the manufacturing enterprise and its all value stream partners. The
graph-theoretic assembly representation and decomposition methods will provide
innovative ways to model and plan assembly products more effectively, and will
increase the level of concurrent engineering. These enhanced modeling
capabilities and decision making tools will help minimize unnecessary lengthy
iterations between the design department and suppliers, and improve U.S.
manufacturing competitiveness by helping bring products to the market rapidly at
reduced cost. The developed methodologies and models can lead to software
systems and information technology infrastructure useful to industry. The
education program will promote learning, teaching and transfer of new
technologies to industry.