* 1331283
* BSF:2012144:Human-Competitive Evolutionary Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Lee Spector, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2017
* USD 42,000.00

This project is funded as part of the United States-Israel Collaboration in
Computer Science (USICCS) program. Through this program, NSF and the United
States - Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
collaborations among US-based researchers and Israel-based
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine and extend
computational techniques that allow computers to out-perform humans on certain
classes of difficult problems, some of which have practical applications across
many areas of science and engineering. The techniques to be studied, which are
modeled on biological processes of evolution, have already been shown to produce
human-competitive performance in areas ranging from pure mathematics to quantum
system design, and from game-playing systems to software engineering and
debugging. In this project the co-PIs will collaborate to characterize the
application areas in which these human-competitive successes have been achieved,
along with the specific techniques that were used in each case. The project will
use these characterizations to guide improvements to the techniques and
applications to new problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial data for the
study will be taken from the winners of the of the Human Competitive Results
Competition that has been held annually since 2004 at the Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference. Areas of anticipated application work
include software engineering, for example for automatic program synthesis and
repair, where early successes and the scale of the potential applications
indicate substantial promise. The long-term potential of work in this area is
for computers to automatically generate useful software, for many applications
of scientific or social significance, that would be prohibitively difficult or
expensive for human programmers to produce. The project will be conducted with
undergraduates and graduate students and will also thereby help to train future
innovators in computer science.