* 1331726
* Using the Susquehanna - Shale Hills CZO to Project from the Geological Past to the Anthropocene Future
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,11/30/2021
* Christopher Duffy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2021
* USD 6,399,992.00

The Critical Zone (CZ) is the zone between the upper branches of trees and the
depths of groundwater. Humans are changing this zone at geologically
unprecedented rates. Maintaining ecosystems will require the ability to project
the future of the CZ. Only with concerted efforts to measure and model the
landscape will it be possible to make forward projections or "earthcasts" of the
CZ. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Susquehanna Shale Hills Critical Zone
Observatory (CZO), scientists are working to earthcast the CZ by modeling
aspects of the atmosphere, land surface, biota, soil, rocks and water. In
addition, the models will eventually incorporate impacts of human activity.
These models for water, energy, sediment, and solute (WESS) fluxes will be used
to project changes spanning from 10^-3 y (water) to 10^6 y (soil). For the
sedimentary rocks underlying the CZO, the models will be used to explore how the
geological past has impacted today?s land surface, and, in turn, how this
structure contributes toward controlling today's water and gas fluxes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central focus of the CZO is the forested Shale Hills
watershed (~0.1 km2) but investigations will include the multiple-landuse
Shavers Creek watershed (165 km2). These nested watersheds will comprise the
expanded Susquehanna Shale Hills Observatory (SSHO). This upscaling will force a
transition from measuring "everything everywhere" to measuring "only what is
needed" in a larger watershed with multiple rock types and land use. The CZO
will be used to test the over-arching hypothesis: To project CZ evolution into
the future requires knowledge of geological history, observations of CZ
processes today, and scenarios of human activities tomorrow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important focus of the CZO will be to transfer
knowledge to nonCZO scientists and to the public. For example, the CZO will
develop hydrological models for two PA watersheds in the region of drilling and
hydrofracking for shale gas in western and northern Pennsylvania. The public
will also be engaged through a "CZO Four Seasons" music concert, where Penn
State musicians will create a music score from many years of watershed data at
the CZO.