* 1331644
* Collaborative Research: Travel Support for Students to Participate in Industrial and Systems Engineering Research Conference 2013; San Juan, Puerto Rico; 18-22 May 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2014
* Ananth Krishnamurthy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 02/28/2014
* USD 5,000.00

This collaborative grant provides travel support to enable students to attend
the Industrial and Systems Engineering Research Conference (ISERC) that will be
held in San Juan, Puerto Rico, 18-22 May 2013. These funds will be leveraged
through matching funds and support from various universities and the Institute
of Industrial Engineers (IIE) and will go a long way in reducing the travel cost
burden on students and thereby improve student participation at the conference.
It is expected that 20 to 100 students will benefit from these travel funds.
Students form an integral part of ISERC of the registrations at the conference.
Students participate in different ways including presenting papers and posters
related to graduate and undergraduate research, attending technical sessions,
participating in student competitions, scholarship award functions and so on.
Strong student participation at ISERC has motivated a number of students to
pursue graduate school options and event academic careers. Past data has shown
that student attendance drops when the conference was held outside the
continental US. NSF support will help maintain high student participation in
ISERC 2013.

ISERC provides an excellent opportunity for students to broaden the impact of
their work. Being one of the major annual conferences in the field of IE and OR,
the ISERC is a venue for US and international researchers in both academia and
industry to showcase research results and exchange ideas. In conjunction with
the ISERC is the Applied Solution Conference, which focuses on solutions to
industrial problems. The venue of the ISERC will bring together practitioners,
vendors, and researchers in all related disciplines in industry, academia,
government, and other organizations. The ISERC is an excellent opportunity for
the students to network with peers, potential employers, or future
collaborators. Another valuable opportunity for the students is to attend the
Doctoral Colloquium organized by IIE. Students will join a special panel session
led by experts in the field to discuss various topics of interest, including the
job search, life in academia and industry, the tenure process, teaching,
research, and professional service. Students will also have an opportunity to
publish their work in a high quality conference proceedings indexed by ProQuest.
Since ISERC 2013 is being held in Puerto Rico, it provides a unique opportunity
to increase exposure of undergraduate Hispanic students from that region to
their student peers pursuing graduate and research careers in the continental
USA. Through the travel grant, the IE community would be able to increase the
student participation at the conference.