* 1331492
* Improving the Effectiveness of Organizational Knowledge Transfer Through Social Media Use
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Paul Leonardi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 309,170.00

An organization's ability to help employees share knowledge with one another is
directly related to its innovativeness, its ability to grow, and its ability to
retain top talent. However, knowledge sharing remains a problem for many large
organizations. Sometimes, problems of knowledge sharing occur because the
knowledge itself is sticky; it requires deep contextual understanding to decode
and apply. Other times, knowledge is difficult to transfer because individuals
do not have the correct intensity of relationships (strong or weak) for the type
of knowledge that needs to be transferred (tacit or explicit) such that
individuals are unwilling to take the time and make the effort to teach a
colleague something they do not know. In other cases, the problem is much
simpler: People within the organization don't know what other people in the
organization know and are therefore unable to seek or share with
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to understand how new
enterprise social media can help to improve at least two important aspects of
knowledge sharing: Helping people find the knowledge they need and helping them
to build the correct kinds of relationships necessary to transfer certain kinds
of knowledge. As organizations spend money and time on the implementation of
these new technologies in an attempt to increase worker productivity, it seems
timely and important to understand not only if such tools can overcome perennial
problems associated with effective knowledge sharing, but also to elucidate the
mechanisms by which such technologies affect knowledge sharing practices. In
short, this research stands to unveil what happens when organizational
communications that were once private become public and the consequences that
this communication visibility can have for the organization as a whole. This
research has high-impact potential for education, labor, and business policies
as it considers strategies for retooling and reshaping the communication
environments of organizations that are becoming increasingly distributed.