* 1331632
* Collaborative Research: CyberSEES: Type 1: A Pilot Study on Cognitive Acoustic Underwater Networks (CAUNet) for Sustainable Ocean Monitoring and Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,04/30/2014
* Jie Wang, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2014
* USD 100,000.00

Environmental awareness is a key to sustainable ocean monitoring and
exploration. To meet the ever growing requirements of the ocean monitoring and
exploration applications, and to preserve a sustainable blue ocean for next
generations, a cognitive acoustic underwater network (CAUNet) that is aware of
the coexistence of multiple underwater acoustic systems will be designed. The
project goals include investigating acoustic spectrum usage via data collection
and analysis, designing algorithms, software and hardware for acoustic spectrum
sensing and spectrum management, and evaluating the feasibility and performance
of the proposed work via simulations, and lab and field experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make significant contributions to the
underwater network research community by improving the efficiency of UANs while
making them more environmentally friendly. The research activities in this
project also provide a rich environment and platform that can facilitate
educating and training students from high school to graduate level and inspire
students in underrepresented groups to pursue research in science and
engineering. Moreover, this project will motivate and enable a wide range of
research and outreach activities within the underwater communications,
networking, engineering, and marine science communities, and promote progress
towards practical solutions in diverse aquatic applications.