* 1331846
* Human and Natural Forcings of Critical Zone Dynamics and Evolution at the Calhoun Critical Zone Observatory
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2021
* Mukesh Kumar, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2021
* USD 6,165,812.00

The Critical Zone is a new concept for the biological and geological system that
extends from the upper leaves of plants to the groundwater deep below the soil.
Scientists consider these systems to be "integrated" because aboveground
climate, plants, animals, and human management all interact with the belowground
biology, chemistry, and physics from surface soils to deep aquifers. A new
Calhoun Critical Zone Observatory (CZO) is located in the USA's Southern
Piedmont that extends from Virginia to Alabama, a region characterized by
ancient, deep, and highly weathered landscapes that between 1800 to 1950
experienced some of the most severe agricultural soil erosion and land and water
degradation in America. The new Calhoun-CZO leverages more than 60 years of
research on land degradation and recovery based at the USDA Forest Service's
Calhoun Experimental Forest in Union County, SC. The CZO researchers and
educators are from Duke University, University of Georgia, Georgia Tech,
University of Kansas, Mississippi State University, Roanoke College, as well as
the USDA Forest Service. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key objective of the Calhoun
CZO is to help integrate land management, disturbance, and recovery into CZ
science. To that end, the scientists include hydrologists, soil scientists,
agriculturists and foresters, geochemists, ecologists, and modelers but also an
environmental historian and anthropologist. The overall hypothesis is that land
use accelerates CZ processes associated with vegetation, atmosphere, water, and
surface soils, thereby stressing temporal and spatial networks that connect
surface and deep subsurface components and processes of the CZ. Land degradation
may even isolate the CZ's surface from its subsurface components with adverse
long-term consequences to water quality, soil fertility, and plant productivity.
Researchers will focus their studies on CZ evolution, rates of recovery from
land degradation, and CZ re-integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Calhoun-CZO is
a center for research and education. The CZO is linked to a Duke University
IGERT-training center on intelligent sensor networks, annual CZO science
meetings will have oral and poster presentations, discussions, and training
sessions that involve scientists and students on equal footing. We plan several
kinds of outreach efforts to local, regional, and national publics with multi-
media science, history, and community-based pieces from hardcover books to op-
eds to Facebook and Twitter. An important emphasis of the CZO is on
undergraduate research and education. Central to this effort will be the
development of a set of classroom-tested, web-based laboratory and classroom
activities for undergraduates and advanced high school students based, in part,
on real-time and historic data from the Calhoun CZO.