* 1331619
* FG 2013 Doctoral Consortium Proposal for Travel Support for Graduate Students
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Yan Tong, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2014
* USD 15,500.00

This travel grant supports US graduate students to attend the Doctoral
Consortium to be held in conjunction with the IEEE International Conference on
Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG 2013) to be held on April 22-26,
2013. Attendees include graduate students who are working on their dissertations
and have been accepted to the consortium. Each student participant is paired
with a senior researcher who serves as his/her mentor during the conference.
Each participant also presents his/her research at a doctoral Consortium
luncheon open to participants and mentors and also presents his/her research in
a poster session open to all attendees of the conference. Graduate students play
critical roles in conducting innovative and groundbreaking research. The
consortium provides talented young researchers the opportunity to discuss their
work formally and informally with both their peers and senior researchers. These
interactions with others coming from different research labs with different
viewpoints typically strengthen the ability of young researchers to communicate
the value of their own work and to set their work more clearly in the broader
context of the research field as a whole. The successful career of graduate
students would be imperative to advance the state of the art in new algorithms
and applications related to face, gesture, and body motion, leading to new
capabilities in areas such as biometrics, interactive systems, surveillance, and
healthcare.