* 1331177
* Scholars Award: Science in Transformation: Shifting Disciplinary Boundaries and Community-Engaged Scientists
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Amy Lesen, Dillard University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 213,869.00

Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator (PI) will address
questions that have arisen as a result of a shift by the scientific community
towards engaging with complex problems that span two or more distinct realm; in
this case, the issue is climate change, which spans environmental and social
realms. Key questions to be addressed concern the challenges faced by scientists
engaged in work on this problem, and the character of the associated shift in
the norms within the scientific community. The PI will address these questions
by focusing on several carefully chosen case studies of scientists and
organizations at the leading edge of these transformations. The PI will use
multiple methods in doing so, including in-depth, semi-structured oral history
interviews with scientists, and archival research into the development of their
organizations and research projects. The results of this project will be an oral
history website and a monograph of case studies to document this transformative
period in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will contribute to the growing body
of research into science and civic engagement by documenting stories of
scientists themselves. In investigating how current scientific issues (such as
climate change) are engendering a shift in science practice, this project will
also increase our understanding of how the scientific problems of an age
influence the evolution of scientific social and institutional norms, and how
(in turn) those norms affect the way scientific problems are studied. The
information and products gained from this research will be instructive to other
scientists, to sociologists of science and to STS
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will serve to inform policy at academic institutions and to guide
efforts to train a new generation of scientists who plan to engage in work that
addresses the scientific and social complexities of climate change.
Additionally, the proposed work will enhance our understanding of how to
facilitate communication between scientists, policy makers, community members
and other stakeholders, which could in turn improve research and policy
effectiveness. The site of this work is a historically black college liberal
arts college in New Orleans, and undergraduates are included in the research
plan as research assistants, meaning that this project will contribute to the
training of underrepresented minority students in science and social science
research and encourage underrepresented minority students to pursue graduate
training in those fields. The oral history website, housed at the work site,
will serve to provide a deeper understanding to the New Orleans community,
particularly communities of color, about the science of climate change and about
science in general.