* 1331269
* Hazards SEES Type 2: Dynamic Integration of Natural, Human, and Infrastructure Systems for Hurricane Evacuation and Sheltering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Rachel Davidson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,994,056.00

This project will improve understanding of and decision support for hurricane
evacuation and sheltering through a dynamic modeling approach. The hazard will
be represented using a set of probabilistic scenarios that describe the range of
ways a hurricane may evolve. For each hurricane scenario, storm surge, wind
speed, and rainfall flooding maps will be developed for each time step. The
research team will also model the dynamic decision-making of emergency managers
and residents as the available information changes, and the dynamic movement of
residents over the course of the event. Overlaying the results of these models
will help to understand the interactions within and among the systems through
space and time. The project has four main components. First, an integrated
meteorological, hydrological, and storm surge modeling system that will be
implemented to determine a set of probabilistic ensemble scenarios for an
offshore hurricane. Second, theoretical models of resident and emergency manager
temporal decision-making will be developed. Third, a multi-stage stochastic
program will be developed that integrates the outputs from the first two steps
to support emergency managers' hurricane evacuation and sheltering decisions so
as to minimize personal risk and travel time. Fourth, the interconnected hazard,
behavioral, and evacuation/shelter models will be demonstrated through case
study applications in North Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
have broad significance because it will result in a major leap forward in
understanding and improving management of evacuation and sheltering for
hurricane events. Wind, storm surge, waves, rainfall, and runoff, all of which
can substantially affect evacuations, will be considered simultaneously and
comprehensively in this project. The project will also advance understanding of
how officials and residents make decisions over time, and how the information on
which their decisions change over time. It will explicitly represent the fact
that emergency managers make initial decisions while a hurricane is still far
offshore and large uncertainty remains, and then make subsequent decisions after
a day or two has passed and more is known about the likely effects of the storm.
Overall, the framework for this project will, for the first time, fully capture
the three features of hurricane events that are perhaps most important for
understanding evacuation and sheltering; these features are: (1)the events are
dynamic over space and time, (2) involve great uncertainty, and (3) include many
interactions within and among the natural, infrastructure, and human systems.The
educational video game and K-8 educational outreach will teach participants
about the dynamics and uncertainty in hurricane evacuation and sheltering. Post-
doctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate research assistants including
women and underrepresented minorities' participation in all aspects of the
project will help train the next generation of disaster professionals.
Collaboration with federal and state agencies throughout the project will help
ensure the findings consider practitioner's perspectives and are integrated into
practice as quickly and effectively as possible.