* 1331841
* Luquillo CZO:  The role of hot spots and hot moments in tropical landscape evolution and functioning of the critical zone
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2021
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2021
* USD 6,597,604.00

The structure and function of the critical zone (CZ) plays a central role in
sustaining Earth's life support system. During the first phase of the Luquillo
Critical Zone Observatory (LCZO1), investigators identified differences in rock
type, deep weathering, geomorphology, and topography as the dominant drivers of
key CZ processes such as nutrient supply, greenhouse gas emissions, and water
quantity and quality. Building on this foundation, LCZO2 will evaluate the role
of "hot spots and hot moments" in the CZ: locations or time periods that
disproportionately impact the environment as a whole. "Hot spots and hot
moments" are particularly relevant to humid tropical environments such as the
LCZO, which are characterized by high physical, geochemical, and biological
diversity in space and time. Critical zone processes can occur at very small to
very large spatial scales. For example, bedrock weathering occurs at a
millimeter spatial scale, while wholesale changes in vegetation and carbon
cycling occur over several kilometers such as along elevation gradients.
Critical zone processes can also vary over time; oxidation-reduction reactions
occur in soils on the scale of minutes, and catastrophic events such as
hurricanes and landslides occur at decadal time scales. Investigators will
identify, quantify, and model the role of "hot spots and hot moments" in a range
of CZ processes and use that knowledge to predict the rates of CZ processes
across the Luquillo Mountains and in other montane areas with high temperature
and rainfall. Specific focal areas include: 1) the importance of knickpoints and
landscape position as hot spots for weathering, soil development, and
biogeochemical cycling; 2) the role of "hot spots and hot moments" in redox
fluctuations and mineral weathering for C and nutrient retention and loss; 3)
the role of "hot spots" for sediment production and "hot moments" in stream flow
for the transport of sediment, C, and nutrients from mountains to the sea; and
4) the development of climate and hydrologic models to scale up "hot spots and
hot moments" in time and space. The data collected and synthesized will
transform the understanding of the controls on key CZ processes such as
weathering, soil development, C and nutrient storage and loss, soil and sediment
transport, and ultimately landscape evolution and the effects of climate change.
The project will provide an unprecedented level of detail on "hot spots and hot
moments" in a tropical system. The results of this research will allow us to
accurately and precisely 'earthcast' the effects of environmental change on
important environmental processes such as flooding, erosion, and landslides.
Because all critical zones have "hot spots and hot moments" of significant
environmental processes, the development of the "hot spots and hot moments"
concept in the CZ context will promote cross-site integration, the development
of conceptual models of the CZ, and provide a venue for the Earth science
community to develop and test novel approaches to CZ
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LCZO2 will continue to collaborate with
University of Puerto Rico (UPR) students and scientists to enhance the
participation of underrepresented groups in the Earth and environmental
sciences. LCZO2 will also contribute to an existing 'Schoolyard' environmental
education program at high schools in Puerto Rico. This program has a successful
record of incorporating new data and research techniques into the curriculum and
provides professional development for the teachers in addition to research
opportunities for students. The diverse group of co-PIs, senior personnel, and
collaborators will provide strong role models for research students and
postdocs. Our robust collaborations with local and federal agencies and
educational institutions provide access to policy makers and other stakeholders
that will help us to translate science into policy-relevant findings. Informal
forums will be used to share our research findings and to emphasize the
significance of CZ research to environmental decision makers dealing with
questions such as soil erosion that can fill reservoirs, water quality that
degrades water supply and coral reefs, and carbon storage that counteracts the
effects of global increases in carbon dioxide. An inclusive and comprehensive
engagement plan will encourage participation by scientists not yet affiliated
with the LCZO2. The plans for cross-CZO modeling, open sharing of data and
samples, and cyberseminars that are open to the public will strengthen the CZO
network as a whole and enhance the availability of CZ science to the public and
decision-makers.