* 1331583
* EFRI-ODISSEI Proposal: Cutting and Pasting - Kirigami in Architecture, Technology, and Science
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2020
* Jenny Sabin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 07/31/2020
* USD 2,399,000.00

Kirigami (from the Japanese kiru, which means to cut) offers a previously
unattainable level of design, dynamics, and deployability to self-folding and
self-unfolding materials from the molecular to the architectural scale. "The art
of structure is how and where to put holes," said structural engineer and
architect, Le Ricolais. The objective of this research project is to take this
principle to the next level: buildable, bendable, and biological stuctures. To
achieve this, DNA-polymer hybrids are being cut and joined to build on the
nanoscale. The project also uses three-dimensional printing and modeling to
study and prototype geometries that utilize origami and kirigami designs on the
macroscopic scale. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
introduce new motifs, portability, and design to form intricate chemical,
biological, and architectural materials all from a common language. New tools
will be developed to visualize folding and optimization of two- and three-
dimensional structures. These tools will generate new hybrid building blocks at
the nano- and human-scale, creating new principles of architecture, materials
synthesis, and biological structures. New technologies will be developed
supporting metamaterials, sensors, stealth aircrafts, and adaptive and
sustainable buildings. Like the opening and closing of flowers, satellites, and
even greeting cards, this research will offer a rich and diverse set of
intricate surprises, problems, and challenges for students at all levels, and
broaden their interest and awareness of emerging science and engineering. It
will also create a significant opportunity to excite the general public, thus,
complementing and enhancing our impact on science, art, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the National
Science Foundation and the US Air Force Office of Scientific Research.