* 1331036
* EXTREEMS-QED: Computational Mathematics and Statistics Program
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2022
* James Albert, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2022
* USD 879,999.00

The primary focus of the COMAST (Computational Mathematics and Statistics)
program is the creation of an undergraduate degree that will meet the needs of
future statisticians. The principles of COMAST follow the three components of
the education of the modern statistician, namely: (a) a broader meaning of
statistical computing to include data methods and statistical presentations
using new technologies; (b) a deeper understanding of computational reasoning
including concepts of programming languages and written computational
algorithms; and (c) the teaching of computing in the context of statistical
practice. The new courses to be established as the backbone of the COMAST
program will be aligned with these three components and thus will reflect the
needs of the modern statistician in this world where big data are abundant. The
creation of these new courses will lead to both summer workshops and webinars,
allowing faculty within the Department of Mathematics and Statistics as well as
faculty in many other departments to understand the new methods and technologies
to analyze big data regardless of discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
degree program Computational Mathematics and Statistics(COMAST) will include two
new courses in statistical thinking, a course in statistical programming, and
two new courses in computer programming. The program will culminate in a two-
semester research project, working with faculty throughout the University who
are dealing with Big Data. These faculty members would serve as mentors to the
students. Written results will be compiled and presented at an end-of-year
symposium, similar to two existing innovative programs, the ACTION program and
the SetGo program (NSF-funded) at BGSU, both of which have an undergraduate
research component. A secondary focus is the training of other faculty in the
Department of Mathematics and Statistics at BGSU in computational science and
data science, as well as faculty from other departments. To accomplish this, two
summer workshops will be offered in summers three and four. The workshop will
also be offered as a webinar so that faculty from other institutions will learn
how to deal with big data using new statistical thinking techniques. Training
for on-site faculty in high-end computing resources through regional workshops
and/or conferences will be supported. Courses in the COMAST program, as well as
the summer workshops, would be taught in a computer classroom, designed to
accommodate the instructional approaches that model data driven research. COMAST
graduates will be well positioned for new job opportunities because of their
preparation, while faculty in other departments will look to the Department of
Mathematics and Statistics for assistance in their research. Due to the
workshops and webinars that will be made available for faculty at other
institutions, along with workshops at ASA meetings, the content and teaching
approaches of these new courses will be disseminated statewide and nationally.