* 1331191
* The Third Symposium on Industrial Ecology for Young Professionals (SIEYP III), Ulsan, South Korea, June 29, 2013
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Marian Chertow, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,927.00

1331191 (Chertow). This award provides partial support for the third Symposium
on Industrial Ecology for Young Professionals (SIEYP III), to be held in Ulsan,
South Korea on June 29, 2013. This symposium is organized by the Student Chapter
of International Society for Industrial Ecology (ISIE) in an effort to encourage
and financially support participation by US-based students and post-doctoral
researchers to the symposium and the ISIE 2013 Conference immediately preceding
it. The theme of SIEYP III is "Applying IE research toward transitions." SIEYP
III is designed, organized, and attended by young professionals, and aims at
promoting communication among graduate students and post-doctoral researchers in
industrial ecology (IE) about their research ideas and experiences. Members of
groups underrepresented in IE are especially encouraged to apply for support.
The proposed event will enable young professionals from around the world to
establish an international network of industrial ecology researchers for ongoing
exchange and future collaborations in the topics such as life cycle assessment,
industrial symbiosis, eco design, and material and substance flow assessment.
For young professionals in the field, making the concrete connection between
their research and work to that of transition initiatives can be a challenge.
SIEYP III will provide an opportunity for young professionals to share and learn
from each other, how their efforts in the field can be more effectively embedded
in sustainability transitions. The main goal of the symposium is to provide an
opportunity for young professionals who perform research in industrial ecology
to present and discuss their novel research ideas and experiences, receive
constructive feedback, and network with senior professionals in the field. It is
anticipated that this engagement of a diverse group of young professionals will
have broader impacts on future industrial ecology professionals in research,
industry, administration, and education. Additionally, the international context
of the symposium will allow for a broadening of world perspectives and new
international collaborations between and within regions. Much of the work of
young professionals in the field is focused on providing a better wellbeing for
future generations as well as enhancing the economic stability of current and
future industry. Enabling the exchange of information, ideas, methods, and
inspirations at this meeting can do a lot to encourage their work in the areas
of human wellbeing and stable and clean industry. The award of travel funds and
accommodation subsidy are expected to especially attract US-based young
professionals including women and minorities, to the symposium who may otherwise
be unable to attend.