* 1331408
* Transformative Behavior of Energy, Water and Carbon in the Critical Zone II:  Interactions between Long- and Short-term Processes that Control Delivery of Critical Zone Services
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,03/31/2022
* Jon Chorover, University of Arizona
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Yuretich
* 03/31/2022
* USD 6,520,001.00

The critical zone (CZ) is termed as such because of its essential role in
sustaining life on Earth. This thin veneer of vegetation, soil and fractured
rock at the earth's surface is constantly infused with the circulation of fresh
water and gases, and supports biological activity and weathering processes
through persistent cycles of tectonic uplift and erosion. The flux of these
fluids through the porous CZ and the distributed biological activity it
supports, alter the matrix and landscape over geological time scales. This long-
term "evolution" of CZ structure directly affects its ability to function as a
"filter" for water and atmospheric gases, and hence to provide essential CZ
"services" for the environment and humanity. In the semi-arid southwestern US,
mountain regions of the CZ are particularly important because they provide a
high proportion of the water that sustains growing urban and sub-urban
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jemez River Basin - Santa Catalina
Mountains Critical Zone Observatory (JRB-SCM CZO), established in 2009, is a
"natural laboratory" located in the Jemez (NM) and Santa Catalina (AZ) mountains
that focuses on quantifying the effects of climate, lithology, and disturbance
on CZ structure, function and long-term evolution. The CZO spans a large
gradient in precipitation and temperature representative of the larger, water-
limited southwestern US. The JRB-SCM CZO team comprises hydrologists,
biologists, soil scientists, geochemists, geomorphologists working together in
instrumented watersheds to develop data and models that enable an improved
understanding of the coupled surface earth processes that control CZ evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CZO is training students and postdoctoral scientists
to be fluent in an emerging field of CZ science that focuses on the interfaces
between the traditional earth science disciplines in order to better resolve
these coupled processes. Students are also directly involved in the development
of novel approaches to translate their research for the public, including via
open science talks, multi-media presentations, museum exhibits and K-12
curricula. Thus, the CZO team includes undergraduate and graduate students
working together with postdoctoral scientists, faculty and technical staff to
build - not only a functional and dynamic observatory that serves the earth
sciences community - but also an integrated, interdisciplinary new field of CZ
science that has direct relevance to the increasingly populated, but water-
limited southwestern US.