* 1331391
* Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Archaeology of Hittite Imperialism and Ceramic Production in Late Bronze Age Cilicia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2013,05/31/2015
* Peter Magee, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2015
* USD 8,326.00

Under the supervision of Professor Peter Magee, Steven Karacic will study the
Late Bronze Age IIA (c. 1400-1200 BCE) ceramics from the site of Tarsus-
Gözlükule, a major settlement in the region of Cilicia, Turkey and a provincial
center within the Hittite Empire. For several generations, empires have been the
subject of scholarly investigations which privilege evidence, both material and
historical, from the imperial capital. Such approaches provide limited insight
into those peoples living under the imperial yoke, often assuming a passive role
on the part of provincial actors in the establishment of imperialism. Tarsus-
Gözlükule, as a provincial center, provides a unique opportunity to investigate
the impact of empire on a politically disenfranchised
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the archaeological record preserves only
a fraction of a society's material culture, the study of ceramics is one
important means of investigating ancient lifeways. Often the pottery from
Tarsus-Gözlükule and other contemporary sites within the Hittite Empire as been
interpreted as the product of a standardized ceramic industry linked to direct
imperial control and divorced from any form of agency on the part of the
provincial population. A preliminary macroscopic analysis of the pottery from
Tarsus-Gözlükule suggests more complicated patterns of production and
consumption. Through petrographic analysis, Instrumental Neutron Activation
Analysis, and firing tests, it will be possible to offer further insight into
the production and consumption of ceramics within a province of the Hittite
Empire. In this way, the dissertation will re-write the narrative for Cilicia in
the later half of the second millennium, offer new insights into Hittite
imperialism, and contribute to debates on empire within the discipline of
Anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a broader scale, this project will analyze
material from an old excavation, contribute relevant data to ongoing research in
the region, promote international collaboration, and convert dormant
archaeological materials into pedagogical resources. The ceramics in this study
were excavated in the 1930s, when many of these technologies were either
unavailable or in their infancy. This re-analysis of previously excavated
material and its subsequent dissemination in academic journals and conference
papers is of fundamental importance to the discipline. The mineralogical and
geochemical data generated by this project will be an asset to current
excavations at Tarsus-Gözlükule as well as several other sites in the region,
and the exchange of this data will promote international collaboration between
US and Turkish researchers. Finally, the data and thin-sections produced for
petrography will be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses at Bryn
Mawr College and will thus contribute to the training of a new generation of
archaeologists.