* 1331412
* Hazards SEES Type 2:   Magnitude 9 Earthquake Scenarios - Probabilistic Modeling, Warnings, Response and Resilience in the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* John Vidale, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,937,478.00

A Cascadia earthquake of magnitude 9 (M9) would cause shaking, liquefaction,
landslides and tsunamis from British Columbia to northern California. The
resulting losses, projected in the tens of billions of dollars, would include
damaged buildings, bridges and lifelines, as well as thousands of human
casualties. This project addresses scientific and engineering challenges in
reducing this risk. The challenges start with assessing the range of
distributions of fault motion and, therefore, the shaking and tsunamis that the
Cascadia fault might generate. The project addresses factors not previously
considered ? the distribution and timing of energy release on the fault, the
coherent variation of frequency content of fault motion with fault depth, and
the 3D effects of the deep basins along Puget Sound - and will specify the
uncertainty in the estimated motions, which is critical to probabilistic
estimation of earthquake impact, including liquefaction, landslides, tsunamis
and built infrastructure response. The project will develop new probabilistic,
statistical, and numerical methodologies to provide deeper insight into these
phenomena. This research will improve forecasting of landslides and liquefaction
through better resolution of the underlying physics with recent data from Japan
and Chile. The project will also improve estimation of tsunami effects by
developing more realistic scenarios of seafloor deformation and by estimating
the battering power of entrained debris. Built-environment response to the
unique long-period and long-duration ground motions will be evaluated
probabilistically using advanced numerical simulation. To inform the development
and deployment of earthquake early warning in the U.S., the project includes
interview and survey research on the potential effects of messages that provide
just a few seconds or minutes of warning. With local communities and agency
partners, the project will improve the utility of probabilistic information by
comparing how stakeholders interpret (a) single "worst case" hazard scenarios
and (b) multiple probabilistic scenarios, and how each type of scenario is then
incorporated into community emergency preparedness and long-range planning. The
project will also advance the integration of probabilistic assessments into
hazards education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last decade has provided unexpected
lessons in the enormous risks from giant subduction earthquakes of M9. Sumatra
2004, Chile 2010, and Japan 2011 each caused devastation that took scientists
and residents by surprise. M9 earthquakes in the Cascadia subduction zone pose
the greatest natural hazard in the Pacific Northwest and provide an integrative
focus for interdisciplinary research on reducing future losses to extreme
events. To address challenges in risk reduction, this project brings together
experts from academia, government, and other nonprofit organizations. The shared
vision is to reduce the catastrophic risk of a Cascadia M9 earthquake through
integrated advances in forecasting, warning and adaptive planning across the
social, built and natural environments. The project will move beyond generalized
scenarios toward probabilistic predictions of M9 seismic events and the
subsequent hazards, with the objective of integrating these into community
resilience planning and advancing the state of earthquake early warning systems.