* 1331572
* Hazards SEES Type 2: Next Generation, Resilient Warning Systems for Tornados and Flash Floods
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Joseph Trainor, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 3,358,593.00

This multi-institution project will design, develop, demonstrate and evaluate
next-generation, resilient warning systems for rapid-onset hazards, such as
tornadoes and flash floods. Using high spatio-temporal observations and short-
term forecasts of lower-atmospheric conditions, this system will deliver user-
centric, context-aware forecasts and warnings resulting in significant
improvements in public response. Warning systems help mitigate the negative
socio-economic impacts of natural hazards such as floods and tornados, which
over the past three years caused 2303 injuries, 297 deaths and $8.5 billion in
property and crop damages across the United States. As technology and its
application evolve, and as our understanding of complex interactions among
natural hazards, technology and human behavior improves, warnings must also
evolve and change. This effort will develop a systems-level framework and
underlying technology, firmly grounded in an understanding of human behavioral
response, to leverage these changes to better meet the ultimate goal of
improving safety for both people and property.

The intellectual merit of this effort centers upon development of new techniques
for real-time, high-resolution nowcasts for rain and wind; creation of a new
context-sensitive communication architecture for efficiently disseminating user-
specific information tailored to various population segments; development and
testing of new measures of human behavioral response; creation of a deeper of
understanding of myriad influences on public response to weather hazards and
warnings; and identification of new ways to link the social and technical
components of the warning system. Research results will be integrated into the
warning system based on time, space and risk considerations and demonstrated via
prototyping next generation warning system concepts. Three key trends will be
addressed: i) The rapid increase in ownership of mobile phones in all segments
of the population; ii) New high spatiotemporal resolution X-band radar nowcasts
(0- 1 hour) that can localize hazard risk and enable operational forecasters and
emergency mangers to warn on a neighborhood-scale for tornados and flash floods;
iii) New concepts for resilient data-dissemination architectures that enable
targeting of weather information by context, such as precise location, or by
demographics such as age. Live warning system experiments in the Dallas Fort
Worth Metroplex will provide a unique opportunity to conduct empirical research,
validate new technology and theoretical concepts. During severe weather events,
high-resolution radar products will be disseminated to NWS forecasters who in
turn will disseminate experimental geo-targeted, context-aware real-time
warnings to individuals via mobile phones equipped with an app that logs
information-seeking activity, communications, location, and movement, and
enables post event surveys. Our project leverages the stakeholder partnerships,
technology, and socio-technical research practices of the NSF Engineering
Research Center for Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere (CASA) and
the GENI infrastructure that enables at-scale research in next-generation
networks and applications.

Broader impacts of this effort will ultimately include improved public safety
and disaster mitigation and potential for applications of developed technology
well beyond the Dallas-Fort Worth region.. An advisory board which includes
representatives of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, the City of
Fort Worth, the National Weather Service Office of Science and Technology and
others will enable faster translation of our results into products and services
that can be replicated in north Texas, and other parts of the nation. Research
on public response addresses an underserved population through our analysis of
the Accessible Hazard Alert System for people with visual or hearing
impairments. The K-12 education efforts, directed at minority serving
institutions, include the creation of a weather programs on safety, informed by
our public response research.