* 1331089
* Collaborative Research: Building a Unified Theory-Driven Methodology for Identification of Elementary Cognitive Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Wenger, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 08/31/2017
* USD 363,973.00

Instant by instant, we take in all of the information that we can gather with
our senses, and we organize that information into objects and events. This is
the foundation for our ability to function in the real world. While we can talk
in general terms about how and why we function with such effectiveness and
efficiency, a satisfactory scientific explanation requires much more. In
particular, it requires a way of relating the things we can measure---
specifically, the frequency with which we choose certain to choose certain
actions and the time it takes to make those choices---to each other and to our
hypotheses for how and why we do these things. Currently, there is no general
way of doing this: the work to be accomplished with this support will
fundamentally change this state of affairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of
a unified theoretical approach to characterizing the ways in which we organize
our perception of the world will open up numerous avenues of research linking
behavior and neurobiology. With the aid of the theoretical language that this
project will produce, there will be systematic and well-defined ways of testing
competing hypotheses for both what we do with perceptual information and how we
do it. Critically, because this language will be extremely general and will not
be tied to a particular set of ideas or theory, scientists from competing
perspectives will be able to frame their ideas using a common vocabulary,
something that is not currently possible. In addition, since this language will
be mathematical, it will possess an exceptional level of rigor and internal
consistency. Finally, this language will demonstrate its utility and power by
being applied to a set of thorny issues in the contemporary study of perceptual
organization.