* 1331088
* Collaborative Research:   Dynamics of Mauna Loa's and Kilauea's magmatic systems from physics-based modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Helge Gonnermann, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 82,589.00

Dynamic linkage between volcanoes has implications for long- and short-term
eruption forecasting. Although such linkage has been suggested to exist for some
volcanic systems it remains controversial, as does the underlying mechanism.
Recently, the possibility of dynamical coupling of Kilauea and Mauna Loa has
been proposed as a consequence of pressure diffusion within an asthenospheric
melt zone that underlies both volcanoes, and from which each volcano is supplied
with melt, albeit from different parts of it. To test this hypothesis, we
propose to construct a numerical model of combined subsurface magma flow and
accumulation, magma degassing and volcano deformation. The magma flow model will
be based on two-phase flow theory, with magma degassing incorporated from
existing solubility and diffusivity formulations for magmatic volatiles. Volcano
deformation will be modeled by coupling the flow model with well-established
kinematic deformation models through mass conservation. Similarly, changes in
magma composition will be estimated from mass balance considerations.
Observations of surface deformation, gas emissions and changes in magma
composition will constrain the time-dependent magma supply to each volcano.
Model results will be used to test for correlative activity and assess potential
mechanisms for dynamical coupling. In addition to testing this coupling
hypothesis, the model can be used to interrogate the interplay between magma
supply, storage and eruptive activity at each volcano, in particular at Kilauea,
where the spatial and temporal frequencies of observations are high. In order to
demonstrate the capabilities of this proposed modeling approach we will perform
an exploration of the unknown parameters the model will include and all the
available constraints. We will establish databases of the available geodetic,
seismic, geochemical and gas observations, evaluate their completeness and
reliability, and ascertain the model uncertainties and trade-offs, assessing the
uniqueness of solutions and the statistics of the inverse problem.

2013 marked the centennial of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory located on
Kilauea, Earth's most active, and near Mauna Loa, Earth's largest volcano. Both
volcanoes are also two of the best and longest monitored volcanoes and have been
instrumental to our understanding of the structure and dynamics of the Earth's
mantle, the evolution of volcanic island chains, as well as basaltic volcanism
in general. They are thought to be the archetypical manifestations of hot-spot
volcanism, caused by a buoyantly upwelling mantle plume that undergoes partial
melting at a few hundred kilometers depth beneath Hawaii. Upward percolation and
accumulation of this melt results in spatially focused flow through the Hawaiian
lithosphere, into magma chambers that are located at a few kilometers depth
beneath each volcano, and from which volcanic eruptions are fed. Both volcanoes
exhibit complex patterns of activity, including movement along large fault
planes that underlie portions of each edifice, with the potential for large
earthquakes, tsunamis and triggering of new eruptions. It has been suggested
that magma accumulation at depth may itself facilitate movement on these faults.
Whether these processes and feedbacks are confined to a single volcano or
whether they may also affect the neighboring volcano remains uncertain. Future
eruptions, especially from Mauna Loa, have significant potential to directly
impact the main populations centers on the island of Hawaii, and an improved
understanding of the processes at work within the volcanoes, and any dynamic
link between then will benefit public safety through increased understanding of
volcanoes and volcanic hazards. This project, which represents a collaborative
effort between the University of Hawaii, Rice University and the US Geological
Survey, is aimed at integrating a range of different types of observation and
will, therefore, impact a number of different fields, including geodesy,
seismology and geochemistry. Moreover, to maximize the public and educational
impact, we will partner with New Media Arts classes from Kapiolani Community
College.