* 1331063
* Business-Higher Education Forum (BHEF) Proposal to Implement &amp; Evaluate Models for Business Engagement to Increase Undergraduate STEM Student Persistence
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Deborah Hughes, Business-Higher Education Forum
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2019
* USD 4,855,583.00

Since the business sector has been a largely underutilized resource in improving
undergraduate STEM education and there is little research on industry-higher
education partnerships, the Business-Higher Education Forum (BHEF) seeks to
address these gaps. Through this project BHEF is (1) integrating implementation
and research efforts on persistence and degree attainment in STEM and (2)
supporting and examining a set of business-higher education partnerships with
particular attention to the transfer of students from 2-year institutions to
4-year institutions in programs of study that impact areas of national interest.
The project focuses on the implementation and examination of evidence-based
interventions (e.g., curricular strategies/activities and student support
services) designed to support student persistence and degree
attainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards these ends BHEF has formed the
Undergraduate STEM Interventions with Industry (US2I) consortium to develop,
implement, and examine evidence-based models of strategic, effective, and
sustainable engagement of industries in curricular strategies/activities and
student support services designed to increase STEM student persistence and
degree completion. The key questions addressed in this R&amp;D project are: (1)
In what ways are the different models of business-higher education partnerships
effective in addressing the problems of persistence and graduation in STEM? (2)
What are the essential elements of business-higher education partnerships that
ensure sustainability and effectiveness? (3) How useful is Designed-Based
Implementation Research (DBIR) as a method for research and development of
interventions supported by industry-higher education partnerships? (4) What are
the strengths and limitations of migration analysis techniques in tracking and
assessing the transfer of students from 2-year institutions to 4-year programs
and degree attainment in STEM? A quantitative and qualitative mixed methods
rsearch design will collect data on student academic progress, higher education
institutional and systems processes, individual corporate engagement, efficacy
of industry consortia, and involvement of corporate and academic leadership. The
study integrates survey research, focus groups, interviews, and student tracking
methodologies to examine five business-higher education pilot efforts. Analyses
will be conducted using a suite of strategies that will include multiple
regression, student migration analysis, modeling, and within-case and cross-case
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BHEF is a national organization of Fortune 500
CEOs and university presidents. Building on past and current activities, the
five BHEF partnerships and domains of interests are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
City University of New York &amp; IBM: Large-scale data analytics and urban
sustainability; &lt;br/&gt;(2) Miami-Dade College &amp; New Era Energy:
Information technology and cybersecurity;&lt;br/&gt;(3) University of
Massachusetts &amp; the Massachusetts Competitive Partnership: Life science,
engineering, and computer science;&lt;br/&gt;(4) University of Wisconsin &amp;
the Milwaukee Water Council: Water Science; and&lt;br/&gt;(5) Washington
University in St. Louis &amp; Boeing: Engineering.