* 1331231
* The Measure of Modernity: Standards and Standardization in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2014,06/30/2017
* Stephen Mihm, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 188,021.00

Project Overview

This is a project to study the history of standards and standardization in the
US. Standards include uniform systems of weights, measures, timekeeping,
electrical units, as well as product specifications governing everything from
screw threads to paper sizes. They are quite pervasive but rarely appreciated.
The project will begin by exploring the challenges faced by eighteenth and
nineteenth-century proponents of standardization. It will also examine how and
why the US rejected the metric system, parting ways with many other industrial
nations in the nineteenth century, and how and why in the early twentieth
century it embarked on a comprehensive campaign of product standardization that
earlier metrological reforms made possible. The research focuses on developments
prior to the postwar era. This emphasis reflects a conviction that much of the
important work of standardization (the precedents, the early governing bodies,
and the scientific consensus) was in place by the early decades of the twentieth
century.

Intellectual Merit

A comprehensive history of standards and standardization in America does not
exist, despite the pivotal role the US played in promoting and frustrating the
adoption of standards. This project promises to remedy this oversight. The PI
will dig deeply into archival sources including the records of the Office of
Weights and Measures and the Bureau of Standards held at the National Archives;
the personal papers of key players in campaigns for and against standardization;
and the extensive writings on standardization that appeared in scientific, trade
journals, as well as the popular press. Though ostensibly driven by scientific
and technological needs, standards have often been proxies for larger conflicts
in American society. This project will examine how standards became entangled in
political and economic struggles over public policy, the power of government,
and national security. The history of standards thus connects the history of
science and society in new and novel ways.

Broader Impacts

One of the main outcomes of this project will be the publication of a book,
which is already under advance publication contract with Harvard. The book will
be marketed to both academic and general readers. The PI has an extensive track
record of reaching a wider audience. He has written on science, technology,
economics, and history in the pages of the New York Times and many other
publications. He is well positioned to insure that his research will be read,
not only by academics, but by the politicians, policy makers, pundits, and
taxpayers who have a stake in contemporary standards and standardization.