* 1331825
* CyberSEES: Enabling Sustainable Civil Infrastructure Using Interactive Formal Analytics for Structural Health Diagnosis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Ehab Al-Shaer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 563,000.00

This project seeks a holistic approach to real-time asset management of critical
infrastructure through an as-yet unexplored intersection amongst structural
health monitoring (SHM), and computational formal methods, while considering
human interaction in the process. A multidisciplinary team brings computer
scientists together with civil engineers experienced in structural health
monitoring of real-world highway bridges. The research departs from the
conventional approach to infrastructure health monitoring by direct solution of
a structural model through application of a Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT)
solver to mechanics-based constraints. The main objective of the project is to
validate the efficacy of this formal approach to structural health diagnostics.
This activity involves development of a framework to construct generalized and
structure-specific constraints and encode them logically using SMT to formally
bound the solution space of a measurement-based structural model satisfying the
inverse Eigen problem that is central to vibration-based monitoring.
Interpretation of the diagnostics result based on SMT will also be investigated,
in a preliminary study of the role of interactive visual analytics utilizing
tangible interaction to enhance the ability of practitioners to perceive,
understand, and contribute to the diagnosis of the structural health monitoring
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maintaining the safety of bridges and other aging
civil infrastructure is a challenging societal problem. Structural health
monitoring offers a sustainable pathway by maximizing the service life and
informing optimized schedule-based maintenance of our costly critical
infrastructure without jeopardizing public safety or the functionality of
commercial and strategic highway routes. If successful, this project will create
solid foundations for a comprehensive diagnosis and prognostication framework.
This model for smart infrastructure is directly translatable to a broad spectrum
of other cyber-physical systems. To facilitate data sharing and dissemination,
the laboratory bridge model is to be distributed as an open-source resource to
the broader scientific and engineering communities with experimental details,
analytical models, and datasets published and maintained through the NSF NEEShub
Project Warehouse. Activities to integrate the project research with education
include development of course modules, projects, and case studies.