* 1331752
* CyberSEES Type 1:  Hierarchical Energy Management for Sustainable Residential and Mobility Ecosystems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Wei Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,334.00

The objective of the proposed research is to study the integrated management of
residential and personal transportation energy consumption to improve overall
performance, efficiency, and reliability. The first goal of the proposal is to
develop a highly resolved residential energy eco-system computational model that
captures all energy consumption of an individual household, including energy for
personal transportation. This can be either in the form of fossil fuels
(gasoline, diesel, or natural gas) or electricity, in the case of plug-in
electric vehicles. The second goal is to develop a hierarchical dynamic energy
management framework for multiple interconnected energy eco-systems considering
multiple energy carriers and the incorporation of stochastic human energy use
behavior. The hierarchical energy management system optimally manages vehicle-
building interactions for a group of residential buildings and associated
vehicles. The management approach is non-disruptive, in the sense that consumers
are not required to change their behavior. Deliverables include: a highly-
resolved residential and transportation energy use computational model,
validated using data from local utilities and from electric vehicle databases; a
hierarchical energy management policy; the demonstration of the energy
management policy in simulation; and an outreach component through the Ohio
Energy Project.

The outcome of this work, if successful, will have a broad impact on energy
efficiency, demand response, and on integration of multiple energy carriers and
coordination among them -- all necessary conditions for the development of a
sustainable energy system. Moreover, introduction of energy diversity in the
residential-transportation sectors may significantly contribute to national
energy independence. The results of this project have value beyond the immediate
application considered here, since many of the advances required to realize the
proposed model and optimization framework are directly transferable to other
domains. In particular, the proposed modeling approach that quantifies
stochastic consumer energy use behaviors provides a novel perspective to study
complex interactions between human and technological systems, while the proposed
hierarchical energy management framework that achieves the optimal tradeoff
between population and individual objectives represents an effective strategy to
control and manage sustainable infrastructure systems involving multiple
participants. Dissemination of the results of the project to (utility and
automotive) industry partners will enable greater societal impact.