* 1331813
* Collaborative Research: CyberSEES: Type 2: A New Framework for Crowd-Sourced Green Infrastructure Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Lawrence Band, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 09/30/2017
* USD 572,182.00

This project develops a novel computational Green Infrastructure (GI) design
framework that integrates interactive, neighborhood-scale, collaborative design
by multiple stakeholders ("crowd-sourced" design) with multi-scale models of
ecosystem and human impacts. The following research questions are being
addressed: (1) How well does coupling of site-scale ecohydrology with catchment-
scale hydraulic routing improve predictions? (2) How well can stakeholder
preferences be predicted using design image feature extraction and machine
learning? (3) What interactive optimization and visualization techniques lead to
the most rapid and complete consensus among diverse stakeholders? (4) Do
stakeholders using interactive cyberinfrastructure tools consider more options
and explore more of the GI design space?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A "crowd-sourced"
design framework is developed to enable stakeholders to interactively create and
evaluate potential GI designs that reflect consideration of the full breadth of
social, economic, and environmental criteria. The research questions are
evaluated in diverse neighborhoods within three urban catchments in the
Baltimore Ecosystem Study, working closely with environmental non-governmental
organizations to ensure that the results will provide significant benefits to
community stakeholders. The models developed in this project are the first to
integrate criteria for human and ecosystem wellbeing with site- and watershed-
scale hydrologic processes, a key advance for improving understanding and
implementation of GI design. Map and image visualization identifies which
visualization approaches best support improving stakeholder engagement for
achieving consensus using interactive collaborative design. This makes technical
advances in interactive optimization and model parameterization accessible to
the broad range of stakeholders, from regulators and planners to contractors and
homeowners.