* 1331735
* Multi-Material, Multi-Layer Devices Enabled by High Aspect Ratio Micro-Extrusion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Leon Shaw, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 149,968.00

In this project, studies of micro-extrusion of pastes through high aspect ratio
(HAR) micro-nozzles to fabricate multi-material, multi-layer (M3L) devices will
be conducted. The capability for layer-by-layer fabrication with composition
variation within each layer will be investigated. To provide unmatched
capability for fabricating novel architecture of M3L devices not achievable
today, extrusion behavior of various sizes of HAR micro-nozzles starting from
millimeters all the way down to 25 micrometers will be studied. Novel three-
dimensional (3D) supercapacitors with high energy densities will be used as a
model system to investigate the challenges of the M3L technology. As such,
extensive efforts will be made to study and establish the proper formulations of
the desired pastes that can be micro-extruded using HAR micro-nozzles and have
pseudoplastic characteristics to form a large layer with the desired thickness
and a uniform composition. The 3D supercapacitors fabricated will be
characterized structurally and electro-chemically to demonstrate the unmatched
power of the M3L technology in fabricating durable, low cost, high performance
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;M3L technology will reduce part count, part
handling, part transportation and part storage because only one processing step
is needed. Furthermore, the M3L technology will offer new manufacturing
capabilities to produce M3L devices with the composition control locally at the
micrometer level for the desired functionalities and the dimension control
spanning over 5 orders of magnitude for high fabrication rates. It is expected
that the M3L technology proposed can compete with conventional manufacturing
methods for cost effectiveness, not to mention that the M3L technology can
fabricate novel devices with new functionalities, not achievable via today's
manufacturing technology. This project will have a substantial impact on
manufacturing technology. It can greatly improve productivity, reduce the
production cost, and enhance the U.S. manufacturing competitiveness. This
project will also provide an excellent education and training opportunity to one
graduate student and many undergraduate students in the areas of manufacturing
and alternative energy.