* 1331611
* Hazards SEES Type 2: Preventing Flood Hazards from Becoming Disasters through Two-Way Communication of Parcel-Level Flood Risk
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* John Houston, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,819,380.00

This project seeks to understand what factors and conditions allow parcel-level
prediction of urban flooding to catalyze behavioral change in flood vulnerable
communities. It is hypothesized that a parcel-level flood prediction model,
coupled with transformative communication strategies, is a more powerful tool
for people to understand vulnerability, visualize flood risk, and plan for
future hazards than coarse-level modeling conveyed via a singular disaster
narrative. To test this hypothesis, this project focuses on the two largest
estuarine systems in Southern California, a region where the damages from a
major flood are expected to be greater than from a major earthquake of the same
probability, and one to which national sea level rise studies point as being
among the most likely to experience increased flooding. The project convenes an
interdisciplinary team of researchers and a broad range of stakeholders and
partners to understand the type of flood risk information that is needed to
catalyze behavioral change, investigate and test communication strategies,
identify interventions that can be implemented to build community resilience and
mitigate expected flood losses, and model how these interventions would affect
the flood hazard and its expected impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For decades
scientists have tried to characterize what they know about climate change and
translate it into actionable information. By most metrics, this effort has
failed. Emissions continue to increase, climate change impacts are tracking
worst-case scenarios, and skepticism about climate change is at an all time
high. The poor response to climate change science is consonant with research
that shows that top down communication of information that is often abstract and
outside the immediate experience of the audience tends to have very little
impact on behavior. This project fosters innovative interdisciplinary science
that builds a broad knowledge base for flood resilience, articulates a strategy
for more effectively translating climate science into actionable information to
catalyze behavioral change, and advances understanding of whether, and to what
extent, parcel-level flood data can contribute to more flood resilient
communities. Specifically, this project also: 1) trains hazard practitioners
through collaborative workshops designed to transfer knowledge, facilitate two-
way communication, and evaluate resilience options; 2) informs local climate
action planning through targeted recommendations for infrastructure adaptation,
emergency preparedness and response, and policy; 3) delivers lessons learned to
national and global climate action planners and interdisciplinary hazards
researchers; 4) trains emerging hazards scholars through a specialized
undergraduate and graduate education program; 5) develops and delivers high
school teacher training on flood education and 6) provides bilingual education
for adults in vulnerable communities; 7) creates a project website to
communicate research and disseminate education materials to external audiences;
and 8) informs national security by encouraging the model's application to other
flood-vulnerable locales within the national security and development assistance
purview.