* 1331409
* EAGER: Increasing the Supply of High-Quality Computer Science Instructors to Low-Income Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Raegen Miller, Teach For America
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 01/31/2015
* USD 116,781.00

Teach For America (TFA) will conduct a pilot to develop a new model for
recruiting and training new teachers to effectively teach Exploring Computer
Science (ECS) at 5-10 New York City public high schools in 2013-2014. The course
will be taught by TFA corps members who are qualified to teach a secondary core
subject and who also have taken 2 or more semester-long core CS courses in
college. TFA will conduct targeted recruitment of CS college students on 10 New
York and New Jersey university campuses. This recruitment will include outreach
to CS departments, presentations to CS classes, engagement with TFA campus
recruitment teams, participation of TFA alums with a CS background, and a
general messaging campaign articulating CS education as an equity issue. An
external evaluation consultant will conduct teacher surveys at the beginning and
end of the course, interviews with school leaders in the schools in which ECS is
being taught, and analysis of student work and instructional materials. In
addition, TFA will assess whether targeted CS recruitment efforts lead to an
increase in the number of people with a CS background who apply to TFA and who
are accepted to TFA. This pilot will test a novel model for pre-service teacher
recruitment and professional development that will contribute to the CS 10K
initiative. Students in the participating high schools that currently lack CS
courses and CS teachers will be directly affected. In addition, this pilot can
inform expansion of CS courses within NYC and throughout high schools in other
TFA regions around the country. The model of recruiting recent college graduates
with CS expertise and training them to be CS teachers also has the potential to
inform recruitment strategies of pre-service teachers at other college campuses.