* 1331291
* AGS-PRF:  The Tropical Marine Boundary Layer Moisture Field Using S-Pol Data from DYNAMO and Comparison with RICO
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Jennifer Davison, Davison                 Jennifer       L
* Fellowship Award
* Edward L. Bensman
* 08/31/2015
* USD 172,000.00

Due to the highly variable nature of the moisture field in the tropical marine
boundary layer (TMBL), it has largely been characterized in terms of its mean
state. Yet, when and where convection is initiated, how long clouds persist, and
precipitation amount and distribution is controlled by the actual distribution
of moisture. Existing data sets capable of characterizing the large-scale
moisture field over the equatorial Indian Ocean (based largely on a combination
of satellite and sounding measurements) are insufficient for understanding
Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) initiation. The need for better resolved, more
frequent, higher quality moisture measurements was one of the primary motivating
factors for the joint Dynamics of the MJO (DYNAMO) Experiment in the Year 2011 -
such data was deemed critical for testing many of the leading MJO initiation
hypotheses. Despite the extensive set of measurements made to document the
moisture field (including ~20,000 soundings), the extreme moisture variability
in the TMBL documented during the Rain in Cumulus over the Ocean (RICO)
Experiment indicates that these combined measurements may still be insufficient.

Previously developed radar product was used to map the mean mesoscale moisture
field structure during RICO, based on Bragg scattering layers (BSLs) detectable
with S-band dual-polarization radar (S-Pol). BSL analysis provides an
unprecedented structural context for both marrying together and more accurately
interpreting moisture retrievals generated at a variety of scales and
resolutions. This proposal is centered on conducting BSL analysis on S-Pol data
from DYNAMO. BSL results will be combined with other DYNAMO humidity retrievals
(e.g. from satellite, soundings, scanning microwave radiometer) to produce the
most complete mapping of the TMBL moisture field to date. TMBL moisture field
statistics will be generated and the controls on its structure will be
investigated (e.g., time of day, wind direction and speed, rain rate, MJO
phase). Island induced biases will be examined through a new BSL-based analysis
technique. DYNAMO statistical results will be compared to RICO's to look for key
similarities and differences in TMBL structure. A BSL-based, large eddy
simulation validation technique will also be explored.

Intellectual Merit: The research addresses fundamental science questions about
moisture variability and the mean structure typifying the TMBL over the
equatorial, central Indian Ocean. Comparison of DYNAMO and RICO results will
likely reveal both key commonalities - that can then be assumed true for TMBLs
in general, and statistical differences - perhaps from differences in large-
scale dynamics.

Broader Impacts: The mapping of the TMBL moisture field structure will be
extremely valuable for testing MJO initiation hypotheses. MJO contributes
significantly to tropical intraseasonal variability and interacts with many
systems to greatly enhance extreme weather events in the tropics and at higher
latitudes. BSL analysis can also improve our ability to produce short-term
forecasts.