* 1331360
* AGS-PRF:  Synthesizing Laboratory and Field Measurements of Biogenic Volatile Organic Compounds
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Tran Nguyen, Nguyen                  Tran           B
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2015
* USD 172,000.00

This objective of this research is to investigate the major chemical and
physical loss pathways for isoprene (C5H8) and its oxidation products in the
atmosphere and assess their role in the formation of secondary organic aerosol
(SOA). An AGS Postdoctoral Research Fellow will conduct laboratory studies in
Caltech's newly built smog chambers to explore potential mechanisms for SOA
formation under various conditions. The three primary mechanisms that will be
investigated are: (1) the gas-phase OH-oxidation of isoprene-derived epoxydiols
(IEPOX), that are formed in pristine environments, in the presence of varying
amounts of NOx, (2) the reactive uptake and aqueous photochemistry of isoprene-
derived organic compounds (hydroperoxide (ISOPOOH), IEPOX, glycolaldehyde, etc.)
in aerosol liquid water, and (3) the formation of hydroperoxides from the water
vapor reaction with stabilized Criegee intermediates from the ozonolysis of
isoprene.

Multifunctional organic compounds that are important precursors to SOA were
measured during an NSF sponsored field campaign in the summer of 2013, the
Southern Oxidant and Aerosol Study (SOAS), using a state-of-the-art chemical
ionization mass spectrometer (CIMS). Results from the laboratory studies will be
used to assess possible mechanisms for SOA formation that might explain the
observational data collected during the SOAS field campaign.

Isoprene is emitted by forests and plants and is among the most highly emitted
organic compounds in the atmosphere. The products of isoprene oxidation form
ozone and secondary organic aerosols, which are harmful to human health and
perturb the Earth's climate. This research will produce information that is
critical to modeling the influence of isoprene oxidation products on climate
change.

This research is supported under the AGS Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
program.