* 1331178
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using Topology to Answer Philosophical Questions About General Relativity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* James Weatherall, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,669.00

Project Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to engage in a conceptual
analysis of the notion of physicality as it is used in the context of the
philosophical foundations of physics using tools from topology and relativity
theory; he plans to develop a mathematical framework for explicating the meaning
of physicality in relation to models. The grant will support travel to two
locations where researchers are working on topics related to aspects of his
work, the University of Pittsburgh and the University of Washington, Seattle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Pittsburgh, the
student plans to work with two senior professors. With one, he aims to develop
the conceptual basis for a proposal by Stephen Hawking to connect topological
stability with the "physically meaningful" properties of a model; with the other
he aims to explore applying topology to inter-theoretic reduction. In Seattle,
the student plans to work with another senior professor to extend known results
in topology to further develop his framework. Interacting with these scholars
will serve to enhance the quality of his dissertation research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has
plans to disseminate his research to the physics community in addition to the
philosophy of science community; he plans to do so through publication of
technical results in physics journals and through presentations at physics
conferences. He explicitly mentions presenting his results at the annual March
and April meetings of the American Physical Society and the 29th Pacific Coast
Gravity meeting in 2014.