* 1331418
* Interdisciplinary Workshop on Cooperation, Conflict and the Evolution of Sociality  at the Texas A&M Univ Campus, 2014.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Randolph Nesse, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2018
* USD 121,546.00

This project integrates the study of cooperation and conflict by bringing
together research leaders in social science and animal behavior for an
interdisciplinary workshop. The workshop is designed to foster exchange and
integrate ideas and methods, to spur creative, new research projects, and to
work towards creating a unified framework for thinking about cooperation and
competition and their underlying mechanisms. One of the dominant themes of
social science in the past several decades has been the remarkable capacity of
humans for cooperation. A parallel theme has emerged in animal behavior
research, where cooperation remains a major focus. In social science, the advent
of game-theoretic models of behavior led to cooperation being viewed as an
anomaly or mystery. Only recently, in the face of overwhelming laboratory and
field evidence, were formal models expanded to reveal how such behaviors could
be "rational." Similarly, in animal behavior research (including human animals),
the pervasiveness of cooperative behaviors challenged theorists to explain how
they increased fitness. Understanding the evolutionary origins of cooperation
among individuals, and among groups and species, is one of the triumphs of 20th-
century biology. At the same time, the study of conflict among individuals or
groups also has led to important insights. The focus has been less on game-
theoretic or evolutionary underpinnings, because the behavior is seen as a
logical outgrowth of standard models of the drive to survive and reproduce.
Conflict is seen as arising from resource competition, with the extra resources
claimed by winners serving to enhance their utility (in social science) or
survival and reproduction (in animal research). For the most part conflict has
been studied separately from cooperation. They are,however, two sides of the
same coin. Cooperation and conflict can be viewed as endpoints on a continuum of
behavioral possibilities. But cooperation and conflict also are intertwined in a
different way. Conflict, or the potential for conflict, may be necessary to
support cooperation, and cooperation within a group may be necessary to mount
successful conflict with another group.

This workshop advances understanding of the fundamental social and biological
forces that shape interactions involving cooperation and conflict. This approach
stands to fundamentally transform our understanding of the interplay of
cooperation and conflict. The workshop provides an important advance in the
theoretical core of a wide range of disciplines. In addition, the project funds
follow-on collaborative projects resulting from the workshop, thus leveraging
the assembled expertise to produce new knowledge. In addition, the workshop
explicitly includes the participation of PhD students and postdocs from a
variety of disciplines, and it is expected that these younger scholars will
participate in the funded projects, thus influencing the next generation of
scholars.