* 1331109
* EXTREEMS-QED: Data-Enabled Science and Computational Analysis Research, Training and Education for Students (DESCARTES) Program
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Arnold Kim, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2019
* USD 879,997.00

The overarching goal of this program is to provide Applied Mathematical Sciences
majors at University of California, Merced (UC Merced) an enhanced academic
experience that provides training in the computational tools needed for modeling
and simulation of complex systems and for analysis of large data sets. The Data
Enabled Science and Computational Analysis Research, Training, and Education for
Students (DESCARTES) Program has three specific aims:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To
provide exceptional undergraduate students unique research opportunities and
state-of-the-art education and training in computational and data enabled
science and to disseminate results from their efforts within the university and
to the community at-large;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To develop the Computational
and Data Enabled Science emphasis track within the Applied Mathematical Sciences
major to provide students a hands-on learning experience on the latest tools and
methods in computational and data enabled science;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To
provide high school math teachers from the region the opportunity to learn the
tools and methods of computational and data enabled
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UC Merced community is committed to
serving the population of the San Joaquin Valley -- the fastest growing yet
economically underserved region of California. Indeed, many of our students are
members of underrepresented populations and most are first-generation college-
goers. These students, as well as regional high school teachers, will realize
significant benefits from the DESCARTES Scholars program. Both will gain access
to emerging areas of research in computational and data-enabled science and the
training necessary to address the complex problems confronting society today.
Regional businesses and industry will benefit by forging connections to a well-
trained pool of prospective employees. At the same time, the University
community will take an important step towards its mission of service to the
region.