* 1331600
* Hazards SEES Type 1: End-to-End Development of Time-Dependent Geo-targeted Alerts and Warnings Enabled by Dense Observations of the 2011 Tohoku Tsunami
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Monica Kohler, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2016
* USD 299,852.00

Technical Description of Project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New tsunami/earthquake
research in seismology and civil engineering will be combined with findings from
empirical social science research on public responses to warnings to develop
enhanced tsunami warning messages in order to improve appropriate protective
action taking among members of the public. This project will focus on the 2011
Tohoku tsunami data to show how messages can be developed that increase the
specificity of geo-location, time to impact, and hazard impact, and integrate
into the tsunami warning system. In 2011, a dense array of seafloor pressure
gauges off southern California recorded the Tohoku tsunami with unprecedented
spatial and temporal resolution. The tsunami data, together with numerical
modeling, will be used to characterize the physical sources (e.g., standing
waves in the source region and large-scale bathymetric structures between source
and receivers) of multiple large-amplitude wave arrivals that make tsunamis a
long-duration, time-dependent, location-dependent hazard. A primary product that
will result from validation of the simulations with the pressure gauge data will
be the ability to determine which waveform features are important for alert and
warning message content. From the analyses, tsunami hazard prediction models
will be refined in ways that have a bearing on public risk communication under
times of imminent threat. Numerical simulation and data processing results from
the dense pressure gauge array of 2011 tsunami data, as well as NOAA DART and
coastal tide gauge data, will be used to increase warning message specificity by
capitalizing on social science knowledge of public behavior to hazard warnings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects Broader Significance and Importance&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary research proposed here extends well beyond the traditional
venues of each individual field represented by the PIs. To complement this
effort, an advisory team made up of technical experts and emergency managers in
the U.S. will be formed. This group of experts will guide the work, providing
focus on how the new modeling results can inform the development of alert and
warning messages that take into account tsunami observations illustrated in the
new data sources. Collaborations with relevant emergency managers, seismologists
and civil engineers in Caribbean and South American countries will also be
established. Graduate and undergraduate students drawn from diverse student
bodies will be involved in the data analysis as part of their thesis and
independent project work. By applying breakthroughs in tsunami science and
modeling to tsunami warning messages, and demonstrating the effectiveness of
enhanced message specificity, this research has the potential to affect public
protective action response and to ultimately reduce losses and save lives.