* 1331126
* A Theoretical Study of the Conceptual, Mathematical, and Explanatory Interconnections at the Foundations of Classical Field Theories
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* James Weatherall, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 221,590.00

Overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STS Scholars Award is to support research on
a project in the conceptual foundations of physics. The standard view concerning
the fundamental postulates of a physical theory is that they are independent
assertions about the nature of space, time, matter, and their mutual
interactions. The proposed alternative hypothesis to be examined by the
principal investigator (PI) holds that physical theories are better understood
as a network of mutually inter-dependent principles and assumptions. The
proposed study will focus on the central principles of classical field theories,
particularly theories of gravitation. Those principles include conservation
principles, energy conditions, and field
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it
well known that some principles of classical field theories may be derived from
others, the idea that this inter-derivability is ubiquitous (or nearly so) and
that this is essential to understanding the foundations of physical theories are
novel claims. Also novel is the proposal to systematically explore these
interconnections. If the alternative hypothesis of the PI is correct, then the
basic postulates of our best physical theories are mutually supporting and
constraining in ways that have not previously been systematically recognized; in
that case, understanding these interconnections is essential to a full account
of the philosophical and mathematical foundations of these theories. Testing the
hypothesis will involve new technical work in the mathematical foundations of
classical field theories as well as conceptual and philosophical analysis of
both new and previously known results. Results will be communicated in physics
and mathematics journals as well as philosophy journals, and will form the basis
of a monograph on the foundations of classical field
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
also explore the implications for topics in general philosophy of science,
including explanation and theory change, provided that the hypothesis turns out
to be correct. In addition, it would be expected that the hypothesis applies
more broadly to include quantum theories and perhaps scientific theories more
generally. In addition, the proposed project will integrate research with
graduate education. The project includes many small, well-defined problems that
will provide opportunities for collaborative work with graduate students. These
collaborations will form the basis for the development and implementation of a
hybrid model of graduate education, drawing from education traditions in
philosophy and in theoretical physics, to facilitate broader participation in
research by early graduate students from under-served groups. To that end, the
PI will partner with existing organizations that are working to increase
diversity in philosophy and the sciences such as Hypatia, which aims to improve
retention and recruitment of women in philosophy.