* 1331520
* Hazards SEES Type 1: Real-Time Geospatial Infrastructure Modeling for Disaster Response and Rapid Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Cumaraswamy Vipulanandan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,273.00

Accurate and timely information are essential to drive a coordinated and
effective response to natural disasters; and the use of geospatial data for
decision support and situational awareness is vital, as it provides critical
information regarding conditions on the ground. Unfortunately, the real-time
application of geospatial data is still hampered by significant bottlenecks that
delay its availability to first responders, and by the lack of automated tools
to analyze this information to prioritize actionable items and identify critical
areas for response. This project will investigate ways to mitigate bottlenecks
by integrating and testing a hardware and software solution that will capture,
georeference data and disseminate to a distributed user group. GIS-based multi-
infrastructure models will be developed that will assist first-responders in
distilling large volumes of geospatial data into actionable items. The effort
will focus on the LiDAR remote sensing data due to its unique ability to
directly provide 3D mapping and change detection. To accomplish these tasks,
three scientific investigations that are fundamental to real-time situational
awareness will be pursued: (1) an investigation of spatial accuracy obtainable
with geospatial data, (2) development of algorithms for real-time determination
of high-resolution change, and, (3) dissemination of detected high-resolution 3D
change through GIS-based multi-infrastructure models. In addition, the project
will define automated process to analyze geospatial data in real-time to assist
in the response to and rapid recovery from natural disasters. The real-time
tools developed will allow the leveraging of existing LiDAR datasets as a
baseline model for rapid change detection in the event of a natural disaster,
and enable more effective response and quicker recovery from natural hazard
occurrences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural hazards such as hurricanes and
earthquakes can have significant impact on communities, as clearly evidenced by
recent hurricanes Sandy and Ike, and the 2011 TÃ´hoku earthquake in Japan.
Regrettably, the occurrence of both hurricanes and earthquakes is beyond our
control. However, can be controlled is the response to these events to minimize
their impact and spur post-event recovery. Currently, in the aftermath of
natural events, decision makers are hampered by the inefficient dissemination of
information regarding the location, scale and nature of the devastation. To
mitigate these challenges, the research team will develop a set of real-time
software tools to enable the analysis of geospatial information to define a set
of prioritized actionable items that will speed the response to, and aid in the
rapid recovery from natural disasters. This project brings together a multi-
disciplinary team of researchers and students, and experts in emergency response
to earthquakes and hurricanes from California and Texas to develop real-time
models for effective dissemination of geospatial information for rapid and
coordinated response to natural hazards.