* 1331895
* CyberSEES: Type 1: Improving Crop Production Efficiency using Wireless Underground Sensor-Guided Irrigation Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Suat Irmak, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This project investigates the feasibility of wireless underground sensor
networks (WUSNs) for soil parameter monitoring and devises next-generation
autonomous irrigation management tools to improve crop production efficiency.
Agriculture is the largest user of freshwater resources, accounting for about
70-80% of current withdrawals. With the increasing demands and the emerging
scarcity in freshwater resources, increasing the crop yield is essential. The
wirelessly connected, permanently installed underground sensor networks can feed
real-time information from the soil to the irrigation management system,
improving crop yields in a cost-effective manner. This project develops a proof-
of-concept irrigation management testbed and associated agricultural practices
and tools for autonomous control of a center pivot irrigation system. The
developed tools are integrated into a heterogeneous architecture that consists
of underground sensing components, relay nodes, a cloud-based management system
and mobile components. These results of this project will make significant
contributions to the implementation of the variable rate irrigation concept.
Moreover, irrigation-scheduling protocols developed using the WUSN will account
for different soil textural classifications. While transforming irrigation
practices, the research also devises sustainable underground system solutions
through development of unique antenna designs; transmit power control
techniques, and vibration energy harvesting systems. The resulting prototype is
the first sustainable wireless underground sensor system and enables
investigation of the relationships between locally-sensed data and crop yields.
Accordingly, the project develops on-line management tools that will enhance
crop production efficiency in the long-term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projections by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations indicate that the
World population will reach over 9 billion by 2050. Ever-increasing limitations
in freshwater resources coupled with population growth have increased the
competition for water between various sectors and substantially increased the
pressure on water users. To meet the food and fiber demand of rapidly growing
World population, new technologies are required for production agriculture. This
difficult and challenging task requires multidisciplinary efforts to couple
various engineering and science disciplines. The developed innovative autonomous
irrigation management paradigm in this project is a new generation concept that
can achieve such broad impacts. The project supports graduate students from
computer science and engineering and biological systems engineering to foster
interdisciplinary research. The results and the insight from this project are
disseminated to farmers and agriculture industry through University of Nebraska-
Lincoln Extension programs and networks as well as high quality publications,
local, regional, national and international conferences and journals.