* 1331940
* The Eel River Critical Zone Observatory: exploring how the critical zone will mediate watershed currencies and ecosystem response in a changing environment
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,11/30/2022
* Stephanie Carlson, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2022
* USD 6,452,152.00

The Eel River Critical Zone Observatory: exploring how the critical zone will
mediate watershed currencies and ecosystem response in a changing
environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surprisingly, we need to look inside hillslopes
to understand variations in atmospheric moisture, the magnitude and chemistry of
river flows, the dynamics of ecosystems, and, even coastal ocean productivity.
These connections arise in a deep, unexplored landscape of weathered bedrock,
populated by microbes, that lies beneath the hillslope surface and below the
soil mantle and above a fresh bedrock boundary. Rain and snow melt can penetrate
this weathered bedrock, be held as rock moisture and be exploited by trees,
which return this moisture to the atmosphere through release (transpiration)
from leaves. Bedrock properties influence how much moisture is available to
plants, so in turn may determine which species can persist, especially in
seasonally dry environments. The water released by trees influences air humidity
and temperature, and the tree type affects how much solar energy is reflected or
absorbed. Collectively these feedbacks influence atmospheric energy and
circulation (and momentum). Rain and snow melt also penetrate to the underlying
fresh bedrock boundary where water perches and flows as groundwater to streams
through the weathered bedrock. This can control the timing, magnitude, and
chemistry of runoff to rivers, especially during summer low flow periods. Hence,
river ecosystems and the coastal oceans (where rivers discharge) are recipients
of water and nutrients derived from deep inside hillslopes. The entire zone from
vegetation canopy down through the soil and weathered bedrock to the start of
fresh bedrock is referred to as the ?critical zone.? This zone mediates these
?watershed currencies?-- water, sediment, solutes (dissolved elements in water),
gases, organisms, energy and momentum?that are exchanged and transformed in the
course of biological and physical interactions across landscapes. PIs propose to
establish the Eel River Critical Zone Observatory in Northern California for
intensive field investigations of key mechanisms controlling these currencies
and their consequences for water resources and ecosystem sustainability. Eel
River CZO scientists will build models to explore how these currencies are
exchanged among atmosphere, hillslopes, rivers and coastal oceans to investigate
fundamental questions and to provide guidance for management issues. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PIs identify four key frontier questions: 1) Do plants in seasonally
dry environments rely on moisture from the weathered bedrock beneath the soil
and if so how might bedrock properties then affect this availability and thus
the resilience of vegetation to climate change? 2) As moisture conditions
change, how do microbes in the critical zone influence the water chemistry and
gasses discharged from hillslopes? 3) What controls the spatial extent of
channels that remain wet (standing or flowing water) in the network of channels
draining seasonally dry environments? and 4) Will changes in critical zone
currencies, induced by climate or land use change, lead to sudden shifts in
river and coastal ecosystems? Motivated by anticipated increase in climate
extremes (especially extended drought) and accelerating societal demand for
water, PIs focus on filling knowledge gaps that not only inhibit our ability to
forecast the magnitude of future change of systems, but even the sign of that
change. The Eel River CZO will be locally rooted in the Angelo Coast Range
Reserve (in Northern California), but will extend to watershed and regional
scales. It will be dedicated to detecting, explaining, and predicting driving
mechanisms that connect watershed currencies to processes that operate in the
critical zone. We will also develop a model which will provide local predictions
over a regional scale that can be used to ask "what if" questions about possible
future climate and landuse scenarios, and the consequences for runoff and
ecosystem conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Eel River CZO will produce a
generation of students and postdocs who have worked together across the
disciplines of climate science, hydrology, ecology, geobiology, geochemistry and
geomorphology and who have made discoveries at the interface of these fields.
There will be strong interactions with other CZOs. PIs will actively work with
resource managers and watershed residents to share and generate knowledge and
collaborate to build resource and ecosystem resilience, specifically in the Eel
and Russian River coastal watersheds. They will focus on these watersheds, but
anticipate our findings and modeling will then be expanded to a much broader
region. Environmental change will come: the need for well-informed guidance and
tools will accelerate. It is only through coupling mechanistic field studies and
integrated modeling as proposed here that we can forecast and offer tools for
decision makers to guide the future state of landscapes and their ecosystem
functions and services