* 1331863
* Collaborative Research: CyberSEES: Coupon Incentive-based Risk Aware Demand Response in Smart Grid
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Evdokia Nikolova, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2018
* USD 667,000.00

This project investigates the potential of a voluntary incentive-based demand
response program in limiting the operating risks of future sustainable
distribution power grids. The approach is to (1) create and assess real-world
experiments of coupon incentive-based demand response (CIDR) in representative
distribution grids; (2) formulate optimization-oriented CIDR models by taking
into account heterogeneous consumers and risk aware load serving entities
(LSEs); (3) introduce efficient algorithms for computing risk and welfare
outcomes from CIDR; and (4) design and test novel mechanisms tailored for LSEs'
risk-averse objectives. The research activities include stochastic modeling of
distribution-level grid operations, design of algorithms and incentive
mechanisms, and real-world tests of CIDRs in representative distribution
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing a cyber-enabled sustainable pathway
towards deep integration of intelligent decision makers in the smart
distribution grid, this project leads toward an overall cost-effective and
environmentally benign utilization of a future energy system portfolio. The
research program is strongly coupled with an educational effort to train future
leaders in the smart grid industry. A new interdisciplinary course on cyber-
enabled engineering and economics of sustainable energy systems is offered to
students across multiple universities, including Texas A&amp;M and UC Berkeley.
As mentors in a NSF REU program at Texas A&amp;M, the team works directly with
undergraduate students, in particular under-represented groups, to empirically
test and improve the smart phone CIDR application. The team also plans to
actively participate in the community outreach activities such as summer open
house activities for high school students and teachers.