* 1331788
* CYBERSEES: TYPE 1: INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS AND POWER MANAGEMENT ARCHITECTURE FOR SUPPORTING CELLULAR BASE STATIONS OPERATION USING  RENEWABLE ENERGY IN A MICROGRID CONFIGURATION
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Andres Kwasinski, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,441.00

This project will investigate techniques to power cellular network base stations
from renewable sources (wind turbines and photovoltaic modules) in order to
address cellular networks' carbon footprint and resiliency concerns. To better
manage operation and increase resiliency, base stations are clustered in small
groups in a microgrid configuration. In this configuration, cellular traffic
management is integrated with the operation of local renewable electric power
generators and energy storage, forming a single power and communication
sustainable smart infrastructure system. Consequently, this project will develop
an integrated management system by (a) researching algorithms that use next-day
weather forecasts to predict the short-term available renewable energy; (b)
studying algorithms to predict the cellular traffic-dependent power consumption;
and (c) investigating algorithms that will integrate the information from (a)
and (b) to shape the traffic at base stations to maximize operation powered from
renewable sources while also maintaining communication quality within
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from this project will help overcome
barriers challenging the use of renewable energy and will increase the
resiliency of cellular networks to allow continued operation under extreme
events. Also, the outcomes from this project will be of value in other
applications, such as demand-response and sustainable operation of data centers
and other networks. This project will also implement a course, to be co-taught
by the investigators through virtual meetings, that integrates technology in
computing, communications and power systems to address the scarcity of
graduating professionals with an understanding of the smart grid as a system
integrating power, computational and communications notions.