* 1331932
* CyberSEES: Type 2: Computing and Visualizing Optimal Policies for Ecosystem Management
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Thomas Dietterich, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,200,000.00

Intellectual Merit

Many ecosystems exhibit spatially spreading processes that we would like to
manage to either promote or prevent. For example, we seek to prevent the spread
of invasive species while promoting the spread of endangered species. For
wildland fire, we seek to promote the spread of low-intensity ground fires that
prevent the buildup of dangerous fuels while preventing the spread of high-
intensity crown fires that destroy endangered species habitat and valuable
timber. These management problems can be formulated mathematically as Markov
Decision Problems (MDPs) defined over spatial regions. However, because of the
spatial nature of these problems, the MDPs are immense and cannot be solved by
any existing algorithms. This project develops new MDP solution algorithms for
spatial MDPs. These algorithms will work with ecosystem simulators (rather than
requiring explicit models) and they will also address the risk of catastrophic
outcomes such as species extinction or catastrophic wildfires.

To bridge the gap between the computational solution of an MDP and the actual
adoption of such solutions by policymakers, this research develops visualization
and interaction methods that will allow stakeholders (e.g., policymakers, land
owners, timber industry representatives, conservation biologists) to understand
and critique both the problem formulations and the resulting solutions.

Broader Impacts

The new methods will be tested on five management problems: (a) Tamarisk spread
in river networks, (b) Cheatgrass spread in Western US range lands, (c) Sudden
Oak Death spread in California and Oregon, (d) deciding when to let a wildfire
burn versus suppressing it, and (e) deciding where to place fuel reduction
treatments in the landscape to reduce fire risk. The Tamarisk, Cheatgrass, and
Sudden Oak Death problems will be studied in stylized settings where the
relevant environmental properties and costs can be varied. The goal of these
studies is to understand how the different spatial spreading processes
(exhibited by these different invasive species) determine the structure of the
optimal management policy. The results will be published in the literature on
natural resource economics and discussed with policymakers in these areas. The
wildfire problems ("let burn," and "fuel treatment") will be studied in a real
landscape-a publicly-owned site in the Deschutes National Forest containing a
mix of Ponderosa and Lodgepole pine. A collaborating fire manager with the US
Forest Service will recruit a panel of stakeholders to analyze and critique the
proposed management policies using the visualization and interaction tools that
we will develop.

Problems and techniques developed in this project will form the core of the
first Summer School in Computational Sustainability, which will be organized by
the research team. The results will also be integrated into the OSU Summer
Institute in Eco-Informatics (an NSF REU Site) and the OSU Spring Break Course
in Monte Carlo AI for junior undergraduates. Four Ph.D. students and one Postdoc
will be trained during this project.