* 1331939
* Southern Sierra Critical Zone Observatory
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,12/31/2022
* Michael Goulden, University of California - Merced
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Yuretich
* 12/31/2022
* USD 6,905,084.00

The Southern Sierra Critical Zone Observatory (SSCZO) is investigating how
mountain soil and regolith properties develop over geologic time, and interact
with shorter-term climate variability and ecosystem behavior. This understanding
is used to predict how environmental change, including human disturbances, fire,
pests and changes in climate influence water resources, material flows and
forest health. We are pioneering low-cost, accurate measurement systems and use
of the measurements to drive advanced earth systems modeling for predictions. We
work closely with regional stakeholders and use our results to assess options
available to resource managers to enhance management of forests, water and other
ecosystem services, given environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SSCZO
is also a community platform for research on critical-zone (CZ) processes, both
locally and as part of the broader CZO national network. It lies along a steep
elevation transect where precipitation grades from dominantly rain to dominantly
snow and ecosystems range from oak savannah biomes to subalpine forests. Spatial
gradients in CZ properties and processes permit substitution of space for time,
making the SSCZO an excellent natural laboratory for studying how the CZ
responds to disturbance and how the water cycle drives CZ processes. SSCZO
research involves a core SSCZO team from 6 campuses, plus collaborators and
cooperators from other institutions who use SSCZO data and other resources in
their research. SSCZO resources include 4 focal sites spanning a 3000-meter
elevation range with gradients in climate, regolith properties, soils,
vegetation and material cycles. Measurements are intensive and detailed,
including 4 flux towers, meteorological stations, soil lysimeters, groundwater
wells, and over 1000 continuous sensors for snow depth, soil moisture,
streamflow, water quality and sap flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SSCZO provides
a platform for research in a landscape with vital importance to society, yet
poorly understood in its potential response to climate warming. The twin threats
of a changing climate and land-use practices raise fundamental questions about
the sustainability of CZ services in the semi-arid U.S. West, which depends
heavily on seasonally snow-covered mountains for many of these services. The
Sierra Nevada provides ecosystem services, ranging from water to biodiversity,
to a large fraction of California's and thus the nation's population. SSCZO
partnerships with federal, state, and local resource-management agencies show
the interest that decision makers have in using both research results and SSCZO
technology to improve predictive capabilities. SSCZO will provide data and
lessons to enhance the science experience of thousands of middle- and high-
school students, several undergraduate students and the public.