* 1331962
* Research Proposal: The Mediating Role of Stereotype Threat and Achievement Goals in the Regulation of Scientific Motivation
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Eric Deemer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 11/30/2014
* USD 158,590.00

Intellectual Merit : Women are often subjected by others to the stereotypical
belief that they are incapable of being scientists because, for instance, they
are assumed to lack the mathematical ability needed to perform scientific tasks.
It is possible that the absence or presence of stereotype threat cues in the
classroom can determine the types of achievement goals women adopt, in turn
leading to changes in scientific motivation. Vallerand?s (1997) hierarchical
model of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation (HMIEM) provides a theoretical
framework for this research which examines how perceived competence and
interpersonal factors mediate the effect of the environment on scientific
motivation. The proposed research will test the contextual component of the
HMIEM in an effort to determine whether individual science motives are mediated
by stereotype threat and achievement goals in the nested context of a laboratory
classroom environment. The researchers predict that perceptions of classroom
environment will have indirect effects on three separate scientific
motives?intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, and avoidance motivation.
Stereotype threat and performance avoidance goals are expected to have negative
mediating effects on intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, and facilitating
effects on avoidance motivation. The study will utilize a cross-sectional,
multilevel structural equation modeling design. Participants will consist of
2,500 college students enrolled in science laboratory classes at two
universities--Louisiana Tech University and Montana State University. Data will
be collected using an online survey method. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The findings will enhance understanding of whether gender-biased
attitudes, achievement goals, and aspects of the laboratory classroom
environment are viewed by students as being more or less facilitative of
scientific motivation. Practical recommendations regarding pedagogical
strategies and intervention could be made to the extent that these factors are
identified. The project has an innovative, multi-media dissemination plan via
documentaries and podcasts made available through the Research Channel, and
Teachers' Network. This plan will ensure the findings are heard by those most
able to make a difference in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
co-funded with the NSF EPSCoR office.