* 1331194
* Designing Nitrogen Fixing Ability in Oxygenic Photosynthetic Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Himadri Pakrasi, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,336,179.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal in this project is to develop the
design principles to establish nitrogen fixing ability in the unicellular
cyanobacterium, Synechocystis 6803, an oxygenic photosynthetic organism.
Nitrogen is an essential nutrient for plant growth. While a few plants acquire
fixed nitrogen via symbioses with microorganisms, most plants obtain nitrogen
through uptake of nitrogenous compounds from the soil. The application of
nitrogen-containing fertilizers is widely used to enhance plant growth. However,
artificial fertilizers are expensive and have serious negative environmental
effects, including degradation of soil quality and runoff and contamination of
water sources. A solution to the problem of nitrogen availability to crop plants
is to engineer plant cells with the ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen into
usable compounds. Presently, a major challenge in developing such a system is
the fact that photosynthesis in chloroplasts generates oxygen, a potent
inhibitor of nitrogenase, the key enzyme for nitrogen fixation. Interestingly, a
number of cyanobacterial strains have the ability to perform both nitrogen
fixation and oxygenic photosynthesis, using ingenious strategies that separate
these two processes temporally. This project uses synthetic biology tools to
engineer a non-diazotrophic cyanobacterium to fix nitrogen, thereby defining the
minimum requirements for nitrogen fixation to occur in photosynthetic cells
including those in crop plants. If successful, this effort will usher a new
paradigm for integrating seemingly incompatible metabolic functions in a
photosynthetic cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Enhanced
production of crop plants is an urgent need for the production of food, feed and
fuel for an ever-increasing human population on this planet, and efficient use
of nitrogen is a key factor to meet such a need. The knowledgebase created in
this project will be directly applicable to engineer nitrogen-fixing crop
plants, and will thus have enormous potentials for societal benefits. The
project team has broad expertise in cyanobacterial systems biology,
computational modeling, and synthetic biology, and plans to develop innovative
interdisciplinary educational programs focused on the application of such
approaches to photosynthetic organisms. In particular, emphasis will be placed
on (1) Development of an inter-institutional iGEM (International Genetically
Engineered Machine) training program for undergraduate students; and (2)
Engagement of international partners at two academic institutions in India. Both
set of activities will be intimately linked to the research goals of this
project, and will be aimed at providing hands on training opportunities for
students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM).