* 1331001
* CGV: Small: Dynamic Skeletal Part Hierarchies for Sketching 3D Shapes and Their Animations
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Andrew Nealen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 136,162.00

Abstract

0916845 Nealen, Andrew HCC: Small: Dynamic Skeletal Part Hierarchies for
Sketching 3D Shapes and Their Animations Rutgers University New Brunswick

Software for creating, modifying and animating digital 3D shapes is a key
component in many computer applications: computer aided design, engineering,
computer animation and digital games to name a few. This proposal addresses
research into dynamic hierarchical part hierarchies, which combine the
interrelated topics of modeling and animating digital shapes into a coherent
whole, as well as simple and effective sketch-based computer tools, with the
ultimate goal of making these tasks more accessible to amateurs and
professionals alike. Advances in consumer computer graphics, as well as the
current in√æux of user generated digital content, both in virtual 3D worlds as
well as on the Internet, illustrate the demand for easy-to-use 3D content
creation software. Recent research in shape modeling and animation, as well as
sketch-based interfaces, has led to the development of experimental techniques,
which clearly demonstrate their viability. Yet, most of these are highly
specialized and domain specific, and they do not deal with these problems as a
whole. The proposed research will build upon this previous work, but put an
emphasis on developing new sketch-based interfaces, algorithms and shape
representations that allow combining previously disjoint, yet intrinsically
connected tasks of shape modeling and animation.