* 1331084
* Correlating Infrasound Signals with Volcanic Emissions at  Karymsky Volcano, Kamchatka, Russia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2018
* David Fee, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 12/31/2018
* USD 370,744.00

To effectively mitigate volcanic eruption hazards and understand eruption
dynamics it is necessary to 1) identify the different types of volcanic
emissions and 2) quantify the relative proportions, amounts, and location of
these volcanic emissions. However, the difficulty of obtaining accurate, real-
time, and continuous volcanic emissions measurements is well known. Relating
infrasound, or low frequency sound, to volcanic emissions shows particular
promise towards quantifying and understanding volcanic emissions, suggesting
that infrasound may provide a tool to indirectly quantify and characterize
volcanic emissions. In this project we will perform a detailed, quantitative
analysis of the diverse infrasound signals from Karymsky Volcano, Kamchatka,
Russia with corresponding measurements of volcanic emissions. The primary
objectives are to 1) identify and characterize the infrasound signals from the
diverse activity at Karymsky, 2) collect detailed volcanic emissions data (both
gas and tephra), 3) identify infrasound signals characteristic of certain types
of emissions; and 4) quantitatively correlate temporal trends in infrasound
signals with the mass flux of volcanic emissions. We aim to develop quantitative
relationships between volcanic emissions and infrasound based both on
theoretical and empirical analysis. An additional goal of this project is to
validate a multi-spectral infrared camera technique for measuring volcanic
emissions with established tephra sampling and ultraviolet remote sensing SO2
measurement techniques.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses important questions in
volcanology and geophysics regarding infrasound signals, volcanic emissions, and
eruption dynamics. To address these questions an unprecedented multiparameter
dataset will be collected and analyzed, which will lead to a better
understanding of the release of volcanic emissions and their observable
infrasound signals. This understanding will improve monitoring and detection of
volcanic hazards and the viability of using infrasound as a remote, continuous
tool to detect and characterize volcanic emissions will be evaluated. This
project will also increase our understanding of eruption source mechanisms,
which will benefit a wide variety of volcanologists and geoscientists.
Collaboration amongst a highly qualified international team of scientists will
occur. Education is emphasized heavily as students from the International
Volcanological Field School will participate in the field experiment and will
gain invaluable experience in active volcanism and international collaboration.