* 1331827
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Muslim Identity and the Mosque in Contemporary Socieity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Jeffrey Alexander, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1331827&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey Alexander&lt;br/&gt;Elisabeth
Becker&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
project studies identity formation, boundary making, and stigma by focusing on
Muslim identity within the context of the mosque in contemporary society.
Through qualitative methods (ethnographic observation at mosques, interviews and
textual analysis of national newspapers), the investigators will study Muslim
identity construction and the confrontation of resulting stigmatization. The
intellectual stimulus arises from the policy findings that individuals in
Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom increasingly privilege their Muslim
identities over ethnic or national identities. The researchers hypothesize that
individuals with Muslim backgrounds both confirm and challenge religion-based
boundaries through various strategies (e.g. confrontation, dialogue, and
avoidance). In testing and building upon this hypothesis, this study will
address the following questions: What is the importance of Islam for individual
identities in contemporary European societies? How and why do individuals who
identify as Muslims cope with and/or confront stigma? How and why is the site of
the mosque important for strategies of coping with and/or confronting stigma
across national contexts? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will complete
an ethnographic study with three Muslim minority groups at the site of the
mosque in three European cities (individuals of Pakistani descent in London, UK;
Turkish descent in Berlin, Germany; and Moroccan descent in Madrid, Spain).
Through ethnographic observation, interviews and textual analysis, the
researchers employ a unique methodological approach to analyze identity
formation and resultant everyday experience across the continent--providing both
micro and macro lenses for better understanding migration, integration and
multiculturalism in Europe through the dually social/physical space of the
mosque. Ethnographic studies of Muslim groups to date focus almost exclusively
on insider accounts, failing to address mainstream societal forces that
contribute to identity formation among minority groups. Moreover, the
ethnographic site of the mosque is highly underutilized, with no in-depth
ethnographies as of yet undertaken at a European mosque and only one at a mosque
in the United States. The comparative method that draws on parallels of
increased identification of Muslim in three historically divergent European
countries, as well as the inclusion of a southern European country, will
concurrently contribute to sociological understanding of boundaries on belonging
in different contexts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this study reaches far beyond
the discipline of Sociology into broader society. In grappling with debates on
immigration and integration, research findings will contribute to understandings
of multiculturalism globally. By engaging with not only academic institutions,
but also community organizations, the research will also help to create linkages
between the academic and broader civil society in the three countries of study.