* 1331624
* Workshop on Future Research Needs in Advanced Manufacturing from Industrial Perspective; Arlington, Virginia; 11-13 August 2013
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* Jian Cao, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,998.00

This grant provides funding to support the Workshop on Future Research Needs in
Advanced Manufacturing from Industrial Prospective; August 11-13, 2013;
Arlington, Virginia. This workshop aims to provide a forum for leaders in
industry and academia to formulate the long term research goals in the area of
manufacturing, particularly innovative manufacturing processes and equipment,
and to enhance respective process capabilities while taking into account impacts
on industrial ecology, for example, raw materials consumption and environmental
impact. A diverse group of individuals from both academia and industry will come
together to discuss the future manufacturing challenges and research needs from
industrial perspective. Major activities of the workshop include presentations
by industrial leaders and NSF program directors, as well as interactions among
workshop attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will create a long-term
impact on the future research needs and directions. The expected outcome
includes outlook to manufacturing research, suggestions of future research
directions, and an establishment of a channel for long term dialogue between
industrial leaders and academic researchers. Results from this workshop will be
disseminated at a public website and to professional societies, and will be
presented at manufacturing conferences.