* 1331195
* Collaborative Research: Nitroplast: A Light-Driven, Synthetic Nitrogen-Fixing Organelle
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Christopher Voigt, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2016
* USD 521,000.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT &lt;br/&gt;For optimal yields, crop plants require fixed
nitrogen in the form of ammonia or nitrate fertilizers, but this requires large
fossil fuel inputs and can also result in runoff which contaminates aquifers and
estuaries. Unlike some microbes that have the capacity to fix atmospheric
nitrogen, plants do not have this ability. The ultimate goal of this research is
to engineer a novel synthetic nitrogen fixing organelle, with the long-term aim
of conferring efficient nitrogen fixation in non-leguminous crop plants.
However, there are significant hurdles before realizing this goal, which include
high metabolic energy costs and overcoming oxygen sensitivity of the process. In
this project, tools of synthetic biology will be used to engineer nitrogen
fixation into a simple model system. Cyanobacteria are single-celled organisms
that are evolutionarily related to plant plastids. In cyanobacteria, the
engineering goals should be tractable, constituting a technological stepping
stone that would lead to the engineering of nitrogen fixation into plant
plastids. For this project to be successful, several objectives need to be met.
First, ideal candidate gene clusters required for nitrogen fixation need to be
identified. Second, using this information, tunable nitrogen-fixing gene
modules, which can be precisely controlled, will be built and moved into
cyanobacteria. Finally, to deal with the high metabolic energy costs of the
process, a novel strategy will be employed by which extra light absorption
capacity is engineered into cyanobacteria. These objectives are complex and
multi-faceted, requiring tight coordination between participating laboratories.
Successful completion of this research will lead to an engineered synthetic,
controllable nitrogen fixing gene cluster linked energetically to light energy,
which can ultimately be transferred into plastids of crop plants in the form of
a 'nitroplast'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;One of the major
challenges of the twenty-first century is to ensure food security for the
world's people. At the core of this challenge is the problem of nitrogen
assimilation by non-leguminous crop plants. The goal of this project is to build
a novel synthetic, controllable nitrogen-fixing module into a cyanobacterium. To
achieve this goal, a team of scientific experts have been assembled from the
fields of biophysics, biochemistry, molecular genetics and synthetic biology.
The outcome of this research is expected to benefit basic researchers in
academia as well as applied scientists through the development of new tools for
cyanobacteria, and through products such as the introduction of nitrogen
fixation into plants. This project is a unique opportunity for methodology
exchange between U.S and U.K. scientists and for developing tools that will be
freely available to the synthetic biology and cyanobacterial research
communities. If successful, the work will also benefit traditional agricultural
research. The preparation of the next generation of scientists is a major goal
of this interdisciplinary team. The research will benefit higher education
through intensive research training at the undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral levels and through international exchange between US and UK
collaborators, publications and presentations at scientific meetings. The new
technologies derived from this work should provide tools and knowledge to boost
nitrogen fixation capacity that could strongly impact agriculture.