* 1331437
* Processing-Structure-Property Relationship in the Fabrication of Hybrid Nanostructured Materials with Tunable Architecture
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Devesh Misra, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2014
* USD 374,850.00

The research objective of the award is to study the fabrication of organic-
inorganic hybrid nanostructured materials in such a way as to create strong
adhesion or bond between the constituent phases of a composite, while retaining
the individual properties of the constituent phases. The fabrication process
involves direct nucleation and growth of polymer nanocrystals along the axis of
carbon nanotubes with the help of high pressure. These polymer nanocrystals are
responsible for the strong bond between the nanotube and the matrix phases in
the nanocomposite. Furthermore, the fabrication will also provide the ability to
tune the structural morphology of the hybrid structure at different length-
scales by controlling the crystallization pressure and liquid undercooling or
the degree to which the polymer melt is cooled below its equilibrium
crystallization temperature. Thermodynamic models with predictive capabilities
will be developed for a wide range of nanoparticle-polymer systems and will be
based on thermodynamically-driven chemical interactions at the polymer crystal-
nanoparticle interface. Successful completion of the research will provide
generic guidelines governing pressure-induced fabrication of hybrid
nanostructured materials for a variety of applications.

An important advantage of direct nucleation of polymer crystals on carbon
nanotubes is to eliminate the need to modify the surface or functionalization of
carbon nanotubes prior to their use in the fabrication of hybrid nanocomposites.
Thus, the un-modified carbon nanotubes will retain their extraordinary
electrical, optical, and mechanical properties and their full potential, when
present in small amounts, can be realized. This aspect will be of particular
interest in the development of next generation of photovoltaic and data storage
devices. Moreover, the direct polymer nanocrystal nucleation method will
overcome the technological barrier of obtaining strong adhesion between the
constituent phases and thereby will open-up a new avenue for fabricating high
performance materials. The confluence of understanding and the realization of
processing of polymers containing nanoparticles under pressure-induced
nucleation conditions have far reaching impact in applications such as barrier
liners in storage tanks and fuel liners for cryogenic fuel storage in aerospace.