* 1331356
* AGS-PRF:  A Study of the Onset of Explosive Magnetic Energy Release
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2015
* Carrie Black, Black                   Carrie         E
* Fellowship Award
* Ilia Roussev
* 12/31/2015
* USD 172,000.00

This is a 2-year postgraduate research fellowship project to investigate multi-
scale processes that drive magnetic reconnection in magnetic configurations
relevant to the solar corona and to the Earth's Magnetosphere. Results from
global magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations will be used as input to kinetic
scale calculations of reconnection. The kinetic simulations will then be
analyzed for feedback to the global evolution, in particular to address key
issues such as energy partition and particle acceleration. Specifically, the
Principal Investigator (PI) will analyze the evolution of extended current
sheets from global simulations of Earth's Magnetotail and Coronal Mass Ejection
(CME)/solar flare events. Drivers for kinetic simulations will be determined
from the dynamics near the primary reconnection sites, and will then be
implemented in a high performance Particle-in-Cell (PIC) code. From the kinetic
simulations, the energy budgets and the particle distributions will be
calculated. These will be (i) compared with magnetospheric and solar data, where
possible, as a check of the validity of the kinetic model, and (ii) used for
determining a "kinetic resistivity" model that can then be put back into global
MHD simulations.

This research project is perceived as an achievable intermediate step in
understanding the multi-scale physical couplings in processes involving magnetic
reconnection. It represents a pioneering, first-time investigation, in
particular for solar events. As reconnection is a fundamental plasma physics
phenomenon, the results of the effort will have broad impacts far beyond solar
and magnetospheric physics. The PI is a recent PhD graduate and this research
project will support the continued training and career advancement of an early-
career female scientist in the Atmospheric and Geospace sciences