* 1331218
* Oxygen-Tolerant Nitrogenase
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Maren Friesen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,112.00

PI: Maren Friesen (Michigan State University)

Key Collaborators: A. William Rutherford and Martin Buck (Imperial College
London)

Nitrogen is most often the limiting nutrient to plant growth. While multiple
bacteria and archaea have evolved the ability to fix atmospheric dinitrogen gas
into biologically available ammonia using the nitrogenase enzyme, biological
nitrogen fixation lacks wide applicability in agriculture. First, the process is
energetically expensive. Second, all well-studied nitrogenase enzymes are
inhibited by oxygen and require special structures to function effectively.
However, there is a singular report of an oxygen insensitive nitrogenase system,
isolated from a Streptomyces thermoautotrophicus bacterium found above burning
charcoal fires in Germany. This superoxide dependent nitrogenase was only
partially characterized and the strain is no longer available. The present
project seeks to culture the original strain, as well as search for additional
strains from similarly harsh environments that may harbor related nitrogenase
systems. In particular, the project will target coal-seam fires and active
volcanoes that have elevated levels of carbon monoxide; following the original
isolation methods, strains will be cultivated under high temperatures with a
carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide enriched atmosphere. Once identified, these
strains will have their genome sequences determined and genes annotated. The
soils from which they are isolated will also be sequenced to determine the
aggregate meta-genome of all culturable and non-culturable microbes present in
these harsh environments. The project will then seek to determine the
biochemical and physiological properties of the nitrogenase systems in these
organisms and attempt to transfer the oxygen-tolerant nitrogenase into other
microbes for future biotechnology applications. The project has the potential to
dramatically alter biological nitrogen fixation research and could ultimately
lead to the engineering of plants that fix their own nitrogen.

This project will contribute to training through the involvement of three post-
docs and one graduate student. Project outcomes and information will be
disseminated through public lectures and through podcasts, both in the US
(http://variationselectioninheritance.podbean.com/) and the UK
(http://wwwf.imperial.ac.uk/imedia/itunes_collections/view/special-lectures). In
addition, a project blog will be maintained that will detail field collection
trips and research findings. Characterized strains will be available via the
ATCC: http://www.atcc.org/. Annotated genome and meta-genome sequences will be
available through NCBI Genbank: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/; the meta-
genome data will also be contributed to the Earth Microbiome Project:
http://www.earthmicrobiome.org. Quality controlled sequence reads will be
deposited into the NCBI Sequence Read Archive:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/ and made publically available upon
deposition.