* 1331532
* I/UCRC FRP:  Advanced design and novel In-situ synthesis of self-cleaning and wear resistant metallic surfaces for water industry components
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Pradeep Rohatgi, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 07/31/2019
* USD 209,993.00

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Water Equipment and Policy (WEP)
located at the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee (UWM). Funding Requests for
Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 11-570.
The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-
defined fundamental research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limited information is
available on the relationship between surface microstructure and wettability by
water and oil. This research will develop relationships between
micro/nanostructural features such as grain size, orientation, texture, phase
composition and morphology, and the surface wettability in metallic materials,
and prescribe optimum surface micro/nanostructure with highest contact angle,
potentially reducing corrosion, fouling, and wear of components used in the
water industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of surface
microstructure and wettability generated by this project using aluminum,
brasses, cast iron and stainless steels will be applicable to other alloys,
composites, polymers and ceramics. The proposed work could lead to lower cost
alloys with only their surface modified during conventional processing instead
of using bulk expensive alloys like stainless steels. This project will make
recommendations to industry for optimum surface micro and nanostructure to
minimize corrosion. The result of this research work will be disseminated to the
manufacturers of water equipment and industries for them to synthesize these
microstructures and use the surfaces of these components for water transport,
storage and treatment during conventional manufacturing. The results of this
research will be incorporated in basic materials science courses dealing with
structure property relationships and advanced courses including corrosion,
composites, metal casting, heat treatment and fluid flow. The proposed project
work will also train graduate and undergraduate students for careers in the
water industry, an increasingly important area of social concern.