* 1331828
* Boulder Creek CZO II:  Evolution, Form, Function, and Future of the Critical Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2013,11/30/2022
* Robert Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2022
* USD 6,638,699.00

The central aims of the Boulder Creek Critical Zone Observatory (BcCZO) are to
understand how the surface of the earth, or critical zone, is shaped by climate,
organisms, and geology, and how it will respond to changing conditions in the
future. The focus is on the 'architecture' of the critical zone, meaning the
topographic lay of the land, and distribution of soils, rock outcroppings, and
vegetation communities. This architecture reflects evolution in response to
geologic processes and climate. The work addresses fundamental questions, such
as: How does rock turn to sediment? How do landscapes evolve? What controls
water, sediment, dissolved mineral and nutrient fluxes? What services do
ecosystems provide? The Colorado Front Range is used as a natural laboratory for
these questions; it typifies mountainous areas of the American West that support
large human populations, and it bears legacies from a varied geologic and
climatic history. Addressing how changing snow, wildfires and landuse will
affect the critical zone depend on this fundamental knowledge of critical zone
architecture, function, and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives are:
1) Document critical zone (CZ) evolution by determining rates of erosion of the
range and its adjacent basin, and documenting the structure of the CZ at key
sites. 2) Study weathering, transport, and biological processes that shape the
CZ. 3) Analyze how CZ architecture governs the storage and flow of water,
nutrients and sediments. 4) Model CZ functional response to near-future changes
in temperature and precipitation, and associated changes in ecosystem and fire
regime. 5) Communicate findings through talks, papers, K-12 education,
undergraduate classes, and shared models. Methods include: 1) monitoring weather
and water in selected sites, 2) sampling rock, soil, vegetation, and water for
physical, chemical, and genetic data, 3) collecting rock, geophysical data and
outcrop descriptions of CZ structure, 4) constructing conceptual and numerical
models to quantify CZ evolution in past, present-day, and future
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformative nature of the program lies in
its integrative and interdisciplinary approach. BcCZO brings together
ecologists, hydrologists, and geologists to study snowmelt, subsurface water
flow, biota, soils and weathering. Monitoring of recent weather and fire events
that have perturbed water, sediment, and solute export stimulate modeling
efforts that can be used to project into a changing climate. Future-casting
hydrologic and ecosystem states to 2050 will be undertaken. Research on snow,
the geobiology of deep weathering, the roles of slope aspect, and the use of
cosmogenic radionuclides connects BcCZO to other CZOs across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to training graduate students and
post-docs, BcCZO will engage secondary students and teachers in CZ science,
reach out to underrepresented minority students, and produce simulation modules
for public education. Through partnership with CU Science Discovery, BcCZO will
develop a Field Course for Colorado secondary teachers, a Mountain Research
Experience for high school students, and offer traveling School and Community
science programs. A graduate researcher will transform CZ models into
interactive simulations, tested by Science Discovery students and teachers, and
contributed to the Science Education Resource Center (SERC).