* 1331620
* Rational randomness: Search, sampling and exploration in children's causal learning.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Alison Gopnik, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 08/31/2017
* USD 446,815.00

How do young children learn so much about the world so quickly and accurately?
And how can they learn so much when, at the same time, they often seem so
irrational and unpredictable? The research in this proposal will help answer
these questions by bringing together ideas from computer science with research
on very young children. The basic idea is that young children learn in some of
the same ways as the most powerful machine-learning programs. Both the children
and the computers explore a wide range of more and less likely possibilities.
Moreover, children may sometimes actually explore more widely than adults and so
be smarter or at least more open-minded learners. Some of their apparently
irrational play, like their wide-ranging pretend play, may really reflect
powerful learning methods.

This work should have significant broader impact for educational practice. If we
understand children's basic natural rational learning mechanisms we can use
those mechanisms to help teach science more effectively. In particular, there
are significant practical questions about how we can leverage children's
spontaneous play to help them learn. Similarly, this research has impact for
studies of developmental disabilities such as autism and mental retardation.
There is reason to think that children with these syndromes may have particular
difficulty with the kind of learning about possibilities that is facilitated by
pretend play, and understanding that learning may help us understand and remedy
these difficulties.