* 1331663
* STTR Phase I:  Developing Alternate Aquafeeds Utilizing Marine Invertebrates and Plants Cultured from Fish Fecal and Feed Waste
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Taylor Pryor, Acadia Harvest, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2015
* USD 269,999.00

This Small Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop
an alternate aquafeed that does not rely on the inclusion of captured, oceanic
forage fish such as menhaden and sardines for its omega-3 content and is
suitable for culturing marine fish in land-based recirculating aquaculture
systems (RASs). Specifically, six alternate fish feeds will be formulated,
pelletized and fed to California yellowtail (Seriola lalandi) in 18 saltwater,
indoor tanks, containing 80 fish per tank in a size range starting at 20 grams
up to 450 grams. A conventional, commercially available fish feed will be used
as a control. Suitability will be measured by how well the growth and survival
rates of the test group compare to the control group. The alternate feeds will
utilize various substitutes for the absent fish meal, including microalgae,
invertebrates such as sandworms and insect-derived meal. The ideal alternate
feed will be price competitive, generally available and sourced from local
processing wastes or cultured in the fecal and fed waste naturally generated
from fish production in an aquafarm. The latter is feasible within RASs since
the flow of nutrients can be directed beneficially from one crop to another in a
web of interactive species.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to demonstrate that
alternate aquafeeds are technically feasible. They can be price-competitive with
conventional feeds. Companies selling conventional fish feed containing a
substantial component of captured fish now advise customers to anticipate annual
price raises as the growth of aquaculture combined with excessive fishing
pressure impacts demand and supply respectively. Certainly the rise can be
accommodated in the short term, but it behooves aquafarmers to develop
alternatives since they can only raise prices to a point after which they become
uncompetitive with fisheries catch while seafood customers turn to other
protein. On the positive side, there is a growing concern by seafood
distributors, chefs and consumers whether seafood is or is not ?sustainable?,
that is whether it abuses or contributes to a healthy global ecosystem. Thus, a
clear commercial opportunity is emerging, perhaps as a niche market at the
outset, but almost certainly a very large market in time as aquaculture
continues to grow.