* 1331122
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Throughput Multi-Analyte Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Assay Development
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2015
* MaryAnne Jelinek, Active Motif, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2015
* USD 526,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a high-throughput, multi-analyte chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assay. ChIP is a widely used technique among life science and biomedical
researchers seeking to understand how the epigenetic mechanism of histone post-
translational modifications impacts the varied biological functions that are
regulated through chromatin-protein interactions. Analysis ranges from single
gene (using PCR) through to genome-wide (next generation sequencing (NGS)). As
envisioned, the proposed technology will transform the lengthy and cumbersome
multi-day ChIP into a high-throughput compatible single-day experiment. An
antibody is linked to oligonucleotides containing NGS platform-compatible tags
and "bar-code" sequences for simultaneous analysis of multiple DNA-protein
interactions. The insertion of the oligonucleotides into chromatin at sites
flanking antibody-bound chromatin fragments will enable direct detection (by PCR
or NGS) of DNA fragments associated with the protein(s) of interest. Phase II
efforts will focus on developing robust and reproducible methods for both
antibody conjugation and technology validation with a panel of antibodies
specific for varying classes of chromatin associating proteins, including
histone and non-histone targets. DNA libraries produced by the novel method and
that of traditional ChIP will be compared first by quantitative PCR for gene-
specific analysis and subsequently genome-wide, by NGS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will be the
development of a high throughput multi-analyte ChIP assay that will have
significant impact scientifically and commercially in the life sciences and
biomedical research arenas. In less than five years post-launch, it is projected
to replace traditional current ChIP methods, which represents 20-25% of the
epigenetic research tools market estimated at $175-245M in 2010. The life
sciences research tool market is currently estimated at $42 billion, with the
epigenetic sector enjoying high growth fueled by a shift of researchers to
purchase commercial epigenetic products rather than in-house made, and by
advances in NGS, which has accelerated genome-wide epigenetic analyses. The
development of this method will open epigenetic analysis to virtually all
researchers by eliminating technical barriers and by significantly reducing
sample size requirements associated with traditional ChIP, including a potential
for single cell analysis. Development of this technology will spur the creation
of additional novel technologies such as homogeneous ChIP for high-throughput
screening, multi-analyte ChIP, and open the door for environmental, nutrition,
and toxicology disciplines to study the epigenetic profiles of any eukaryotic
organism a genome wide scale.