* 1331098
* Engineering Synthetic Symbiosis Between Plant and Bacteria to Deliver Nitrogen to Crops
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Christopher Voigt, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2017
* USD 3,427,720.00

PI: John W. Peters (Montana State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs: Jean-
Michel Ane (University of Wisconsin - Madison), Michael Udvardi (The Samuel
Roberts Nobel Foundation) and Christopher A. Voigt (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Collaborators: Giles E. Oldroyd (John Innes
Centre, UK) and Phillip S. Poole (John Innes Centre, Oxford University,
UK)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen is an essential element of biological
molecules and life on earth. Lack of usable nitrogen limits growth of microbes,
plants, and animals. Scarcity of nitrogen in agricultural soils limits plant
production of food, feed, fiber and fuel. Nature solved the nitrogen limitation
problem via evolution of biological nitrogen fixation in a type of bacteria,
diazotrophs, that are able to reduce atmospheric N2 to NH3, which is readily
assimilated into biological molecules. Biological nitrogen fixation is promoted
by a complex metal containing enzyme called nitrogenase, whose oxygen-
sensitivity may explain its restricted distribution amongst bacteria. Some
plants, including most legumes and a few non-legumes form intimate, nitrogen-
fixing symbioses with diazotrophs that provide the plants with ammonia. As a
consequence, legumes have been an integral part of sustainable agricultural
systems for thousands of years. Unfortunately, many important food species,
including the grasses maize/corn, rice, and wheat cannot establish effective
nitrogen-fixing symbioses with diazotrophs, making them dependent on nitrogenous
fertilizers for high yield. Large-scale use of industrially-produced nitrogen-
fertilizer has doubled the influx of nitrogen into the terrestrial
biogeochemical nitrogen-cycle, with serious negative consequences for human
health and the natural environment. Therefore, the long-term sustainability of
massive nitrogen-fertilizer inputs in agriculture has come into question.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together an interdisciplinary team of
investigators from the US and UK to solve the dual nitrogen problems of
nitrogen-fertilizer over-use in developed countries and soil nitrogen-paucity in
developing countries by developing effective endophytic (bacteria inside the
root) and associative (bacteria attached outside the root) nitrogen-fixing
symbioses in a model and a crop plant species. The overarching goal of the
project is to develop effective N2-fixing symbioses between the model C4-grass,
Setaria viridis, as well as the related crop species, Zea mays, with the
endophytic bacterium, Rhizobium sp. IRBG74, as well as the associative
bacterium, Pseudomonas fluorescenes Pf5. Successful deployment of biological
nitrogen fixation in model or crop grass species will pave the way for a second
Green Revolution to increase crop yields for resource-poor farmers and decrease
the use and environmental-impact of industrial nitrogen-fertilizers by wealthier
farmers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a powerful new model
system for the study of plant-microbe interactions and demonstrate the power of
synthetic biology in engineering new associative relationships and
interdependencies that have the potential to be universal for all crop plants.
It will test this potential in the important crop, maize. The integrated US-UK
research partnership will provide a unique training opportunity for students and
post-doctoral associates with active exchange of personnel between academic
laboratories and research foundations in both countries. Data and materials
generated in the study including plasmid constructs and genetically modified
bacterial and plant species will be made available via websites maintained in
the US and the UK. To broaden the impact of the work, traditional and non-
traditional outreach strategies will be used to help K-12 teachers, students,
and the public understand the fundamentals and benefits of interdisciplinary
research and the implications of synthetic biology for the next generation of
biotechnological solutions in agriculture.