* 1331175
* BSF: 2012251: Algorithmic Game Theory meets Computational Learning Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Avrim Blum, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2018
* USD 32,939.00

This project is funded as part of the United States-Israel Collaboration in
Computer Science (USICCS) program. Through this program, NSF and the United
States - Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
collaborations among US-based researchers and Israel-based
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use ideas and
techniques developed in the field of Computational Learning Theory to produce
algorithms that can aid users or firms in solving certain economic decision-
making problems. Computational Learning Theory studies how one can automatically
learn good prediction rules from data, as well as questions such as how much
data is intrinsically needed in order to learn rules of a given complexity. In
economic decision-making, one often has some amount of data (or recent
experience) and must extrapolate from this a course of action for the future.
This project aims to bring these two areas together in order to produce improved
economic decision-making tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
specifically on three challenging problems for which ideas from Computational
Learning Theory appear to be especially promising. The first concerns the
decision of how many of each of a given suite of products to produce when
customers are arriving over time and have disjunctive needs, and the production
costs for each product obey economies of scale. The goal in this setting is from
a small amount of initial observation to be able to commit to a near-optimal
plan for how much of each product to produce, to satisfy future customers at the
least possible total cost. The second concerns the problems of market
segmentation when the potential customers have known attributes but the relation
of these attributes to their preferences is not known up front. Finally, the
last concerns the problem of inferring a model for bidders in an auction when
only the outcome information of the auction is observable. These problems all
involve challenging inference tasks for which tools from Computational Learning
Theory appear to be well suited.