* 1331709
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using syntactic priming to identify cross-language constraints in bilingual language processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2015
* USD 17,513.00

A hallmark of bilingual language processing is the parallel activation of the
two languages during the use of only one language in production comprehension.
In order to select a word in a single language from the myriad of co-activated
words, bilinguals exploit an exquisite mechanism of language control that may
come to affect cognitive and executive function. However, the exact nature of
this mechanism is unknown. With National Science Foundation support, Mr. Jason
Gullifer will collect data for his dissertation under the direction of Drs.
Judith Kroll and Paola Dussias. Using an array of experimental methodologies,
including behavioral and electrophysiological measures, Gullifer and colleagues
will investigate whether differences in sentence structure between English and
Spanish can function as a cue enabling bilingual speakers of those two languages
to make a language choice during comprehension. Reaction times to name words in
the context of sentences and brain potentials time-locked to the presentation of
those words will be used to test the hypothesis that structural differences
between languages can influence the degree of language co-activation. An
independent behavioral experiment utilizing a method to measure cross-language
syntactic priming will be used to determine the degree of representational
overlap of each of the structures between Spanish and English, revealing the
relationship between the degree of cross-language overlap and language co-
activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research has a number of broader
impacts. Increasing diversity makes it important to learn a second language to
enhance communication. The biological basis of second language learning was
identified in 2005 in the AAAS publication 'Science' as one of the top 125
questions for scientific inquiry over the next quarter-century. The proposed
research informs language learning by advancing models of language comprehension
and production. Learning a second language also confers benefits to cognition,
and the funded research will identify one mechanism by which language selection
is achieved, helping to answer the question of how bilingualism impacts
cognition. The proposed research includes a component for the mentorship of
undergraduate research assistants by involving individuals who have been
historically underrepresented in scientific research.