* 1331368
* AGS-PRF: Study of Dayside Reconnection Through Cusp Ion Structures
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Hyunju Connor, Connor                  HyunJu
* Fellowship Award
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2017
* USD 172,000.00

This is an Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences (AGS) Post-doctoral Research
Fellowship grant to support a young woman scientist just beginning her
scientific career. The project addresses a longstanding question in
magnetospheric physics about where magnetic reconnection occurs on the dayside
magnetopause. In particular it will address the question of the relative
importance of antiparallel reconnection which is thought to occur when the
magnetosheath magnetic field and the magnetospheric magnetic field are
oppositely directed and component reconnection in which one component of the two
fields is oppositely directed. Cusp magnetic field lines map the magnetopause.
Information about dayside magnetic reconnection is contained in particle
signatures in the cusp region. The approach is to run a global
magnetohydrodynamic simulation of the solar wind, magnetosphere and ionosphere
system and then to launch ions into the fields from the simulation. The
distribution of test ions in the cusp region will be used to model cusp ion
spectrograms as a function of the location and nature of the reconnection. The
simulations will vary solar wind conditions including the interplanetary
magnetic field (IMF) clock angle, the radial component of the IMF and the solar
wind pressure. The theoretical spectrograms will be compared with Cluster
spacecraft observations. This study will contribute to an understanding of
relationship between the cusp ion signatures and dayside reconnection.