* 1331083
* Collaborative Research:   Research, Synthesis, and Knowledge Transfer in a Changing Arctic: Science Support for the Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2014,07/31/2025
* Helen Wiggins, Arctic Research Consortium of the U.S.
* Continuing Grant
* Renee Crain
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,779,409.00

The Arctic is undergoing dramatic, accelerating environmental change, resulting
in impacts on local, regional and global scales. Improved understanding of the
present and probable future state of the arctic environment is important for a
wide range of stakeholders, including arctic residents, the private sector,
agencies and decision-makers. To develop and convey this understanding to
decision makers, an interdisciplinary research program is needed that engages
with stakeholders to provide science-based answers to stakeholder questions, and
the Study of Arctic Environmental Change (SEARCH) is well positioned to serve
this function. This project will build a support structure to enable SEARCH to
serve the needs of the scientific community and agencies. The new research
coordination structure will coordinate science, exchange knowledge and tools
between science and stakeholders, drive scientific syntheses, and connect
scientists and stakeholders to answer questions about arctic change. The new
structure will ensure that its activities have societal benefit, and foster two-
way communication of research findings and information needs. Proposed
activities include knowledge exchange workshops that will facilitate networking
between stakeholders and scientists, and stakeholders will be included in other
synthesis research activities, meetings and conferences. A set of activities
focused on the theme "Arctic Futures 2050" will frame scientific findings in a
way that can help decision-makers plan for the future. All of these activities
will lead to development of research products that address societal priorities
and can help inform policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEARCH will facilitate
research in response to scientific priorities and stakeholder questions about
complex arctic change. This project will improve understanding, advance
prediction, and explore the consequences of changing arctic sea ice; document
and improve understanding of how degradation of near-surface permafrost will
affect arctic and global systems; and improve predictions of future land-ice
loss and its impacts on sea level. An additional overarching goal will be to
analyze societal and policy implications of these arctic environmental changes,
and a set of activities will be undertaken to integrate findings across all the
thematic goals. These goals will be achieved by facilitating research across
disciplines, scales and among agencies; advancing scientific synthesis of data,
model output and expert projections; creating networks of people and research
groups that promote efficiencies and scientific discovery; developing tools
useful to stakeholders and decision-makers; and enhancing research coordination.