* 1331108
* SBIR Phase II:  Real-Time Rehab to Improve Gait Symmetry in Amputees
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2019
* Stacy Bamberg, VERISTRIDE, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,400,498.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance the
technology research and development necessary to bring wireless instrumentation
and smartphone technology used for feedback to lower-limb amputees about their
real-time performance, for rehabilitation in situ. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research lies in the opportunity to transform the field of
rehabilitation and to advance healthcare by enabling a fundamental shift toward
low cost, ubiquitous rehabilitation that can be used away from the clinic. This
proposal will research and develop the pre-market alpha- and beta-prototypes of
an instrumented insole, smartphone app, and HIPAA-compliant data transfer and
remote server storage and analysis system, as an essential and transformative
tool utilized for physical therapy and gait training outside of the clinic.
While sensors have become small, inexpensive, and highly available, many
research lab applications are limited to proof-of-concept evaluations that
involve tethered systems and/or post-processing of the data. This research
quantifies the effect of this low-cost, personalized, wireless assistive
technology that can be used away from the clinic. Ultimately, this work lays a
foundation for more complex rehab feedback systems, e.g. using a smartphone to
detect gait and provide feedback to an orthotic or prosthetic for muscle
stimulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project includes the focus on mobility limitations in persons with lower-
limb amputations, which affect twice as many minorities as Caucasians. The
commercial potential of this wireless assistive technology is vast: with
diabetes as the major contributor to amputations, the number of amputees is
forecast to triple to 3.6 million by 2050. The knowledge gained can be expanded
to impact individuals with a wide variety of mobility limitations, e.g. stroke,
Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, etc. The orthopedic
market ? 773,000 total hip/knee replacements performed annually in U.S. ? is
also commercially relevant, as patients must affect an asymmetric gait following
fracture repair or joint replacement to reduce weight-bearing on the healing
limb. Another significant group are athletes seeking to improve performance or
recover from injury through precision gait analysis and real-time feedback. In
this Phase II proposal, this research will quantify the effect of this wireless
assistive technology by enabling persons with amputations to use individualized
proprioceptive feedback and to participate in the design of the personalized
feedback methods. This work will enable a wealth of information collected away
from the clinic, including a way to investigate how and whether patients follow
treatment protocols.