* 1332351
* CAREER: Creation of Complex Biomimetic Materials via Molecular Recognition
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2013,04/30/2018
* Yong Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 04/30/2018
* USD 453,236.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to University of Connecticut aims to create a new generation of tissue-
like biomaterials based on novel hydrogels that are functionalized with nucleic
acid aptamers for potential use of these hydrogels as synthetic mimics of
extracellular matrix. Biomaterials that can recapitulate complex functions of
natural tissues will not only provide a deeper insight into biological systems,
but also offer a variety of applications such as tissue repair or organ
regeneration. The proposed studies include synthesis and characterization of
polymers and hydrogels that are functionalized with nucleic acid aptamers; study
of the molecular recognition between affinity polymers and their targets at
different interfaces; and investigation of the roles of aptamers and molecular
triggers in regulating the release of multiple signal molecules from hydrogels.
The coordination of numerous signals from the tissue-like biomaterials is
expected to determine whether cells undergo proliferation, migration,
differentiation, or other critical functions. The educational activities will be
pursued to stimulate prospective students' passion and interests in science and
engineering; encourage the students of different levels to learn both cutting-
edge nanobiotechnology techniques and 21st century skill sets; and enable the
broad dissemination of nanobiotechnology knowledge not only to scholars and
students in the field, but also to the general public and prospective students.

Tissue loss or organ failure is one of the most challenging health problems in
the biomedical field. Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine is a
promising field that applies the principles of multiple disciplines together
towards tissue repair or organ regeneration. However, one of the challenges in
this field is the creation of novel materials that are expected to mimic the
complex structures and functionality of human tissues. The proposed research is
designed to develop tissue-like materials that possess multiple features
including communication with human cells. These synthetic polymers with
functional groups hold strong potential of stimulating tissue repair or organ
regeneration. The educational outreach efforts will be coupled with diverse
teaching and outreach activities such as the training of high-school students
and teachers, the development and teaching of a new course, and the
establishment of a popular science website for the dissemination of
nanobiotechnology knowledge. The students of different levels from K-12 to
graduate studies will pursue research in an encouraging and collaborative
environment, learning cutting-edge nanobiotechnology and other related fields in
sciences and engineering.