* 1332022
* EAGER: Novel Interfaces for Nanostructured Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Alexander Agrios, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 02/28/2015
* USD 89,839.00

The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) is a promising technology for low-cost
solar energy conversion in which a dye molecule adsorbed on a semiconductor
absorbs light, injects a photoinjected electron into the semiconductor (becoming
oxidized), and is reduced (regenerated) by dissolved iodide, giving the neutral
dye and triiodide. The electron is collected from the semiconductor, travels
through an external circuit, and is returned to a counterelectrode where it
reduces triiodide to iodide, completing the circuit. The reduction of oxidized
dyes by iodide requires a large overpotential (at least 0.5 V), constituting a
significant energy loss in the DSSC. Alternative redox couples that can reduce
oxidized dyes with much smaller overpotentials tend to remove electrons from the
semiconductor at high rates, replacing one loss process with another.
Surmounting this latter problem (recombination) requires increasing the speed of
electron transport in the semiconductor, in order that the electron may be
extracted before it is lost to recombination. This exploratory project will
generate preliminary data to demonstrate the potential for new composite
semiconductor nanostructures to solve this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The design paradigm
that governs this work is the paring of two semiconducting
materials:&lt;br/&gt;an active layer on which dye molecules adsorb and inject
electrons, and a transport layer that extracts charges from the active layer and
rapidly transports them to the conducting substrate for collection. The active
layer must have a high surface area to allow a large dye loading per geometric
area for strong absorption of incident sunlight. Two instances of this paradigm
will be produced in this work. One consists of titania nanoparticles coated over
zinc oxide nanorods; the nanorods provide fast transport while the nanoparticles
greatly increase the total surface area. The other is a conformal layer of
titania over a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) aerogel. The aerogel is inherently
a high-surface area structure, allowing a conformal coating of the active layer.
This project focuses on preliminary data regarding blocking layers to retard
recombination, analysis of fluorine dopant levels in FTO aerogel samples, and
optoelectronic measurements of solar cell devices made with the novel composite
semiconductor films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This
research will significantly advance the technology of low-cost solar energy
conversion, for which there is an increasingly urgent need in the face of
sharply increasing energy usage among a large population together with impending
climate change and other environmental impacts from fossil fuel combustion. The
project will provide education and training to involved graduate students
including the writing of research articles and travel to domestic and
international conferences for dissemination of the results. The PI actively
engages K-12 students and teachers using the DSSC as a teaching tool for topics
related to energy, the environment, chemistry and engineering.