* 1332978
* Measuring interannual variability of the AMOC and meridional ocean heat transport at 26.5N:  The RAPID-MOCHA Array
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2020
* William Johns, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 3,831,009.00

Overview: Climate models suggest that variability of the Atlantic meridional
overturning circulation (AMOC) is linked to sea surface temperature changes on
inter-annual to multi-decadal time scales that can have far reaching societal
impacts. Additionally, climate models continue to project a substantial
weakening of the AMOC over the next century that could feed back on the climate
system through reduced carbon dioxide uptake in the North Atlantic (2007 Report
from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). The specific role of the
AMOC in the climate system has been difficult to determine due to a lack of long
term measurements of its variability. However, the joint US-UK ocean observing
system along 26.5째N (RAPID-MOCHA) has now provided continuous estimates of the
AMOC for nearly a decade that have revealed the nature of its seasonal to inter-
annual variability, the only such full-depth, basin-wide measurements currently
available. The RAPID-MOCHA program has already provided a critical benchmark for
evaluation of forced, data-assimilative, and coupled climate models, and is
forming a fundamental building block around which international programs are
being developed to monitor the AMOC throughout the Atlantic
basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The goal of this project is to
maintain this measurement system for an additional 6 years, from 2014 to 2020,
to quantify the inter-annual variability of the AMOC and its relationship to
changes in surface forcing over the North Atlantic. The ocean meridional heat
transport (MHT) at 26.5째N will also be monitored, including the time varying
contributions by the overturning and gyre components of the heat transport. The
last few years of the time series have shown significant inter-annual time-scale
changes with respect to prior years, which are believed to be linked to changes
in North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) forcing. Ocean heat content and Sea Surface
Temperature changes in the mid-latitude North Atlantic also appear to be linked
to the recent AMOC changes. The results of the RAPID-MOCHA project thus far have
been primarily focused on an accurate determination of the mean AMOC strength
and vertical structure, its associated heat transport, and the dynamics of the
seasonal cycle and shorter-term variations. The focus going forward will be to
document and understand the causes of inter-annual variability and to link AMOC
changes observed at 26.5째N to other AMOC indices and results from developing
AMOC measurement programs around the Atlantic basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the project are to provide the basis for long-term monitoring
of the AMOC, so that its relationship to observed climate fluctuations can be
understood, and our ability to assess climate model predictions can be improved.
This project will continue a successful international collaboration with
investigators from the U.K. National Oceanography Centre as part of the U.K.
RAPID-WATCH program. The U.S. contribution to this in-situ ocean observation
system includes: (1) Florida Current monitoring using the operational submarine
cable, calibrated by regular cruises with expendable temperature dropsondes,
shipboard Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP), and hydrographic/lowered-
ADCP measurements, and (2) continuous moored time series measurements across the
Deep Western Boundary Current and Antilles Current region east of the Bahamas,
including hydrographic/lowered-ADCP sections at nine-month intervals in concert
with scientists at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA.
The Florida Current monitoring is independently supported by NOAA. The U.K. will
provide support for the extended array of moorings along 26.5째N that completes
the trans-basin continuous time series observing
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a contribution to the US AMOC under
the US CLIVAR (CLImate VARiability and predictability) program to maintain the
moored component of element for a six-year period extending from March 2014 to
March 2020.