* 1332851
* DMREF-A Combined Experiment and Simulation Approach to the Design of New Bulk Metallic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Dane Morgan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,550,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This project supports development of a new, iterative
alloy design methodology for bulk metallic glass (BMG) alloys that advances the
objectives of the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI). This development requires a
comprehensive approach, treating dynamics in the liquid, which are essential to
the glass transition, and crystallization, which must be avoided to form a
glass, on an equal footing, connected by the structure of the liquid and the
glass. Achieving this goal requires the integration of experiments and
simulations with tight feedback. The experiments include novel high-thermal-
rate, high-throughput flash DSC to measure entire time-temperature-
transformation curves and liquid fragility, and fluctuation electron microscopy
(FEM) to measure new, otherwise inaccessible information about nanoscale
structural order. Simulations include accelerated molecular dynamics to connect
structure to liquid dynamics and crystallization along with the development and
release of a new reverse structure determination software tool incorporating FEM
data and ab initio Hamiltonians using genetic optimization and Bayesian
statistics. The new methodology will be applied to develop new, bulkier Al-based
metallic glasses, starting from the Al-Sm and Al-La systems, stabilized by minor
alloying. A larger goal is to uncover fundamental new connections between
composition, structure, atom dynamics, and crystallization; these will be used
to create general, intuitive, cluster design rules to develop new BMGs.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) are alloys that can
be cooled from the liquid without crystallization, resulting in a glassy,
amorphous solid. Sufficiently stable BMGs can be processed like plastics if the
temperature is held in the supercooled liquid region, resulting in net-shape,
seamless forming of complicated shapes by blow molding and rapid fabrication of
nanostructures across large areas by hard-mask imprinting. New applications
include packaging, arterial stents, water purification, and miniature gears and
springs. This project will develop a new methodology for discovering new BMG
alloys using an iterative strategy of state-of-the-art experimental and
computational tools that advances the objectives of the Materials Genome
Initiative (MGI). The method requires the integration of experiments and
simulations with tight feedback between the four investigators with
complimentary expertise to provide new scientific insights. The novel integrated
computational and experimental approach, combining structure up to the nanometer
scale and the kinetics of both glass formation and crystallization, may be
transformative in yielding a unique combination of tools and approaches that may
lead to a general method to design new BMGs alloys for a variety of
applications. This project supports the education of students and post-docs in
combined experimental and computational materials research in a collaborative
environment, and development of outreach materials and demonstrations for
younger students and the general public. This award is funded by the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).