* 1332553
* Integrated Geoscience Curriculum for Workforce Development for Oil and Gas Industry (IGC)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* krishnakumar nedunuri, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 390,969.00

The project at Central State University will infuse shale gas extraction
principles into an integrated geosciences curriculum; engage faculty in
providing innovative research experiences for undergraduates in the application
of environmental engineering principles on shale gas production; and develop a
certification program in shale gas technology. The project's focus on teaching
and training students in shale gas technology is consistent with the needs of
the state of Ohio and its shale gas economy. In collaboration with partner
universities, Central State University will expand instruction and research in
different facets of shale development such as site development, preparation for
drilling, drilling, fracturing, well completion and fracturing fluids
management. The certificate program will require an internship in the industry
in addition to courses in cognate areas. The project will enhance institutional
research capacity in the areas of geophysics, hydraulic fracturing fluids
treatment and management, and air quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
impact the participation of underrepresented groups in the geosciences field and
the shale gas industry. The project has an important emphasis on environmental
impact in its educational and research program plan specifically integrating
green engineering principles, optimization of water resources allocation, and
other environmental solutions and conservation. Research experiences for
undergraduate students will involve their participation in finding solutions to
some of the major environmental challenges associated with fracturing for shale
oil, in particular, the techniques for addressing treatment and cleaning of
caustic flow water backflow. The curricular and research enhancements of the
geoscience program will position Central State University as a regional leader
at the forefront of geoscience research and instruction.