* 1332492
* RAPID: Origin of Persistent Organic Pollutants in the Antarctic Atmosphere, Snow and Marine Food WEB
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Rainer Lohmann, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 03/31/2015
* USD 111,468.00

Many persistent organic pollutants (POPs), though banned in the U.S. since the
1970s, remain in the environment and continue to reach hitherto pristine regions
such as the Arctic and Antarctic. The overall goals of this RAPID project are to
better understand the remobilization of POPs from melting glaciers in the
Antarctic, and their transfer into the food-web. Legacy POPs have characteristic
chemical signatures that will be used ascertain the origin of POPs in the
Antarctic atmosphere and marine food-web. Samples that were collected in 2010
will be analyzed for a wide range of legacy POPs, and their behavior will be
contrasted with results for emerging contaminants. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research combines (a) the use of chemical signatures to assess whether
melting glaciers are releasing legacy POPs back into the Antarctic marine
ecosystem, and (b) a better understanding of the food-web dynamics of legacy
POPs versus emerging organic pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the proposed research project will include the training of the next
generation of scientists through support for a graduate student and a
postdoctoral scholar. As well, this work will result in a better understanding
of the relationship between pollutants, trophic food web ecology and global
climate change in the pristine Antarctic ecosystem.