* 1332050
* STTR Phase I:  Digital eWriter for the Classroom
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Duane Marhefka, KENT DISPLAYS INC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 224,954.00

The innovation is the development of a new class of devices known as eWriters
for classroom use as both a sustainable paper replacement technology and an
effective tool for student/teacher interaction. These devices address the
problem of achieving a sustainable world by satisfying the human need for making
and recording handwritten images without the environmental harm associated with
the production of paper. They are widely accepted based on a writing experience
which closely mimics the feel of pen and paper. The paperless classroom workflow
will require tools for automatically collecting assignments and electronically
grading them. Virtual whiteboards enabled by the devices will be created to
enhance student/teacher interaction. The project focuses on math and science
education, areas that are difficult to service with other device types, such as
ones requiring keyboard input, due to the basic nature of the work, special
symbols, and formatting requirements. However, the devices themselves are
applicable to a broader range of subject areas, including art, where it is
noteworthy that some artists have already adopted the eWriters for their medium.
As eWriters are a new technology, the project will be among the first to explore
their transformative potential as applied to education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impact begins with the societal benefit of significantly
reduced paper consumption in schools and later extends into the workplace as
increasing numbers of students enter the workforce prepared to perform their
jobs without the use of paper. Also important is the new tool that eWriters
provide to teachers, particularly through virtual whiteboards that permit
wireless interaction between a teacher and their students. Capable teachers will
find new ways of reaching students in subject areas as varied as art and
science. It is hard to overstate the importance of this at a time of flagging
student test scores and academic competitiveness. Commercially, the eWriter
display technology has been developed and manufactured in the United States,
with investments in roll-to-roll display production facilities in Kent, Ohio.
Development of the technology into an educational tool therefore assists in
sustaining the domestic economy, in addition to the environment. The existing
eWriter product, distribution, retail channels, and marketing give a strong
platform for the educational development to be commercialized. The initial
success in educational settings shows strong promise and potential for
commercialization success in this field.