* 1332287
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Minaspata Archaeological Project: Wari Colonialism in the Lucre Basin, Cuzco, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Thomas John Hardy, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2014
* USD 29,278.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Clark Erickson, Thomas Hardy will direct excavations
at the archaeological site of Minaspata, located in the Lucre Basin near Cuzco,
Peru. Minaspata is relevant to understanding the long-term rise of social and
political complexity in the Cuzco region, eventually culminating in the rise of
the Inca Empire (AD 1400-1532), but of particular importance is the period from
AD 600-1000. Known as the Middle Horizon in Peru, this period is marked by the
pan-regional dominance of the Wari state, located several hundred miles to the
west in the modern city of Ayacucho. The Wari state expanded outward slightly
before AD 600, likely conquering several regions in south-central Peru and
establishing colonies throughout these annexed territories. However, without the
aid of a writing system, relatively little is known about the political
structure of this colonizing state, or about the social and cultural effects
Wari domination had on local populations - in part, because few local Middle
Horizon sites have been studied in peripheral Wari regions.

Minaspata provides an ideal opportunity to examine the effects of colonization
in more detail, as the site was occupied from as early as 800 BC until the end
of the arrival of Spanish conquistadors in AD 1532. Mr. Hardy's research will
employ recent theoretical advancements and high-tech methodologies to examine
the social and cultural transformations which occurred at Minaspata as a result
of Wari colonization, which will in turn shed light on the colonial strategies
which pre-Columbian complex polities employed to establish and maintain
sovereignty.

Archaeological research in the Cuzco area has revealed a highly intensive Wari
presence particularly in the Lucre Basin. The most notable sign of this
investment is the massive site of Pikillacta, located 1 kilometer from
Minaspata, which is the largest Wari site in Peru outside of the capital city
itself. Limited excavations at Minaspata in the 1960's suggested that the site
maintained a local character during the Middle Horizon, which would contradict
assumptions archaeologists have made regarding the nature of the Wari state in
the Cuzco area. A useful concept which Mr. Hardy will employ is that of cultural
hybridity, which can be used to examine the degrees to which local populations
adopted various Wari social and cultural practices into their lives. This can be
determined by analyzing archaeological remains recovered in excavations, such as
the production and design of tools and crafts (particularly ceramics),
transformations in architectural construction and layout, shifts in food
production and consumption practices, and changes in ritual and mortuary
practices. The results will have larger implications for understanding of
colonialism, both modern and ancient.

This research will seek to have broader impacts beyond these topics presented.
Mr. Hardy will use these investigations for his dissertation, and will seek to
build on the data in future field seasons. The project will also involve student
archaeologists from the United States as well as from Peru, promoting
international cooperation between future scholars, as well as providing
experience to aspiring archaeologists from a variety of backgrounds. The results
of this project will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications in both the
U.S. and in South America, and the raw data will be made available for public
use online. Finally, the project will involve analyses made at laboratories in
Peru and in the U.S., promoting the integration of scientific techniques with
more humanistic anthropological and archaeological theory.