* 1332415
* HBCU-UP TIP: Enhancing the Interest, Pedagogical Skills, Confidence and Expertise of Preservice K-6 Teachers to Teach Science Utilizing Research-Based Instructional Methods
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2014,02/28/2019
* Justina Osa, Virginia State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 02/28/2019
* USD 323,490.00

The National Science Foundation's (NSF) Historically Black College's and
Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) is providing support to Virginia
State University (VSU) through its Targeted Infusion Project (TIP) funding
opportunity to increase the quality of science teaching at the K-6 grade level.
This teacher preparation project represents a joint venture between the College
of Natural and Health Sciences and College of Education as well as local school
districts in central Virginia to increase interest, pedagogical skills,
confidence and expertise of preservice elementary education teachers to teach
science utilizing research-based instructional methods. The project will pair
preservice teachers with science majors and biology faculty to work
collaboratively on interdisciplinary projects, allow for field-based experiences
that incorporate applied knowledge, practices, and hands-on learning by exposing
preservice teachers to practical application of science concepts, enable
preservice teachers' participation in professional development conferences and
activities; and enhance VSU's College of Education Teaching and Learning
Resource Center with science resources. The project supports both formal and
informal learning for thirty (30) pre-service teachers over a three-year
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be evaluated using the Teaching
Science as Inquiry (TSI) survey instrument to measure teacher's self-efficacy as
it relates specifically to classroom practice.