* 1332789
* Computation of Grain Boundary Energy Landscapes as a Tool for Grain Boundary Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Christopher Schuh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 10/31/2016
* USD 395,392.00

Grain boundaries are defects in metals and ceramics that often control failure
mechanisms such as corrosion and cracking. However, a vast number of different
grain boundary types are found in a given material specimen. By controlling the
types of grain boundaries present in a material through a process called grain
boundary engineering, dramatic enhancements in materials performance, including
corrosion and cracking resistance, can be achieved. The aim of this project is
to advance the field of grain boundary engineering by investigating the
properties of different types of grain boundaries in order to determine which
grain boundaries are most important in preventing or causing materials failure.
To accomplish this, a variety of different types of grain boundaries are
investigated using a computational method called the activation-relaxation
technique. This method provides essential information regarding the kinetic
properties of grain boundaries, which are inherently related to the mechanisms
of material degradation and failure.

The research results produced in this work will advance the field of grain
boundary engineering?telling materials designers what the most critical defects
in a material structure are allows them to focus on removing those critical
defects, thereby extending the lifetime of a variety of engineering materials.
The toolbox for materials design at the microstructural level will thus be
greatly augmented, with societal benefits in reducing materials failures,
enhancing product reliability, and thereby reducing materials usage. The project
also focuses on the training of Ph.D.-level experts and B.S.-level practitioners
in the newest tools of microstructure design. Combined with significant exposure
of the research to industrial concerns, these newly-trained students are poised
to carry the research results into the field and effect their implementation in
advanced materials technologies.