* 1332575
* Targeted Infusion Project:  Implementation and Assessment of Blended Learning First and Second Year Chemistry Courses at Spelman College
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2013,01/31/2019
* Lisa Hibbard, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 01/31/2019
* USD 478,567.00

Spelman College, a minority-serving institution, will implement course revision
in General and Organic Chemistry through the National Science Foundation?s
Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Targeted Infusion Project funding opportunity. The project implements a ?blended
learning? in first and second year chemistry courses to improve the retention of
students selecting majors in this STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activities are designed to monitor and support student success while training
students to engage in scientific thinking, master and apply scientific concepts,
and transfer skills developed in the critical freshman and sophomore
undergraduate years of STEM study. A blended learning format will be used for
content delivery to include skill-building activities involving problem-solving
sessions, team-based guided inquiry learning (e.g., POGIL, ChemDrills, case
studies, computer modeling).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 36-month project includes
assessment that involves use of pre-and post exams in both sequence courses and
comprehensive evaluation focusing on long-term goals impacting student
retention. National and international venues will be used for the dissemination
of project outcomes as well as Spelman?s I-Tunes University and the universities
website.