* 1332027
* STTR Phase I:  Wall-climbing robots for nondestructive inspection to ensure sustainable infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Kenshin Ushiroda, InnovBot LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to investigate
innovative approaches and provide a research-based foundation for developing a
reliable and versatile wall-climbing machine that can scale odd surfaces (with
deep cracks, ledges), carry large payload of testing equipment, reach hard-to-
access places to carry out various non-destructive testing/evaluation (NDT/NDE)
tasks to ensure the sustainability of human-built infrastructure. The technical
innovations include: 1) new drivetrain using foam tread and a rotor package
which not only produce strong adhesion but also helps to eliminate the
acoustic/vibration interference between the climbing robot and impact-echo
measurements; 2) the fault tolerance feature of multiple chamber seals in the
drivetrain that allows the robot to cross deep gaps without loss of adhesion; 3)
the differential drive locomotion using two drivetrains enables the robot to
carry much larger payload of testing equipment; 4) the combination of
impeller&amp;#8232;and propeller provides a means for the robot to cope with
ledges and allows re-attachment with the wall if the robot accidentally loses
contact; 5) the use of tether helps the distribution&amp;#8232;of payload among
cable and robot adhesion mechanism and enhances the operation
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is that it allows inspections of human-built infrastructure to be
performed significantly faster and more thorough at a lower cost by eliminating
the use of scaffolds. It also improves safety by removing the need for
inspectors &amp;#8232;to scale high-rise buildings/structures to perform
exterior inspections. In addition to visual inspection of surface flaws, the
climbing machine will be able to detect subsurface defects (i.e., cracks,
delamination, voids) using other NDT instruments such as impact-echo devices or
ground penetrating radar (GPR). A group of such wall-climbing robots can do the
inspection task simultaneously while avoid the scaffolding, thus saving time and
money, making the national civil infrastructure more secure. New York City and
many other cities in the world have laws that mandates the facade inspection of
high-rise buildings &amp;#8232;every 5 years. The aging infrastructure and
residential apartments lower than 6 stories in&amp;#8232; USA and around the
world also have strong needs for inspection and property maintenance.
Considering the number of buildings to be inspected every &amp;#8232;year, and
over millions of buildings, bridges and tunnels in the country and around the
world that require continuous maintenances and inspection, the market of the
wall-climbing robot technology &amp;#8232;is vast.