* 1332917
* Operation of the CLIVAR and Carbon Hydrographic Data Office at UCSD/SIO, 2014-2018
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* James Swift, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,467,763.00

Overview: The CLIVAR and Carbon Hydrographic Data Office (CCHDO) is the
repository, assembly center, and distribution center for full-depth global ocean
hydrographic, carbon, and tracer data. These data are a product of several
international research programs (the World Ocean circulation experiment (WOCE),
the CLImate VARiability and predictability program (CLIVAR), the International
Ocean Carbon Coordination Project (IOCCP), the Global Ocean Ship-based
Hydrographic Investigations Program (GO-SHIP)), and national research programs -
past, present and to come. Whenever possible the CCHDO provides these data in
three community formats: WHP-Exchange, netCDF, and WOCE. The CCHDO seeks to
assure that these data and their associated documentation are prepared and made
readily available for immediate research and education uses, and that these data
have a long service life. The CCHDO?s primary window to the research community
is via its web site &lt;http://cchdo.ucsd.edu&gt;. The CCHDO maintains ties with
designated national data archives like NODC/WDC-A to see that the entirety of
its public holdings is formally archived and up to date at the
archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The CCHDO brings together,
verifies, and corrects content and format errors in the hydrographic, and tracer
data used in large scale ocean carbon, global change, water mass, and
circulation studies. The team assembles the data with relevant documentation,
and carefully prepares them for dissemination and archive. In addition they work
to promote appropriate methodology, community standards, communications, and
data compatibility. The CCHDO data are created by over 100 data originators
worldwide, sometimes with 5 or more investigators separately contributing to one
bottle data file. The CCHDO makes it possible for all data users to cope with
the temporal-, content-, and format-related file diversity these different
originators engender. The CCHDO brings data together to a common content and
readability standard, thereby greatly reducing the difficulties research and
education data users encounter. A strong additional advantage is that the
documentation associated with the data are collected, reorganized to a common
standard (where possible), and preserved with the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The CCHDO enhances research
infrastructure, the broad dissemination of results, and the integration of
research and education. While the CCHDO does not generate new data, it makes the
data better and more usable, thus more far reaching and ultimately more
scientifically and socially relevant. Via the CCHDO?s actions, present-day and
future US and international users of these CTD, routine hydrography, ocean
carbon, and tracer ocean profile data can easily use any of the data files
written in the ASCII or netCDF exchange formats. This both reduces the personnel
costs to data users to import and use data and also makes these data available
to a much wider audience in the research, educational, and broader communities
who do not employ data specialists. Moreover, the careful assembly of
documentation with the data helps to assure a service lifetime for the data far
into the future, contributing to a broad range of future studies of long-term
ocean variability. The clean-up of the data and rewriting into accepted data
formats also make the data much more straightforward to import into computer
models. The CCHDO supports CLIVAR and carbon science programs, and is a data
component of a global observing system for the physical climate and carbon
dioxide system. The CCHDO is hence part of a larger international effort to
monitor the ocean?s response to climate change. The CCHDO puts into play the
fundamental concept that data collected belong to the community, and should be
available to the community at large.