* 1332385
* ESE: Spatial Interactive Optimization for Restoration of Upland Storage in Watersheds: Community Participation in the Design of Distributed Practices and Alternatives
* GEO,EAR
* 08/31/2012,09/30/2014
* Meghna Babbar-Sebens, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 279,213.00

PROPOSAL TITLE: ESE: Spatial Interactive Optimization for Restoration of Upland
Storage in Watersheds: Community Participation in the Design of Distributed
Practices and Alternatives

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dr. Meghna Babbar-Sebens, Assistant Professor,
Department of Earth Sciences, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis.

CO-PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dr. Snehasis Mukhopadhyay, Associate Professor,
Department of Computer and Information Science, Indiana University Purdue
University Indianapolis.

COLLABORATOR: Dr. Edna Loehman, Emeritus Professor, Department of Agricultural
Economics, Purdue University.

Abstract

The alteration of the natural hydrologic cycle due to human activities -- such
as deforestation, artificial agricultural drainage systems, urbanization, and
residential development has resulted in loss of multiple ecosystem services
(e.g. flood attenuation and water quality control) that were previously provided
naturally by various landscape features in river basins and watersheds. Re-
naturalization of the hydrologic cycle in degraded watersheds has been proposed
to replace lost storage on floodplains with upland storage. At the same time,
agronomic practices recommended by USDA's Natural Resources Conservation Service
can improve water quality and habitat. This research focuses on the design of a
distributed upland storage system, with design involving the selection of sites,
scales, structural changes, and agronomic practices for agricultural landscapes
in a degraded watershed. We will use the Eagle Creek Watershed (HUC 11
watershed) for development and demonstration of design methods. Because there
are a large number of alternative sites, scales, and mitigation methods, and
because there are multiple criteria for selection of locations and methods,
design is complex. Quantifiable criteria for selection include downstream flood
volume, cost of mitigation, loss of habitat, etc. As in any decision problem,
there are also unquantifiable criteria such as inconvenience and loss of
productivity and control for private land holders. Because upland re-
naturalization must occur on private land, there must be voluntary agreement for
any mitigation measures. To address both complexity and acceptability to land
holders, our research will integrate computational tools (GIS, simulation,
optimization algorithms, etc.) for quantified criteria with community
participation to address un-quantified criteria. Specific objectives are: 1)
Develop a simulation-visualization framework for stakeholders to assess
mitigation alternatives under conditions of climate change. 2) Develop and
investigate interactive, multi-objective, and stochastic optimization approaches
for including single and multiple stakeholders' participation to generate
preferred alternatives that reflect non-quantitative and local criteria. 3)
Compare efficacy of the interactive approach with non-interactive optimization
through stakeholder assessment. Though we demonstrate the usefulness of the
approach for Eagle Creek Watershed, IN, it can, however, be applicable to many
other areas and problems.