* 1332681
* Cell Modulation Using Biomaterials with a Negative Poisson's Ratio
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 09/30/2017
* USD 377,574.00

The research objective of this award is to create a new class of nanostructured
biological scaffolds that exhibit a negative Poisson's ratio (auxetic surfaces),
and study their ability to modulate the cell shape, adhesion, proliferation and
cytoskeletal re-orientation. The ability of a biomaterial scaffold to support
and transmit cell and tissue forces can be quantitatively described by its
elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio. Recent studies have shown that elastic
modulus can modulate a variety of cell types. However, the effect of Poisson's
ratio on cell behavior has been largely ignored. While most natural materials
have a positive Poisson's ratio and contract (expand) transversally when
stretched (compressed) in a certain direction, auxetic materials exhibit an
unusual property of having a negative Poisson's ratio, i.e., they expand
transversally when stretched and vice versa. To achieve the research objectives,
the team will design, fabricate, and characterize nanoscale auxetic surface
topographies that exhibit a negative Poisson's ratio using polyethylene glycol
biomaterial. The team will investigate the auxetic effect in the nanoscaffolds
on the adhesion, cytoskeletal organization, and shape of adipose derived human
stem cells. If successful, this work will be the first in the field for
developing nanoscale scaffolds with a negative Poisson's ratio and studying the
cellular responses to such novel scaffolds. The PI has an outstanding track
record of research in nanofabrication, biomaterials, and cell interactions with
microenvironments. UC San Diego and the PI's laboratories offer excellent
facilities and resources for this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An auxetic
scaffold could match both the elastic stiffness and the Poisson's ratio of the
host tissue and would likely better integrate with native tissues and better
promote clinical tissue regeneration. Methodology developed in this work can be
extended to other biomaterials and cell-types to investigate effects of altering
the Poisson's ratio on a variety of cellular aspects for arterial endothelium,
myocardial patch, skin and fat tissue engineering, medical sutures, and in wound
management. Thus this work directly aids scientific progress, benefits
healthcare and society at large. The proposed research is highly
interdisciplinary, involving tissue engineering, nanomanufacturing, and
biomaterials. Results from this project will be excellent teaching materials for
undergraduate and graduate students. The strong educational efforts for K-12 and
minority students will attract more young students and under-represented
students into engineering, and particularly into the interdisciplinary field
between engineering and biology.