* 1332705
* Alongshore Advective Acceleration in the Surf Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Steve Elgar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 11/30/2017
* USD 762,866.00

Overview: This project focuses on the alongshore flow variations and advective
accelerations owing to surfzone bathymetric variations. Feedbacks between
alongshore flow variations and surfzone morphological changes may be critical to
the evolution of surfzone morphology on beaches with alongshore uniform incident
waves. Determining the magnitude of the alongshore advective accelerations and
flow variability resulting from surfzone features is important to developing
accurate models for coastal evolution and transport of pollution. Field evidence
that the advective acceleration contributes significantly to the momentum
balance also may lead to new theories and models for shoreline
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Analytical and numerical
studies suggest that alongshore advective acceleration may be important to
surfzone rip currents, alongshore flow meanders, dispersion, and sediment
transport and morphological evolution. Recent numerical model simulations
indicate that alongshore advective acceleration can be large relative to other
terms in the depth- and time-averaged surfzone momentum balance on beaches with
alongshore bathymetric variations as small as ten centimeters. However, field
measurements have shown that alongshore flows are predicted well with simplified
equations that neglect advective accelerations. Furthermore, except near strong
rip currents, field observations show relatively small alongshore variations in
alongshore surfzone flows. The simplified equations may reproduce observed
velocities accurately because the advective acceleration term is balanced by an
alongshore pressure gradient term, or because advective acceleration is
accounted for by the parameterized bottom friction coefficient. It also is
possible that the observation-based estimates of alongshore flow gradients are
biased low because flow maxima and minima are not resolved owing to the
relatively large spatial separations between in situ sensors. Alternatively, the
numerical models, which are sensitive to the friction coefficient, may
overpredict the advective acceleration. Densely distributed observations of wave
forcing, pressure gradients, and surfzone flows will be obtained to calibrate
numerical model simulations. The field measurements will be used to estimate
advective acceleration and the field-tested model will be used to explore the
causes of the advective accelerations in the presence of alongshore
inhomogeneous surfzone bathymetry. In particular, the observations and
simulations will address the following questions: Is alongshore advective
acceleration important? Are model predictions of alongshore flow gradients and
advective acceleration accurate? And what causes alongshore advective
acceleration? By combining field observations designed to measure flow
variations at the spatial scales of small surfzone bathymetric variations with
numerical model simulations, the investigators will be able to address these
questions about the importance and causes of alongshore advective accelerations
on beaches with near uniform incident waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The American Shore and Beach Preservation Association (ASBPA,
http://www.asbpa.org) is concerned that Americans interested in coastal
engineering are not able to obtain field experience. Thus, a partnership with
ASBPA and interested engineering firms will be established to provide field
training to undergraduates, recent graduates, and young professionals embarking
on coastal careers. In particular, two programs will be offered: 2- to 3-week-
long fieldwork-focused internships for young professionals currently employed in
coastal consulting and engineering firms, and 6-month-long fellowships for
students interested in coastal engineering careers. More than a dozen companies
already have expressed interest in the internships, and have offered to support
their employees to participate in the proposed program. The student fellowships
would be similar to the Swashzone Fellowships previously conducted by the lead
investigator, Raubenheimer, which have led to several students receiving
positions in coastal engineering firms. The interns and students will work with
the investigators to obtain field observations, and to improve models for
nearshore processes, which in turn will improve coastal management, help protect
coastal communities, and sustain coastal resources.