* 1332566
* Enriching Computing Curricula through HPC Teaching and Research
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2020
* Suxia Cui, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 430,783.00

The goal of this project at Prairie View A&M University is to improve
undergraduate computing education through enhanced courses and research
opportunities that incorporate high performance computing (HPC) training that
will stimulate students' interest in computing and strengthen their
computational problem-solving skills. This project leverages faculty expertise,
institutional commitment, industry and federal support to elevate students'
computing-related skills and education.

This project is a collaboration of faculty members from three departments -
Electrical & Computer Engineering, Computer Science, and Engineering Technology
- to develop a diverse high performance computing environment and use it to
improve HPC-related education and training at the institution. Six courses will
be redesigned to include both embedded and cluster HPC platforms and integrate
research topics of the project faculty members. In addition, faculty members
will develop new courses in the areas of parallel computing, machine learning,
and computer vision. The proposed HPC platforms can easily be expanded to
support other disciplines in science technology, engineering, and mathematics.

This project addresses a national need to provide trained graduates in the
computing sciences in order to help the U.S. retain its technological
competitiveness. Almost 500 undergraduate students, the majority of whom are
African American, will be impacted during the three project years. Each year,
high school teachers and university faculty members will receive training.
Research data, source code, and curriculum materials generated by this project
will be posted online and disseminated in conferences and publications for the
research and educational community.