* 1332207
* Collaborative Research: Exchange and Dispersion Across the Inner Shelf: Understanding the Importance of Spatial Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Chang-Sheng Chen, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 209,435.00

This study seeks to understand spatial variability in the flow field over the
inner part of the continental shelf at scales of 100s of meters to 10s of
kilometers, its contribution to exchange and dispersion, and its implications
for coastal systems. Recent observations of the coastal ocean south of Martha's
Vineyard, MA have documented startling examples of spatially-variable flows with
the potential to drive focused lateral exchange across the shelf rivaling that
due to the frequently-examined along-shelf uniform response to upwelling or
downwelling. Yet, we know almost nothing about the characteristics of the flow
field at these scales because conventional observational techniques and typical
realistic shelf models do not adequately resolve these scales. This will likely
be the first comprehensive study of current variability in the coastal ocean at
scales from 100s of meters to 10s of kilometers by employing a unique
combination of high-resolution HF radar surface currents, dense observations of
subsurface velocity and hydrography, and mass drifter releases along with
comparisons to realistic and idealized numerical models. The proposed work will
quantify the total flux of water masses across the shelf, the relative
importance of spatial variability in the wind, stratification, and bathymetry on
exchange, and the role of spatially-variable
dispersion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous efforts to quantify the rates of
exchange in the coastal ocean have generally focused on the transport due to
along-shelf uniform, wind-driven dynamics. While evidence of additional
transport due to major capes or headlands, bathymetric irregularities, or non-
uniform wind fields has been found in most coastal areas, the relative impact of
these sources of variability on exchange and dispersion across the shelf have
not been quantified. Additionally, the effects of small-scale and/or transient
features, potentially important sources of spatially-dependent exchange or
dispersion, have never been resolved. This comprehensive view of exchange across
the coastal ocean south of Martha's Vineyard, including the use of Lagrangian
trajectory analyses in addition to the Eulerian-based transport studies, will
enable a much broader range of spatial variability to be captured and will
quantify the occurrence of transient events, their drivers, and their importance
for coastal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The movement of water masses from the
shallow waters adjacent to the coast to the larger coastal ocean offshore
controls the flux of heat, salt, nutrients, and pollutants between the nearshore
and the global ocean. By providing a holistic look at across-shelf transport,
the results of this work will document the potential effects of spatial
variability on coastal systems. This effort will improve our ability to quantify
and predict the exchange critical to assessing the productivity of coastal areas
and the dispersion rates critical to monitoring the fate of harmful algal
blooms, pollutants, and search and rescue operations. The PIs are actively
involved in teaching and mentoring at WHOI and UMASS Dartmouth as well as
interacting with coastal managers and planners. In collaboration with the NOAA's
Northeast Fisheries Science Center, a broad educational program will entrain
K-12 students in the region into the science being conducted through additional
drifter deployments