* 1332204
* Particle Image Baro-Velocimetry (PIBV): simultaneous measurement of pressure and velocity in fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Sean Peterson, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 269,981.00

Porfiri, Maurizio 1332204

This proposal addresses the grand challenge of enabling, for the first time,
direct and simultaneous full-field measurement of the instantaneous pressure and
velocity in a fluid flow. The proposed methodology will transform current
experimental fluid mechanics practices by providing US academic, industrial, and
government institutions with the capability of performing local sensing in real
time of kinematics and kinetics of fluid flow fields. While the proposed
framework is transformative in nature, its practical implementation requires
minimal upgrades to established fluid mechanics measurement systems.
Specifically, this proposal encompasses the formulation and incorporation of
novel pressure-sensitive tracer particles into traditional Particle Image
Velocimetry (PIV) systems towards a novel Particle Image Baro-Velocimetry (PIBV)
system. The proposed microcapsules will comprise air encapsulated in highly
compliant biocompatible hydrogel shells that are specifically formulated to
fluoresce with different wavelength distributions, that is, to change color,
depending on the strain of the hydrogel shell. Pressure acting upon the particle
modifies its volume, which, in turn, results in a measurable change in the
fluorescent response. The response time of the probes to a step change in
pressure is expected to be on the order of a microsecond. Further, the hydrogel
microprobe design can be tailored to the experiment to optimize sensitivity over
a prescribed pressure range and detect pressure levels as low as the order of
ten pascals. Utilizing these novel microscale particles as tracers, the velocity
field within a fluid can be measured using traditional PIV techniques without a
loss of flow tracing fidelity or an increase in overall measurement uncertainty.

Intellectual Merit : The intellectual merits of this project include: (i)
establishing a novel measurement system that will enable full characterization
of the pressure and velocity fields of complex fluid flow scenarios; (ii)
designing, synthesizing, and calibrating a new class of biocompatible pressure
microprobes based on hydrogels; (iii) formulating and experimentally validating
mechanics-based theoretical and computational models of air-encapsulated
hydrogel spheres in fluids; and (iv) assessing PIBV potential through direct
pressure measurement in state of the art studies on biomimetic propulsion,
hydrodynamic damping, and internal flows.

Broader Impacts : Effective technologies for simultaneous characterization of
flow kinematics and kinetics will benefit multiple scientific and engineering
communities within academic, industrial, and government institutions and
positively impact several applied and fundamental research fields. This project
will reinforce technical training and education of the socioeconomically diverse
student body in Brooklyn, New York. A suite of teaching modules for middle and
high school students demonstrating various principles of fluid mechanics will be
developed and implemented in classroom education through synergy with current
NSF programs (RET site and GK-12 program). The project will also contribute to
the removal of mental barriers across the extremal student populations defining
the spectrum of metropolitan versus rural backgrounds in Brooklyn and Waterloo,
Ontario by supporting the summer research experience for US students in the
University of Waterloo. A one-day instructional short course on PIBV systems
will be hosted at the Polytechnic Institute of New York University with emphasis
on the measurement principle and uncertainty, data acquisition and processing,
and integration into PIV systems. A wiki page about the project will be
developed for outreach to the public and promoting PIBV.