* 1332554
* RAPID: PAEROS ChArMEx Mountain Experiment (PACMEx)
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Gregory Roberts, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 03/31/2014
* USD 199,997.00

The Mediterranean Region has been identified as a hot-spot in future climate
change projections, as expected changes in the hydrological cycle will affect
the water resources for millions of people by the turn of the century. Model
simulations suggest a significant decrease in the summer precipitation along
with a rise in ambient temperature; in addition, a greater variability in
precipitation will likely increase the intensity of flash floods, droughts, and
heat waves. Until now, however, most models have not accounted for the impacts
of aerosol in the Mediterranean Basin, whose major sources include Saharan dust,
biomass burning and anthropogenic emissions. Recent airborne studies led by the
PI indicate that aerosol sources from Europe and Africa are transported
throughout the lower troposphere up to 6 km. Because of their complex vertical
distribution, it is a challenge to capture the variability and quantify the
contribution of these sources to the radiative budget (both direct and indirect
effects).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this RAPID award, a miniaturized aerosol
package (PAEROS; Portable AERosol Observing System) will be deployed at a
mountain site in Corsica for six weeks in June/July 2013 to complement other
ground-based and airborne activities and measure aerosol physical and optical
properties, Cloud Condensation Nuclei (CCN) spectra, radiative fluxes and
meteorological parameters. Specifically, this project addresses the following
science objectives:(i) Investigate the sources and sinks of aerosol over the
Mediterranean Basin to identify the contribution of European emissions, Saharan
dust and biomass burning above the boundary layer where much of the transport
occurs; (ii) Enhance an observational network of airborne and other ground-based
measurements (in the boundary layer) to characterize aerosol-cloud interactions
and mixing between the free troposphere and boundary layer; (iii) Use
hygroscopicity to study the evolution of aerosol during transport and quantify
the characteristic time of the transformation; and (iv) Demonstrate the
technical capability of PAEROS by operating the observing system at a remote
mountain site with a solar panel array and wind power for an extended period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding of the hydrological cycle has
tremendous societal impacts. This project also fosters international
collaboration between French and American research institutions through direct
involvement of PhD students and post-docs.