* 1332819
* Enabling Multidisciplinary Design Optimization: Inexact-Newton-Krylov and the Individual-Discipline-Feasible Formulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jason Hicken, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2017
* USD 303,037.00

This project is investigating matrix-free Newton-Krylov algorithms as a means of
solving multidisciplinary design optimization problems. More precisely, we are
exploring the use of matrix-free algorithms to solve simulation-based design
optimization problems in a modular way. Modularity is attractive for these
problems because many legacy software libraries already exist that can analyze
and optimize problems involving a single discipline, for example fluid dynamics.
In contrast, few libraries are available that can analyze complex
multidisciplinary systems, let alone optimize them. To achieve a modular
approach, we have adopted the so-called individual-discipline-feasible (IDF)
formulation. Historically, the IDF formulation has been limited by the need to
form computationally expensive matrices demanded by conventional optimization
algorithms. This motivates our investigation of Newton-Krylov algorithms, which
will enable a scalable and matrix-free implementation of IDF.

Engineering systems governed by complex multi-physics are challenging to design,
because they often exhibit subtle tradeoffs and defy our intuition. When the
physics are modeled accurately with high-fidelity simulations, numerical
optimization can help guide and inform the design of complex engineering
systems. By showing that matrix-free Newton-Krylov methods can be used to
efficiently solve IDF-formulated problems, this project promises to make high-
fidelity design optimization more tractable and easier to implement for
industrial practitioners. This makes powerful optimization tools more useful to
designers, leading to improved products and processes that benefit society;
examples include aircraft with lower emissions, more efficient power plants, and
better artificial hearts. Such tools can also streamline the design process,
which would improve the economic competitiveness of domestic industries.