* 1332149
* Collaborative Research: Engineering an Angiogenic Cardiac Patch
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Robert Peattie, Tufts Medical Center, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 09/30/2015
* USD 46,382.00

0932456/0933470&lt;br/&gt;Peattie/Firpo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellec
tual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed project is to develop
and evaluate a biocompatible implant capable of preserving cardiac function
following ischemic injury. By facilitating restoration of functional heart
tissue, this implant will significantly improve healing and recovery after heart
attack. The implant will be fabricated as a reinforced hydrogel (the cardiac
patch), easily securable to the heart and capable of storing and releasing
growth factors into the injured tissue. Functional tissue restoration will be
achieved through the growth of a new capillary network surrounding the injured
tissue in response to the implant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, 920,000
heart attacks (myocardial infarction) occur annually in the US. Inadequate blood
supply to the injured heart tissue is a critical limitation to healing.
Development of mature microvessel networks in the damaged tissue can therefore
provide a major advance towards restoring heart function. The cardiac patch will
consist of a novel composite biomaterial composed of electrospun silk fibers
dispersed through a covalently crosslinked, thiol-modified hyaluronic acid and
heparin-based gel, creating a synthetic extracellular matrix. Mature microvessel
networks will be induced by controlled, sequential release of multiple growth
factors from the gel and by synergistic interactions of those growth factors
with hyaluronic acid. In the proposed project, we will test the hypothesis that
heparin-regulated growth factor release can dramatically improve the
revascularization of damaged myocardium, eliciting functional, perfused vessels
that restore cardiac function after ischemic injury. Physico-chemical properties
of the composite will be evaluated in vitro and its composition optimized with
regard to specified design criteria. The angiogenic capacity of patches pre-
loaded with selected growth factors then sutured onto ischemic hearts will be
quantified by measurement of microvessel proliferation and maturity in heart
samples post-implantation. The functionality of elicited vessels will then be
determined by non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging in live animals over time.
Such imaging will also allow determination of improvements in heart
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By supporting
restoration of functionality to diseased heart tissue, this implant will
significantly reduce the burden of suffering associated with ischemic heart
damage. The proposed investigations will establish protocols for design and
fabrication of silk and hyaluronic acid-based hydrogels that restore functional
cardiac tissue in diseased heart tissue by eliciting the growth of new capillary
blood vessels into diseased tissue through sustained growth factor delivery. By
developing a superior matrix, our results can in due course significantly impact
therapeutic treatment of heart disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, as is
described in the proposal text, the PIs have a long history of significant
commitment to education, training and mentorship of students. The proposed
project will permit us to continue to engage undergraduate as well as graduate
students in our ongoing research efforts, expanding the research training,
educational experience and opportunities available to the students involved. As
part of the process of recruitment of students into the project, full attention
will be given to the infrastructure in place in our institutions for recruiting
and retaining women and underrepresented minorities in research. These include
the New England Board of Higher Education Excellence through Diversity Program,
a major forum for recruitment of underrepresented minority students for programs
and for disseminating information about the opportunities, and the Tufts
University School of Medicine minority outreach program. For the last ten years,
these programs have been highly successful in attracting underrepresented
undergraduate students to spend summers at Tufts involved in biomedical science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;