* 1332667
* Collaborative Research: Completing a 10-Year Record of Deep Western Boundary Current Observations at Line W: A Contribution to the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation Study
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Ruth Curry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,545,515.00

Overview: Over the last decade, a growing international research effort has
focused attention on the physical state of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC), including its climatically-vital transports of heat, mass
and tracers, and the causes and consequences of its variability. Begun in 2004,
the Line W program - moored and shipboard measurements of the equatorward-
flowing Deep Western Boundary Current (DWBC) and poleward-flowing Gulf Stream
along an altimeter track between New England and Bermuda has acquired a
remarkable 10-year time series of this component of the AMOC. The goals of this
project are to conduct a final Line W cruise to recover the current meter array
presently in the water and reoccupy the hydrographic section, to process the
recovered sensor data to final form and refurbish the sea-going equipment, and
to complete the scientific analysis of the Line W data set in conjunction with
fellow AMOC investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Property and
transport time series generated by several AMOC programs are now approaching or
exceeding a decade in length and are starting to provide truly unprecedented
views of the AMOC's structure, strength and variability. Synthesizing these
results and combining them with state estimate models will undoubtedly result in
improved understanding of the mechanics, dynamics and impacts of AMOC
variability. Key foci of this project's analysis effort include careful
quantification of the local variability at Line W, estimating variations in net
(coast-to-coast) meridional transport of selected water masses by combining Line
W observations with interior-ocean data and via models, and investigating the
meridional coherence of water property anomalies and AMOC fluctuations by
comparing Line-W observations with water property observations and AMOC
estimates at other latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A graduate
student in the MIT/WHOI Joint Program will be funded to complete her Ph.D.
thesis that will be based on Line W. As in past years, several students and/or
postdocs will be involved in the final Line W cruise to gain hands-on experience
with hydrographic sampling procedures and physical oceanographic mooring work.
In this analysis and synthesis project, the original Line W investigators are
entraining a new junior scientist into the research effort. This will introduce
the investigator to new observational practices and associated data reduction
and analysis procedures while bringing new expertise and viewpoints to the
study. It is absolutely critical to observational physical oceanography that
young investigators become fully versed in modern observational methods. The
project's investigators will additionally continue to showcase Line W in public
outreach events as a demonstration of ocean science and climate variation
studies. Beyond these human elements, the Line W program is continuing to serve
as a testbed for several emerging ocean measurement technologies and associated
data processing procedures.