* 1332840
* Impact, Cavitation and Fracture of Polymers with Liquid-Filled Nucleation Sites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Veronica Eliasson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2016
* USD 310,644.00

Solid materials usually contain damage in the form of small voids. If filled
with a liquid, these voids can serve as nucleation sites for water to change
phase from liquid to gaseous state if sudden pressure changes occur. If the
solid structure is subjected to a sudden high-impulse dynamic impact, stress
waves are generated and will propagate through the solid and the liquid-filled
voids. When subjected to sudden changes in pressure, small bubbles within the
liquid-filled voids have the potential to rupture, or cavitate, and emit liquid
jets and shockwaves that can increase the damage to the surrounding solid. As
the liquid undergoes cavitation, the complex physics of the cavitation bubbles
and subsequent jetting will determine how the surrounding solid deforms and
breaks. The goal of this research is to use experiments to quantify the
resulting deformation in real time with high-speed, non-invasive visualization
techniques. The fractured specimens will be post-processed to further evaluate
the difference between various scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this cross-disciplinary project, integrating fluid mechanics theory with solid
mechanics and fracture dynamics, will provide an important step towards
understanding the failure modes of solids during highly dynamic short duration
tests to assess the strength of structures and lead to viable options to
minimize or avoid damage. This project opens new venues for interesting
applications, with examples ranging from wave slamming on coastal structures and
earthquake impact on dam buildings to non-invasive treatment of kidney stones.
This project will support one PhD student at University of Southern California.
With focus on promoting the participation of underrepresented groups,
undergraduate and high-school students will be invited to work on short-term
summer projects related to this research.