* 1332252
* Novel 3-D Measurements of Flame Index to Solve the Flame Blowout Problem
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* James Driscoll, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 06/30/2017
* USD 293,832.00

CBET-1332252&lt;br/&gt;James F. Driscoll&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the physics of how a turbulent flame
extinguishes and blows out is an important and yet unsolved barrier that limits
progress in the area of combustion science. It is desirable to extend the flame
blowout limits in order to achieve lower nitric oxide pollutant levels and
higher energy efficiency from stationary energy sources and from engines, but
first the basic physics must be understood. At present, computational design
codes cannot predict flame blowout limits because of the need for critical
experimental data. This research project will obtain new insights into the flame
blowout problem by making measurements using new laser diagnostics recently
developed by the PI on a previous NSF project. High-speed movies will measure
the local gas velocity field and the fuel and air concentration levels within a
highly turbulent flame. Laser light sheets pass through the turbulent flame and
the fluorescence is recorded at 20,000 frames per second by high-speed cameras.
The images provide measurements of fundamental quantities that are needed by the
computational models, including the local flame turbulent propagation speed, the
aerodynamic strain rate and the flame index.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel
aspects of the work are that the new laser diagnostics provide measurements of
the true, three-dimensional flame propagation speed. They also provide
information about the type of combustion that occurs, such as the locations were
the fuel and air have been properly premixed and where they burn in a non-
premixed manner. The high-speed movies will help to explain the dynamic,
unsteady processes that previously could not be measured. The approach is to
systematically vary the non-dimensional governing parameters and then attempt to
collapse the data set to fit it to a set of simple scaling relations (formulas)
that will be of general use. The high-speed movies will record fluoresecence
from formaldehyde, acetone and nitrogen dioxide in order to image the
concentrations of fuel, air and intermediate chemical species. Three dimensional
measurements will be achieved by rapidly sweeping the laser light
sheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of the work will lead to the 3-D data
for the first time for understanding flame anchoring/blowout in turbulent flames
spanning the whole spectrum of burning regimes premixed, partially premixed, and
non-premixed. This is critical for developing codes for designing combustion
devices. The study would further enable low-emission combustion (e.g., NOx),
because once the flame anchoring/blowout mechanism is understood, the combustion
conditions can be pushed toward as close to the lean limit conditions as
possible, resulting in low temperatures and low levels of NOx.