* 1332300
* NASCRE 3:  Chemical Reaction Engineering for a Sustainable Future  -- Addressing New Challenges and Revisiting Persistent Problems in Energy, Environmental, and Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2013
* Michael Harold, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 22,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Harold, Michael&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Houston&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1332300&lt;br/&gt;Title: NASCRE
3: Chemical Reaction Engineering for a Sustainable Future -- Addressing New
Challenges and Revisiting Persistent Problems in Energy, Environmental, and
Chemicals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will provide funds to support the
participation of young researchers (students, post-doctoral fellows, and junior
faculty) from US institutions in the 3rd North American Symposium on Chemical
Reaction Engineering (NASCRE 3). The symposium will take place in Houston, TX,
USA, during March 17-20, 2013. The theme of the symposium is: "Chemical Reaction
Engineering for a Sustainable Future: Addressing New Challenges and Revisiting
Persistent Problems in Energy, Environmental, and Chemicals Research". Advisors
will be asked to nominate students and postdoctoral researchers working in their
research groups; the nomination package will include a letter of recommendation
and the CV of the nominee. Junior faculty members will simply submit their CVs.
The NASCRE 3 Scientific Committee will evaluate the applicants and select the
candidates who will receive the partial
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The U.S. faces imposing
challenges in energy and the environment that require new technologies that will
sustain the planet yet meet the needs of a robust society. Many of these
challenges require expertise in converting raw materials, including the biomass
feedstocks and the burgeoning supply of natural gas, to transportation fuels and
intermediates, without compromising the environment. The theme of this symposium
is to capture the essential role that chemical reaction engineering (CRE) plays
in addressing these challenges. NASCRE 3 will feature communications of recent
research on CRE fundamentals, enabling technologies, and advanced materials for
advanced fossil fuel recovery and refining methods, environmental technologies
for mobile and stationary sources, advanced power generation devices, and
biomass conversion to fuel and chemicals. NASCRE 3 complements the International
Symposiums on Chemical Reaction Engineering (ISCRE), held every two years at
alternating venues in North America, Europe, and Asia. NASCRE 3 occurs at the
midpoint between ISCRE meetings held in North America, and in so doing ensures
that reaction engineering researchers stay well connected. NASCRE 3 will include
plenary lectures on current topics, oral and poster presentations, two workshops
on computational methods in theoretical catalysis and reaction and transport
systems, and plenty of opportunity for individual discussions. The proceedings
will be published as a special issue of Industrial &amp; Engineering Chemistry
Research (IECR). With the central theme being energy, environmental, and the
fundamentals of chemical reaction engineering, participation in this symposium
is to convey to young investigators the many exciting intellectual challenges in
the field. The presentations and interactions will expose them to innovations
and should inspire them to synthesize their own ideas, which are central to
further developments in the above-mentioned
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The knowledge generated by the
CRE community is central to the continuing success of various industries and the
US economy. Over the past few years, there is the feeling that the CRE community
has been shrinking, e.g., as evidenced by the rather small number of junior
faculty. NSF support for up to 100 NASCRE participants will provide a vehicle to
increase attendance of young investigators including people from
underrepresented groups, and continue the CRE mission. To further increase
impact, NASCRE 3 will disseminate information through its web site and a
dedicated IECR issue of accepted papers and plenary perspectives.