* 1332034
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Corporate Board Interlocks: Information, Status, and Institutional Context
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Steve McDonald, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2014
* USD 4,312.00

SES-1332034&lt;br/&gt;Steve McDonald&lt;br/&gt;Richard Benton&lt;br/&gt;North
Carolina State University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will study how
corporate governance is structurally and institutionally embedded, focusing on
the network of board interlocks, inter-organizational ties that form when a
corporate director or CEO sits on the board of another firm. The investigators
will analyze how corporate governance and board interlocks co-evolve.
Specifically, they will study the mutual occurrence of four mechanisms that
operate in the coevolution of director interlocks and corporate governance.
These mechanisms are diffusion, selection, endogenous network mechanisms, and
institutional change. The major research questions are: How do director
interlocks spread governance conceptions between firms? and How do existing
governance conceptions influence the selection of new directors? Examining each
of these mechanisms in concert will provide a holistic picture of corporate
governance and board interlocks. Moreover, the study will contribute
considerable theoretical insights into issues of organizational change, the
effects of legal environments, and micro-macro level interactions. The analysis
will use network panel data on board ties and governance provisions for six time
points between 1998 and 2006 and recently developed stochastic actor based
models.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research
findings will advance theory and research on corporate governance and interlock
networks across firms. The findings will be of interest to scholars and policy
makers working on issues related to shareholder value and corporate governance.
By specifying the mechanisms and conditions under which firms allocate internal
power, the research could potentially help policy-makers better design
interventions that promote transparency and accountability in corporate
governance. Further, the study offers the first application of panel-based
network analytic techniques (via stochastic actor-oriented modeling) to the
study of dynamic interlocking corporate directorships. The data are gathered
from public sources and the analysis will be made available to the scholarly and
applied research through an online repository. The investigators will issue a
press-release upon research completion through the University news services
office.