* 1332771
* The Incoherent Scatter Radar (ISR) Summer School
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2013,04/30/2020
* Elizabeth Kendall, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Robert C. Moore
* 04/30/2020
* USD 879,881.00

This award will support an annual summer school to educate undergraduate and
graduate students on the theory and practice of incoherent scatter radars (ISR).
The National Science Foundation supports six ISR facilities worldwide. A
community of highly trained scientists operates and uses the data from these
radars; however, there is no clear path for graduate students to become a part
of this community. While a handful of schools provide training in ISR studies,
most interested students need to cobble together an educational path for
themselves or pursue the program through a postdoctoral position. Starting in
2008, incoherent scatter radar schools have been held to provide an intense
hands-on program that involves a radar experiment and lectures from experts in
the field. Over the past five years, the program has proven highly successful
and is always fully subscribed with both US and international students. Some
schools have been held outside the country, and international collaborations on
lectures and experiments have been developed. Many students trained in these
schools have continued in the field and become a part of the ISR community. The
collaborators on this award represent a core team of lecturers who have
developed a successful agenda of courses aimed at imparting the core principles
of ISR theory and experimentation during the course of one week. Five locations
have been selected for future schools, based on proximity to radar communities:
Haystack Observatory (Westford, Massachusetts), Arecibo Observatory (Puerto
Rico), CONICET (Buenos Aires, Argentina), Geophysical Institute (Fairbanks,
Alaska), and SRI International (Menlo Park, California). At each of these
locations, students will have hands-on interactions with ISR technology, and
will become familiar with a radar facility. The core goal of the ISR summer
school is to encourage new participants into the field. Students who attended
the summer school in the past have, in fact, continued on to propose their own
ISR experiments, and have become active in the field. The awardees will
systematically track the educational and professional trajectories of students
who attend the summer school and send out yearly surveys to school alumni to
learn their current relationship to ISR research and activity in the community.
They will also encourage select alumni to return to the school to act as mentors
and student liaisons. Another important aspect of the summer schools is the
mentoring relationships that are developed between established scientists in the
field and interested students. Well after the program has ended, these
relationships become a resource as students further their studies and enter the
workforce. Students also form relationships with their peers, who provide
support as they return to their individual institutions. In addition to the
network established in the United States, the summer school has a strong history
of international collaboration. The school has also been conducted jointly with
the EISCAT summer school, where many European students and professors were in
attendance. The two schools plan to merge again every three years.