* 1332939
* International Symposium:   Reconciling Observations and Models of Elastic and Viscoelastic Deformation due to Ice Mass Change
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Jeffrey Freymueller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2015
* USD 28,530.00

The PI requests funds for travel support for US based scientists, mostly
graduate students, postdocs, and junior falculties to attend the International
Symposium: Reconciling Observations and Models of Elastic and Viscoelastic
Deformation due to Ice Mass Change, to be held in Ilulissat, Greenland
(Denmark). This conference will provide an opportunity for US-based scientists
to interact with colleagues from around the world to develop Glacial Isostatic
Adjustment (GIA) models. Determining the mass balance trend and fluctuations of
the Earth's cryosphere in a warming climate is a topic of great interest in the
Earth and environmental sciences communities. Present day measurements of
changes in the cryosphere do not uniquely constrain the present-day mass
balance, because of the long-lasting effects of past mass changes - GIA. GIA is
caused by the combined elastic and viscoelastic responses of rock beneath
glaciers and ice sheets. Developing these GIA models requires accounting for the
mass load history and the physical properties of the earth, integrating
glaciology, geodesy and seismology through numerical modeling over a variety of
timescales, from the elastic response to the viscoelastic response over decades
to centuries to millennia. Results from theses studies are needed for
understanding postseismic deformation after earthquakes and reconciling the
response of the cryosphere and sea level to climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will support the participation of US-based
scientists, especially early career scientists, in a focused international
conference. They will have the opportunity to present their work and interact
with global experts in their related fields. They will also gain first hand
experience of glaciation during a field trip to Jakobshavn Isbrae, one of the
fastest moving glaciers in the world. The topic of the conference is important
for a wide range of fields, such as deriving estimates of the present-day
response of the cryosphere to climate change, and developing a proper budget for
sea level rise and other impacts of a changing climate.