* 1332574
* Viscoelastic and Viscoplastic Behavior of Thin Metal Films for MEMS
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Richard Vinci, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 415,108.00

This research is about the basic mechanisms that underlie a problem that often
exists with the metals in micro-electromechanical devices used for applications
like cell phones. Although the behavior of these tiny metal components may be
fine immediately after fabrication, over time the behavior can change and the
device may fail. In particular, the required tension that exists in certain
metallic components can gradually relax, much like a guitar string relaxes over
time. Unlike a guitar string, however, it is not possible to periodically
tighten a metallic micro-electromechanical component to regain optimum
functionality. A number of workaround solutions have been found, but the lack of
basic understanding leads to greater device complexity, greater cost, and less
capability than would otherwise be possible. The approach of this research is to
systematically explore the root cause of the undesirable behavior by altering
aspects of metal structure one at a time while holding the other aspects
constant. Gold films approximately one micrometer thick will serve as a model
system that can be modified on the surface and in the interior in order to
simulate conditions that are common to other metals used in micro-
electromechanical devices, including aluminum, copper, and platinum.

If successful, the benefits of this research will include a greatly improved
understanding of the undesirable time-dependent changes in metals used for
micro-electromechanical devices. This will guide future development of metallic
alloys and surface treatments to reduce or eliminate time-dependent changes.
Mathematical descriptions of the trends observed in this research will provide
device designers with the modeling tools needed to accelerate device development
and reduce cost while doing so. With a micro-electromechanical devices market of
approximately $12 billion US dollars in 2012, influencing even a fraction of
devices can have a significant economic effect. In particular, micro-
electromechanical devices for cell phones, small displays, and automotive radars
will benefit. Concepts related to micro-electromechanical devices and the
methods used in this research will be shared with children in grades K-12
through an annual outreach event, stimulating their interest in science and
engineering.