* 1332008
* Investigating Submarine Basaltic Balloon Eruptions: Going to the Source
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Steven Carey, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 25,595.00

The majority of volcanic activity on Earth occurs beneath the sea yet the
mechanisms of submarine eruptions remain poorly understood due to the lack of
direct observations of the events and their products. One of the most peculiar
and rarely observed submarine eruption styles is the production of giant gas-
filled floating lava bombs from relatively shallow water eruptions of basaltic
magma. These eruptions can pose hazards to ships at sea and to island and
coastal communities due to the explosive release of gas and the high temperature
of the magma. This research investigates shallow submarine volcanic eruptions
that produce large floating scoria blocks, also known as lava balloons. The 1891
submarine eruption of Foerstner volcano off the northwest coast of Pantelleria
island in the Mediterranean Sea will serve as a type example of this style of
activity. High-resolution bathymetric mapping and video recording of the
seafloor vent site and samples of rocks and volcanic sediments will be used in
the analysis and are already in-hand from a previous oceanographic expedition.
The mapping and video data will be used to create the first high-resolution
geologic map of the vent area associated with this style of submarine volcanism.
A major goal of the work will be to inform models of submarine explosive
eruptions, which, at present, are immature compared to those for subaerial
eruptions due to the lack of direct seafloor observations and paucity of studies
on submarine deposits. Another objectiveis to address the fundamental problem of
eruptive mechanisms via direct examination of the nature and morphology of the
seafloor deposits left by the explosive Foerstner eruption. Major and trace
element geochemical analyses of lava and volcaniclastic samples from the
eruption will be carried out on bulk rock samples using XRF. The composition of
associated quenched volcanic glass will be analyzed via electron microprobe.
Data will be used to characterize the geochemical nature of the magma erupted
and assess its volatile content and implications for eruptive mechanisms. Magma
compositions at the vent site will be compared with samples of other submarine
volcanic cones in the area to evaluate whether compositions can be used to
fingerprint individual vents. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR)
will be used to examine the composition of melt inclusions trapped in olivine
and clinopyroxene crystals in order to determine pre-eruption magma gas (H2O and
CO2) content and evaluate its role in driving the explosive nature of the
eruption. The research will examine whether pre-concentration of volcanic gases
in sub-seafloor conduits results in the build up of gas to levels that allow
magma to inflate to the extent that it buoyantly rises to the sea surface. This
research on the mechanisms of shallow water submarine explosive volcanism will
allow for better assessment of its impacts on marine ecological disruptions and
the acidification of local seawater. Broader impacts include undergraduate and
graduate student support and development of educational modules used into
university courses taught by the investigator, as well as support of an
institution from an EPSCoR state.