* 1332404
* EFRI-PSBR: Integrated design of cyanobacterial biorefineries
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Kenneth Reardon, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2018
* USD 2,260,711.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Several novel systems approaches and an alternative target biofuel
are brought to bear in this project to develop sustainable processes for the
production of fuels and chemicals by cyanobacteria. The project has been awarded
to a multidisciplinary team, consisting of Professors Kenneth F. Reardon, David
S. Dandy, Thomas H. Bradley, Christie A.M. Peebles, and Graham Peers, all of
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO. To address the goals of increasing
commodity yields and increasing the sustainability of photosynthetic microbe-
derived fuels, the research team will synthesize knowledge and approaches from
fluid dynamics, photosynthetic physiology, proteomics, metabolic engineering,
and life cycle analysis methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a novel approach to
engineer photosynthetic efficiency, the team will model the environment of
different photobioreactors and use these models to design accurate scale-down
systems for laboratory cultivations, opposite to the usual practice. This will
allow them to identify and target industrially relevant biology at a small scale
and make accurate predictions for large-scale systems. Next, the team will
quantify energy losses and stresses associated with photosynthesis, and target
these for genetic improvements. This genetic research will be coupled to the
metabolic engineering of cyanobacteria to shuttle carbon to a novel
sesquiterpene fuel molecule, bisabolene, which offers promise as an alternative
biodiesel which does not require transesterification processing, necessary in
the current biodiesel production from vegetable oils. To separate the
cyanobacterial cells from their cultivation liquid in an energy-efficient
manner, the team will develop a novel inertial migration-based cell
concentration mechanism. All of these studies on system performance will be
guided by feedback from new life cycle analysis methods developed by modeling
the productivity of large-scale reactors using the scale-up relationships
developed in this project. The Colorado State team predicts this integrated
approach to solving the major issues associated with photosynthetic microbe-
based fuels will result in a rapid increase in the accuracy and speed with which
the productivity of the system can be manipulated; greater yields of target
molecules in industrial deployment; large, quantified increases in the overall
sustainability of the process; and transferrable approaches toward the
cultivation of photosynthetic microbes and the production of other biofuels or
biochemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work, which encompasses understanding of photobioreactor process
dynamics, physiological responses of cyanobacteria to photobioreactor
conditions, engineering of cyanobacteria to produce biofuels and biochemicals,
and life cycle analysis, will lead to photosynthetic production of advanced
biofuels and biochemicals with the potential to be environmentally sustainable.
The engineered strains will serve as a platform for future research on biofuel
upgrading strategies and on biochemical production strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide interdisciplinary training for
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral scholars, with
significant efforts being made to include members of underrepresented groups.
Students will gain broad experience in modeling, metabolic engineering, systems
biology, microbial cell cultivation of photosynthetic organisms and life cycle
analysis, placing the students at the forefront of research in biofuel
production from photosynthetic organisms. The project includes opportunities for
mentoring of K-12 students in research, as well as teacher training. The results
of this project will be disseminated in leading peer-reviewed journals, national
meetings, in new courses, and via an interactive website.