* 1332212
* Targeted Infusion Project: An Innovative Approach to Improving Undergraduate Student Performance in Computer Science at Howard University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Legand Burge, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2017
* USD 448,594.00

The Targeted Infusion Project at Howard University will address the challenge of
increasing the number of African-American undergraduates in computer science by
establishing a multi-layered program that includes a partnership with Google,
Inc. The project includes: a virtual pre-college program for incoming freshmen;
a revised and restructured Computer Science course curriculum that includes
culturally-relevant content; Googler co-instructors and guest speakers for
introductory Computer Science courses; a mentoring program pairing freshmen with
Googlers; a Computer Science boot-camp for peer-led tutoring targeting
introductory Computer Science courses; faculty professional development; and
undergraduate research opportunities in Computer Science. Project activities
will provide student participants with a better understanding of Computer
Science and the broad opportunities available within the field. Students will
establish support systems that include industry mentors, department faculty, and
peers to help them not only persist, but succeed in Computer Science. The
enhanced curriculum will also help students develop critical thinking skills,
including problem solving, algorithm development, and higher-level
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will increase the participation
of underrepresented minorities in Computer Science and enhance the educational
infrastructure at Howard University. Additionally, the project will directly
impact fifteen pre-service teachers and enhance the preparation of future K-12
teachers. The project can serve as a model for Computer Science departments,
particularly those at other Historically Black Colleges and Universities that
share similar challenges with student enrollment, engagement, and retention.
Findings will be broadly disseminated increasing Computer Science literacy.