* 1332520
* Implementation Project: Student-Centered Active Learning and Assessment Reform (SCALAR)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Charles Weatherford, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,849,249.00

The Implementation Project entitled: Student-Centered Active Learning and
Assessment Reform (SCALAR) at Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU) will implement a
series of innovative curricular and co-curricular initiatives that will
ultimately position the university as a national leader in STEM education. The
project involves a complete restructuring of the undergraduate course curricula
and instructional approaches in the areas of mathematics, chemistry, physics,
biology, and computer science. All of the program areas are housed in a newly
created College of Science and Technology, which will facilitate the seamless
and focused implementation of the project activities. Specific program
components include: the redesign of course curricula to include a specific
instructional focus on using active learning strategies to teach STEM concepts;
a comprehensive assessment strategy that will be integrated into the course
design and will be continuously used to modify the instructional strategy in
order to optimize student learning; the creation of a faculty development
program to increase faculty use of pedagogical best practices; the development
of an online seminar series, which will be presented by leading scientists from
institutions across the country; and the development of a centralized STEM
tutorial center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 5000 undergraduate students at FAMU,
where the enrollment is approximately 90% African-American, will be impacted by
this project. The broader impact will result from documentation of how a
student-centered learning environment that is integrated into the STEM
curriculum will be created, and from the wide dissemination of the
documentation. The FAMU SCALAR project will thus serve as a model for the
sustainable transformation of the undergraduate STEM curriculum to incorporate
evidence-based best-practices in STEM education.