* 1332491
* Targeted Infusion Project: Development of an Undergrad Bioinformatics and Biomathematics Track at Fisk University to Enhance Undergrad STEM Education, Research, and Future Careers
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Sanjukta Hota, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2017
* USD 399,928.00

To enhance and expand undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) interdisciplinary education and research, Fisk University is
designing three new undergraduate courses ? Biomathematics I and II and
Bioinformatics ? to offer its students over the next three years. The infusion
of focused funding from the National Science Foundation's Historically Black
Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) for these new courses
creates a new interface between existing STEM courses in mathematics, biology
and computer science. &lt;br/&gt;To meet the calculus need of biology students,
the biomathematics courses focus on topics that have immediate relevance to
understanding biological phenomena and introduce students to hands-on modeling
of biological phenomena using relevant mathematical theory. Similarly, the
bioinformatics course introduces students to hands-on computer science and
information technologies essential for contemporary biology disciplines.
Students will engage in faculty mentored summer research and professional
development activities addressing unsolved research questions directly related
to the topics covered in the three courses.&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a
strong interdisciplinary research base at Fisk University and brings a new
awareness for quantitative research in biological sciences. The activities are
expected to increase student interest in STEM-related fields, attract and
increase retention at the undergraduate level and student progression in STEM
disciplines to graduate studies, and serve as a possible replicable model for
other institutions.