* 1332501
* Effects of Liquefaction on Structures in Christchurch
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jonathan Bray, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,883.00

Conventional liquefaction evaluation procedures cannot explain the different
levels of liquefaction-induced building damage that occurred in Christchurch,
New Zealand during the 2010-2011 Canterbury earthquake sequence. Each event with
its different effects on structures warrants further study. Performance based
earthquake engineering requires robust analytical tools that can discern varying
levels of seismic performance. The 2010-2011 Canterbury earthquake sequence,
with its excellent recordings of ground motions, its comprehensive subsurface
investigation program, and its well-documented performance of structures in
Christchurch, provides an exceptional opportunity to advance liquefaction
evaluation tools. With the limitations inherent in investigating liquefaction
effects solely in the laboratory or through numerical simulations, there is a
pressing need to use these well-documented case histories to gain insights and
to develop improved analytical procedures. The quantity and quality of the
ground characterization and ground failure data in Christchurch are
unparalleled. Thus, they provide a unique opportunity for advancing knowledge
and practice in liquefaction engineering. Sampling and advanced cyclic testing
of the troublesome silty sands in Christchurch is performed to characterize
their cyclic resistance. This work enables comprehensive documentation of
insightful case histories of building performance at sites undergoing different
levels of liquefaction-induced ground failure. Fully nonlinear effective stress
back-analyses of the case histories evaluate the importance of soil-structure
interaction effects for buildings at liquefaction sites. Additionally, a
liquefaction outreach website will bring liquefaction into the classrooms.

Learning from design level earthquakes is invaluable to advancing the earthquake
profession. Liquefaction effects research is vitally important in the U.S. where
the occurrence of the massive liquefaction that occurred in Christchurch could
literally destroy a city. The similarity of the Christchurch liquefaction
hazards and infrastructure with those in the U.S. means that the research
findings will be directly transferable to U.S. cities of comparable size, as
well as scalable to larger urban centers. The 2010-2011 Canterbury earthquake
sequence provides the opportunity for an integrated study of blocks of buildings
at a degree of detail and level of complexity that could not be performed in the
U.S. due to security restrictions. Importantly, the research focuses on the
effects of liquefaction on structures as opposed to the phenomenon itself, thus
advancing the state-of-the-practice in liquefaction engineering. The project
supports continued international collaborations between New Zealand and U.S.
earthquake researchers and allows a U.S. Ph.D. student to establish research
contacts in New Zealand.