* 1332836
* Equilibrium and Dynamics of Polymer-Grafted Nanoparticles at Fluid Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 336,568.00

1332836&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tilton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A polymer brush is a
descriptively named monolayer of polymer chains, each of which is anchored by
one end to a surface, while the rest of the chain stretches away from the
surface into a solvent. Prior NSF-supported research by this group developed
polymer brush-decorated nanoparticles that were extremely efficient stabilizers
of oil-in-water or water-in-oil emulsions. These nanoparticle brushes stabilized
emulsions for several months to well over a year without emulsion droplet
coalescence or macroscopic oil and water phase separation. Most importantly,
they did so while only requiring nanoparticle concentrations that were two
orders of magnitude lower than are generally required for conventional particles
used to stabilize emulsions. The goal of the proposed research is to determine
the fundamental interfacial phenomena responsible for the unique emulsifying
efficiency of nanoparticle brushes. Current understanding of particle-stabilized
Pickering emulsions mainly concerns the origins of long-term stability, but it
cannot yet explain why particles with different physico-chemical properties
produce emulsions with quite similar long-term stability yet display vastly
different emulsifying efficiencies, that is, why they require vastly different
concentrations to produce a stable emulsion in the first place. This requires
fundamental investigation of the interfacial properties of the nanoparticles
when they adsorb to the oil/water interface. The main hypothesis guiding this
research is that those nanoparticle brushes that produce the strongest
interfacial tension reduction and interfacial elasticity at the lowest surface
concentration will be the most efficient emulsifiers. A series of nanoparticle
brushes with well-defined compositions and architectures will be synthesized by
controlled radical polymerization. For each nanoparticle brush, the surface
equation of state (the relationship between interfacial tension and the adsorbed
particle surface concentration), interfacial dilatational elasticity, and
diffusional dynamics will be measured at the oil/water interface and correlated
with emulsifying efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle brushes are a
new class of surface active material. Typically, such materials are designed to
manipulate the interface between incompatible materials to make them more
compatible. For example, they mix oil and water in emulsions that deliver active
ingredients in pharmaceuticals or personal care products. This research is
transformative for its focus on the fundamental reasons why nanoparticle brushes
are extremely efficient emulsifiers and for the broader fundamental
understanding it will provide for how chemical structure controls the
interfacial behavior of this new class of surface active materials. This
knowledge will enable high stability emulsion products with ultra-low emulsifier
concentrations. Besides the benefit of efficient raw materials usage, this also
promises new products that are infeasible without emulsifiers that are both
highly effective and highly efficient. One possibility is a clean-burning diesel
fuel emulsion that meets stringent stability requirements without excessive
additives. Broader impact for technology workforce development is delivered by
the interdisciplinary research education of Chemical Engineering and Chemistry
Ph.D. and undergraduate students. Pittsburgh middle school students from under-
represented groups will be mentored in closely-related, discovery-based science
projects that teach students how they can use scientific understanding to make
predictions ? in this case concerning interfacial tension reduction and
emulsification performance of different kinds of materials. Seminar visits with
high school chemistry students will introduce the full spectrum of chemistry-
related careers to encourage retention in the STEM pathway as they transition to
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This reasearch is jointly funded by the
Particulate and Multiphase Processes and Interfacial Processes and
Thermodynamics Programs in the CBET (Chemical, Biological, Environmental and
Transport) division in Engineering.