* 1332915
* Collaborative research:  RUI-Ecology and functional biology of octocoral communities
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2017
* USD 661,063.00

The recent past has not been good for coral reefs, and journals have been filled
with examples of declining coral cover, crashing fish populations, rising cover
of macroalgae, and a future potentially filled with slime. However, reefs are
more than the corals and fishes for which they are known best, and their
biodiversity is affected strongly by other groups of organisms. The non-coral
fauna of reefs is being neglected in the rush to evaluate the loss of corals and
fishes, and this project will add on to an on-going long term ecological study
by studying soft corals. This project will be focused on the ecology of soft
corals on reefs in St. John, USVI to understand the Past, Present and the Future
community structure of soft corals in a changing world. For the Past, the
principal investigators will complete a retrospective analysis of octocoral
abundance in St. John between 1992 and the present, as well as Caribbean-wide
since the 1960's. For the Present, they will: (i) evaluate spatio-temporal
changes between soft corals and corals, (ii) test for the role of competition
with macroalgae and between soft corals and corals as processes driving the
rising abundance of soft corals, and (iii) explore the role of soft corals as
"animal forests" in modifying physical conditions beneath their canopy, thereby
modulating recruitment dynamics. For the Future the project will conduct
demographic analyses on key soft corals to evaluate annual variation in
population processes and project populations into a future impacted by global
climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will
be at multiple educational levels. At the university level, the project will
have impacts on the quality of the academic environment at an RUI institution
(CSUN) and a leading PhD-awarding institution (University of Buffalo).
Additionally, it will provide unique opportunities for training and research by
graduate students, as well as opportunities for undergraduate participation in
fieldwork through existing funding and REU supplements. The PIs will build on an
existing relationship with a high school in St. John, USVI since 2006. We will
host: (1) marine biology club activities at the school through participation of
faculty, a postdoctoral research associate and graduate students, (2) laboratory
opportunities focused on the biology of soft corals, (3) field opportunities for
teachers from the US to work in St. John, and (4) with the support of parents
and CSUN, will offer a St. John field trip for select students from local
schools. The reach of these opportunities will be broadened through new
collaborations with two teachers based in the public schools of LA County.
Finally, in the Caribbean established "ecocamps" at the host marine laboratory
will be used to work with children from Caribbean islands to provide educational
experiences focused on ecology and conservation.