* 1332092
* STTR Phase I:  Performance Optimization Toolbox for Wave Energy Conversion Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Mirko Previsic, Re Vision Consulting, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2014
* USD 255,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project is titled ?Performance
Optimization Toolbox for Wave Energy Conversion Devices?. Advanced wave
prediction and concurrent online adjustment of the operating parameters (such as
hydraulic system pressure and generator load) of existing wave energy conversion
(WEC) devices have the potential to increase their power extraction efficiency
by at least 200% over presently used approaches. However, application of such
advanced control-theories have not been implemented by industry Todate. This is
largely due to two major issues: (1) the difficulty of predicting the waves
encountered by a WEC system 20-40 seconds in advance, which is required to
effectively implement online tuning strategies, and (2) the challenges
associated with optimizing the control system, given various nonlinear system
behaviors and constraints. The research objectives of this project are to
resolve the key issues in this multi-disciplinary problem and develop a toolbox
that allows WEC device developers to optimize their device performance and
therefore enable transformative improvements in WEC device performance and their
economic viability. During phase I, a software suite will be developed and
tested, leveraging advanced simulation, estimation, and control tools, which
will enable remarkable performance improvements for existing WEC devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be to enable an effective cost-reduction pathway for wave energy. According
to a recent study released by the US Department of Energy, wave power could
provide up to 630TWh/year in the US alone, which corresponds to 15% of the US
electrical demand in 2011. At the current market rate of 8 cents/kWh, this
represents a market opportunity of $50 billion per year and would add more than
150,000 jobs to the US economy. Unfortunately, current WEC methods need to
attain a significant level of cost reduction and/or performance improvement to
compete with other power generation methods. Advanced controls and rapid tuning
will enable a cost-reduction pathway that will allow wave energy to become
competitive with other power generation methods. The ability to accurately
predict wave fields (and, in certain cases, to use advanced control theory to
take corrective actions to minimize loads and improve performance and/or
operational safety) has numerous applications in other areas, including tsunami
prediction, maritime operations, and offshore oil &amp; gas. Though these
applications will not be explored in the present effort, the foundation laid
with the present research could easily be extended to these related fields.