* 1332926
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Military Wives and the Commercialization of Surrogacy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Iddo Tavory, The New School
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 4,529.00

SES-1332926 Iddo Tavory Elizabeth Ziff New School University

In the United States, the practice of gestational surrogacy has grown
exponentially. Military wives are disproportionately represented in the rising
numbers of surrogate women. This dissertation will investigate the experiences
of U.S. military wives who have been, or are currently gestational surrogates
and will examine how these women came to be surrogates, what their experiences
were and how being a "military wife" informs this choice. Analysis of this group
will result in an enriched and focused account of the motivations for women to
become surrogates, how the surrogate identity is constructed and performed, and
the lasting effects of the practice on these women and their families. In
addition, potential intersections of class, race, military life, family and
national discourse will also be explored in this project. Data will be collected
through individual, semi-structured interviews with military wives who have been
through the surrogate experience and will be analyzed for trends specific to the
sample. Findings will also be compared to other studies on surrogates to
identify what similarities military wives exhibit and how, if any way, the
surrogate experience is specifically structured by their role as a military
spouse. Preliminary research indicates the existence of a strong elective
affinity between military culture and surrogacy based on a shared imperative to
serve the needs of others, which may lead to distinct differences between this
group of surrogates and others. This project is intended to contribute to the
existing body of work on surrogacy by producing a clearer portrait of the
surrogate and demystifying an under-developed and, at times, distorted cultural
view of these women. Broader Impacts There has been a significant cultural shift
with regard to reproduction due to the ever-increasing options available to
couples and individuals. As surrogacy has become commercialized there has been a
significant increase in the numbers of babies born via this practice and it is
imperative that we as researchers and a society better understand the experience
of physically producing someone else?s child. This research will not only impact
specific academic circles in sociology, anthropology, cultural studies, and
others, but will also be informative for participants in the surrogate market,
potential surrogates and intended parents who are seeking information on this
role, the children who are born to surrogates and the public in general. Aside
from etching a portrait of the surrogate, this work will give voice specifically
to military spouses and will methodologically investigate my proposed connection
between military wives and surrogacy. This work will address the altogether
broader tangent of how social conceptions of kinship, motherhood and the body
are affected by surrogacy.