* 1332185
* STTR Phase I:  Engineering Polysaccharide Monooxygenases for Enhanced Sugar Recovery From Biomass
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Barry Olafson, Protabit LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to apply
computational protein design (CPD) to engineer polysaccharide monooxygenases
(PMOs) for improved thermostability, so that a cocktail of PMOs and key
cellulases will more efficiently convert lignocellulolosic biomass to
fermentable sugars. The objectives of Phase I are to: (a) evaluate several
natural PMOs for expression, thermostability, PMO activity, and ability to
enhance the cellulolytic activity of a cellulase cocktail, and then select one
or more as targets for engineering; (b) use CPD to design the PMOs for improved
thermostability; (c) experimentally screen libraries of designed PMO variants;
and (d) improve the properties of best hits with additional rounds of
engineering. The work proposed here will help elucidate the role PMOs play in
cellulolytic degradation in the context of other cellulases. This project may
further our knowledge of the substrate specificities of these enzymes. Any novel
crystal structures that may be solved could also enhance our understanding of
the structural differences and substrate specificities within this family of
enzymes and may serve to elucidate structure-function relationships. The
anticipated technical result is one or more PMO variants that have increased
thermostability of 5-10°C relative to the wild-type PMO.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project,
if successful, will be to: (a) reduce the costs of converting biomass into
simple sugars, which are a principal raw material for the production of
renewable fuels and chemicals, (b) encourage the broader use of enzymatic
hydrolysis, a sustainable and environmentally-friendly process, and (c)
demonstrate the utility of our protein engineering platform. By facilitating the
bio-based production of ethanol, advanced drop-in biofuels, and substitutes for
other petroleum-derived materials, this research can help reduce U.S. dependence
on foreign oil, reduce our carbon footprint, and spur domestic manufacturing,
investment, and job creation. In addition, sourcing sugars from cellulose can
curb the food-versus-fuel debate by encouraging the farming of dedicated
feedstock crops capable of growing on marginal lands unsuitable for food
production. CPD-based protein engineering methods can significantly reduce the
costs of biological research by shifting a significant amount of experimental
screening effort to the software platform. The designed libraries output by CPD
are typically enriched in functional variants, accelerating the delivery of
functional end-products. Furthermore, CPD-based protein stabilization methods
enable new products and technologies in myriad areas, including industrial
enzymes and therapeutics. This project will accelerate U.S. progress toward
economic, energy, and environmental sustainability.