* 1332130
* STTR Phase I:  Reducing Mining Waste and Energy Using a Spectral Imaging Tracking System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Donald Kraemer, SPLIT ENGINEERING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will involve the
development of an innovative spectral image system to track rock material flows
through mining operations. Accurately tracking material flows will allow smarter
mineral processing circuits and optimized blasting, significantly reducing waste
and energy. This addresses two of the central environmental impacts associated
with mining: the size of the environmental footprint, and the large amount of
energy used. The tracking system will be based on spectral imaging of the ore at
various locations, such as after blasting, during the various stages of crushing
and grinding, and before and after stockpiles and bins. The system will
continuously track ore type at these locations, based on the unique spectral
signature of different ore types in a mine. Accurate material tracking will be
accomplished by integrating push-broom hyperspectral imaging with particle
delineation algorithms, and by developing a tracking algorithm that tracks both
rock type and material volumes. The Phase I work will involve spectral
laboratory testing in simulated mining environments using mine rock samples, the
development of algorithms to process the integrated spectral/particle
delineation data, the development of a tracking algorithm, and the determination
of optimal hardware and software for a prototype system.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be a reduction in
the environmental impact of mineral operations and a reduction in energy
consumption, via solutions applied during processing. The proposed technology
presents new opportunities to improve mineral processing to customize the
techniques to each specific rock type encountered. The tracking mechanisms for
material types will enable operators to adjust settings for the ore type to
effectively maximize the recovery while reducing unproductive activities. As a
result, requirements for energy, materials, and solutions will be reduced
throughout the process. The significant benefit achieved will be an overall
reduced physical footprint of mining operations. This technology will also
promote further investment into existing operations as opposed to the creation
of new green-field projects. The new information and data provided by this
system will allow more insight on the physical, mechanical and chemical
properties that affect mineral extraction. This effort will in turn drive
additional research by universities which will further understanding of the
process and the advancement of the technology. Finally, the advancement of
hyperspectral imaging technologies will cross-over to other applications and
industries that will further research and investigation.