* 1332030
* STTR Phase I:  Predictive Control Systems for Nickel Zinc Flow Assisted Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Sanjoy Banerjee, Urban Electric Power Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2014
* USD 224,901.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project aims to
improve predictive battery models and control systems for grid-scale energy
storage applications. A typical grid-scale battery system is composed of
thousands of individual batteries that may have initial material and
manufacturing variations that tend to increase over time and reduce overall
string efficiency, with the result that energy storage installations must be
significantly over-specified, making them too expensive for many customers.
There is a great opportunity to develop an integrated predictive battery
modeling and control system that can determine the exact performance of each
battery in operation and optimize string function. The research objectives of
this SBIR project are to develop Neural Network (NN) based predictive models of
battery performance using information gathered early in the life of each cell
like Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy measurements in addition to current,
voltage, and temperature measurements that can be taken throughout the life of
the battery, in order to accurately estimate the state of charge and state of
health of each battery in the battery string. The NN models will be incorporated
into the control strategy to operate the battery string safely but aggressively,
thereby decreasing the total system cost and required
volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to enable grid-scale energy storage by reducing system costs. The
main barrier to the adoption of energy storage on the grid is its high cost.
Recent advancements in energy storage technology have resulted in lower cost,
longer-life batteries capable of meeting grid requirements, though there have
not been the analogous transformative improvements to battery management systems
to optimize system efficiency and cost-effectiveness. The innovations supported
by this SBIR will enhance scientific and technical understanding of battery
function and failure modes, resulting in improved battery performance and
lifetimes. The addition of energy storage to the grid will have an enormous
societal impact, as storage is required to firm zero-carbon renewable sources
such as wind and solar and can reduce energy prices by time-shifting energy
loads. While the market for these types of stationary battery systems is
currently less than $5 billion, this sector is expected to surge to
approximately $100 billion in the next ten years. The dominant battery
management system technology for these systems has not yet been established.
Commercial advanced battery controls are the key to unlocking this market and
represent the next step toward a lower carbon, more sustainable energy future.