* 1332531
* Targeted Infusion Project: Use of Mobile Application to Improve Active Learning and Student Participation in the Computer Science Classroom
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Muztaba Fuad, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 276,731.00

The Targeted Infusion project at Winston Salem State University develops a
mobile classroom response system (MRS) to help students address interactive
problems while improving class engagement and enhancing problem solving skills.
The project includes four distinct activities: the development of mobile
classroom response system software; the development of interactive problem
solving course modules and corresponding rubrics that utilize the MRS software;
the deployment of the software and course modules in targeted Computer Science
classes at Winston Salem State University; and the assessment and documentation
of progress. The purpose of the MRS software is to provide a responsive
environment where students can solve problems in an interactive way and
communicate solutions with the instructor, allowing the instructor to respond
providing feedback and student performance data. The MRS software and
corresponding course modules will be deployed in sophomore and junior level
courses which are required for both Computer Science and Information Technology
majors. A comprehensive evaluation framework will be utilized for assessment and
evidence-based continuous improvement across the duration of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will significantly impact student engagement
in the classroom and enhance their problem solving abilities. It will also
invigorate interest in the field of computer science among African American
undergraduate students through exposure to a technology-rich learning
environment, and it will prepare them for graduate school or the workforce. The
instructional software system, course modules and study results will be
disseminated through websites, publications and presentations, enabling other
institutions to effectively incorporate them in their undergraduate computer
science curriculum. Undergraduate student researchers working with this project
will gain experience in software development in mobile platforms. The project
will also enrich teaching strategies by including a diverse set of active
learning components.