* 1332477
* Targeted Infusion Project: Developing A Minor in Geoscience Application at Kentucky State University
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2014,06/30/2019
* Chi Shen, Kentucky State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2019
* USD 399,992.00

Kentucky State University (KSU)'s Historically Black Colleges and Universities-
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) Targeted Infusion project supports science,
technology, engineering and technology (STEM) interventions in support of a
minor degree program in Geoscience. This STEM education project aims to increase
the number of students from underrepresented minority groups by strengthening
STEM skills at the precollege and undergraduate levels in this discipline. The
project's objectives are to: (1) develop curricula for a minor at the
undergraduate level; (2) develop a Summer Bridge Program for college preparation
and STEM education; and (3) enhance geoscience teaching, learning, and research
pedagogy and infrastructure using cyber-learning resources and techniques. Major
activities include development of a sequence of geoscience courses; design of
effective recruitment tools and geoscience career awareness materials;
development of research projects for undergraduate and high school students to
strengthen curricula, teaching capability, laboratory, cyber-learning-based
teaching, learning, and research. Faculty development activities include
engagement in integrating research, technology, and innovative pedagogy in
curricula with an emphasis on learning science through many multidisciplinary
activities via cyber technology- and visualization-based participatory learning
modules.

Expected outcomes of this three-year project include the availability of a
sequence of three new courses for students who intend to minor in geosciences;
an enhanced Geospatial Laboratory with a spatial database, software, and other
innovative and cyber-teaching and research resources; increased networks with
high schools, state and federal agencies and other universities for recruitment
and teaching; increased cross-program coordination at KSU for recruitment,
management of minor and caption research projects; and effective advising and
timely graduation of students. Annual assessment and evaluation of project
activities and impacts will be evaluated every year.

The overall impacts of the project enhance quality teaching, innovative
curricula and research, and increased production of competitive underrepresented
students in the STEM disciplines.

Over the 36-month duration of the project, more than 100 students will be
impacted by the project's implementation. Dissemination efforts will address
successful practices in attracting, recruiting and retaining underrepresented
minority students in geoscience and environmental science fields at minority-
serving institutions.