* 1332718
* Semidiurnal Perturbations to Storm Surges on the U.S. Eastern Seaboard
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Arnoldo Valle-Levinson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 403,326.00

Semidiurnal perturbations modified the non-tidal surges of hurricanes Sandy
(2012) and Irene (2011) which affected the entire U.S. eastern seaboard. In the
South Atlantic Bight, the amplitude of the perturbations reached up to 50-60% of
the total surge amplitude. In general, semidiurnal perturbations become evident
when predicted water levels are subtracted from observed water levels. A
response of such tide-surge interaction is to modify the timing of tidal low and
high water, which is expected to be different from nearly progressive to nearly
standing tides. This project seeks to advance understanding of the processes
that trigger semidiurnal perturbations on storm surges and that determine the
size of the perturbations. Atmospheric forcing can disturb the surge through
direct surface stress and by inducing additional bottom stress and tidal stress.
The relative contribution of each stress needs improved understanding. Specific
objectives of this investigation are to determine a) whether semidiurnal
perturbations appear under other tropical storms and under extratropical storms,
b) the relative size of the dynamic agents associated with the perturbations,
and c) the atmospheric and tidal forcing thresholds that produce them. Specific
objectives will be addressed with observations from tidal and meteorological
stations along the U.S. eastern coast, and with realistic and process-oriented
numerical simulations.

Intellectual Merit: In recent decades, coastal areas worldwide have been
affected by storms that cause severe flooding, damage to buildings, and beach
erosion. Storm-tide interactions can produce the highest storm-related levels at
times not linked to high tide but still at semidiurnal periodicities. It is
therefore necessary to understand the behavior of semidiurnal perturbations
triggered by storms in order to improve forecasts and warning systems of storm
surges. This project will try to answer several key questions: Do semidiurnal
perturbations occur in every storm that moves along the eastern US? Do
semidiurnal perturbations also occur during nor'easters? What are the dynamics
associated with these perturbations? Are there atmospheric forcing thresholds
below which these perturbations vanish? Do perturbations depend on the tidal
amplitude? Does the peak in semidiurnal perturbations develop consistently in
one phase of the tidal cycle? Clearly, there is a need to understand appropriate
conditions for triggering semidiurnal perturbations on the surge. Findings
generated from the study will help understand the causes for the appearance of
high frequency (periods smaller than the inertial period) perturbations,
semidiurnal residuals, which modify storm surges.

Broader Impacts: This project will study a phenomenon that can affect the entire
U.S. eastern seaboard. Because semidiurnal perturbations can reach amplitudes of
up to 50-60% of the total surge signal in the South Atlantic Bight, it is
imperative to include tide-surge interactions. These interactions will also
affect the timing of maximum surge, relative to high tide. Probability density
functions related to arrival of storm surges will thus be affected by
semidiurnal residuals. Better understanding of these perturbations will help to
refine storm surge predictions and risk analysis for the entire eastern U.S.
seaboard. The project will support one graduate student, one undergraduate,
through semester-long research experiences, and one high school student through
summer internships. The high school student will be recruited among minority
groups among high schools in Gainesville, Florida. Results derived from this
project will be presented to K-12 audiences and will be incorporated in classes
taught by the PIs at the University of Florida. The involvement of both PIs
enhances the participation of underrepresented groups in science.