* 1332417
* iREU: Interdisciplinary Research Experience for Undergraduates in Medicine, Energy, and Advanced Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 01/29/2013,05/31/2014
* Surya Kalidindi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Esther Bolding
* 05/31/2014
* USD 19,885.00

This three year REU Site program at Drexel University will engage 10
undergraduate students for 9 weeks in interdisciplinary research in medicine,
energy, and advanced manufacturing. The REU students will be part of a multi-
institutional team, including a graduate student and faculty mentor from Drexel,
a faculty mentor from the participant's home institution, a Drexel freshman from
the Students Tackling Advanced Research (STAR) program, and a high school
teacher in an NSF funded Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) program.
Students will also attend weekly seminars on research, education, and ethics,
present an educational module on their research to middle school students, visit
local industry and national laboratories, and attend social and cultural events.
The participants will keep photo journals of their experiences. These journals
will enhance and reinforce research and social experiences, and provide a tool
for program assessment. At the end of the summer program, participants will
present their research results at a poster presentation and will be encouraged
to submit their research at professional conferences. After the program, REU
participants will be encouraged to remain in contact with their
interdisciplinary team through a Facebook group. Travel grants will be provided
if students need to use Drexel's facilities to produce additional data that
could result in a presentation or publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment
efforts will be focused on minorities, women, and underrepresented groups, and
those who do not have access to advanced research facilities at their
educational institutions. The PIs will recruit from regional institutions such
as Delaware State University, Cheney University, Lincoln University, Swarthmore
College, West Chester University, Rowan University, Villanova University,
Widener University, Community College of Philadelphia, Burlington County College
and Camden County College. The PIs have established strong connections with
faculty at these institutions. REU students will be encouraged to pursue
graduate studies and careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This REU site is co-funded by the Department
of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program."