* 1332964
* Self-Healing Photochromic Polymeric Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Marek Urban, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2017
* USD 420,000.00

Research Objective and Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is about the
development of a new generation of polymeric materials that upon mechanical
damage undergo coloration in a damaged area, but exposure to electromagnetic
radiation, acidic vapors, and/or elevated temperatures will result in self-
repair of the damaged area and revitalization of the original color. The
objectives of the proposed research are three fold: (1) development of a new
platform of materials capable of sensing and self-healing, (2) understanding of
molecular and macroscopic processes leading to orchestrated chemical and
mechanical changes during color-induced self-repairs, and (3) property and
design optimization that will lead to rapid innovation. The approach of this
research will be to precisely synthesize and engineer a new generation of
polymeric materials with photochromic components and variable copolymer
compositions that offer these rarely obtainable advanced properties. Using a
combination of molecular and thermo-mechanical probes we will develop
fundamental understanding of processes leading to self-healing. Combining
chemical imaging, controllable damage assessment, and analysis of spatial
distribution of thermal and viscoelastic attributes of damaged and repaired
areas will allow us to fully elucidate the relationship between molecular and
macroscopic events responsible for this unique
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits to Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the benefits of this research will include many unique applications
ranging from multi-level sensing devices to "smart" coatings, and extended
lifetimes of materials' original integrity that will revolutionize societal
desires. These will include composite structures with build-in molecular
sensors, allowing early assessment and prevention of potentially catastrophic
events in airspace industries, early detection of corrosion and degradation
processes, engineering of mechano-mutable devices, and many others. We envision
that these stimuli-responsive self-repairing materials will play a vital role in
the pharmaceutical, medical, personal care, electronic, energy, and related
industries. If successful, a new technological paradigm through "green"
chemistry approaches, with minimal or no impact on the environment creating
sustainable material approaches to solve critical technological challenges, will
be established. Another benefit to the society of the proposed research will be
the development of the highly educated workforce that will tackle scientific and
technological challenges leading to the enhancement of US technological
superiority.