* 1332344
* EFRI-PSBR: Channeling Carbon Flows in Algal Productions Systems from the Molecular to Bioprocessing Scales
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2024
* Michael Betenbaugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,133,435.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;One of the most pressing grand challenges facing humanity is
sustainably supporting a human population predicted to increase to 9 billion
people by mid-century. Meeting this challenge will require the development of
new and innovative renewable production systems that not only help meet the
energy and health-product needs of the populace, but do so in a way that is
environmentally and economically sustainable. One approach to address the
problems of dwindling reserves of non-renewable fuel resources and rising levels
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is to capture concentrated carbon dioxide
(CO2) emerging from waste treatment facilities, petroleum refineries, coal and
other energy sources and convert the CO2 into useful products, including dietary
supplements, medicinals, and biofuels. Microalgae species represent a potential
renewable source of such products due to their ability to use light to fix CO2
into biomolecules. However, there are currently critical technical bottlenecks
including slow growth rates and low synthesis rates of desired products and
inefficient access to CO2 and light. These limitations will be addressed in an
award made by the National Science Foundation Office of Emerging Frontiers in
Research and Innovation, through a collaboration between engineers and
scientists Michael Betenbaugh and Royce Francis at Johns Hopkins University,
Maciek Antoniewicz at University of Delaware, Steven Miller at University of
Maryland, Baltimore County, and Bernhard Palsson at University of California,
San Diego. They intend to combine genome-scale modeling, metabolic flux
analysis, metabolic engineering, and process optimization to improve algae
cultivation and capture and convert CO2 and light into useful bioproducts,
including carotenoids and hydrocarbons similar to gasoline. Genetic and
bioprocess engineering methods will be used to improve pathways involving CO2
capture, carotenoid biosynthesis, and hydrocarbon biosynthesis. Genome-scale
models of algal physiology will be connected to bioreactor models in order to
optimize commercial-scale production processes and metabolic flux analysis will
evaluate the success of these engineering efforts. The investigative team will
use life-cycle, economic, and social impact analysis to ensure microalgae
bioprocess sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to expand the broader
impacts to maximize the educational value, investigators will work closely with
Baltimore Poly High School, middle schools, and community colleges to attract,
prepare, and retain minority and female students and faculty into STEM fields
through various new educational programs. One feature of this effort will be the
development of a microalgal demonstration facility for local students and the
general public to learn how algae remediate CO2 while generating useful
products. These programs will help recruit and train future scientists and
engineers in key STEM fields.