* 1332340
* GENI Tutorial at ACM SIGCSE
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Jay Aikat, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2016
* USD 13,388.00

The Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) is a medium-scale CISE
infrastructure project building a national virtual laboratory for network
experimentation. However, in addition to the use of GENI as an experimental
platform, NSF and the GENI community have long recognized the potential to use
it as a platform for innovation in teaching undergraduate networking and
distributed systems courses. A workshop on the issues of undergraduate teaching
using GENI and other cloud systems was held in conjunction with the fourteenth
GENI Engineering Conference (GEC) in Boston, MA on July 8, 2012. One of the
findings of the workshop was that "the first step to redefining undergraduate
systems education is to inform educators at a broad cross section of colleges
and universities about the resources available to them and their
students."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every year, ACM SIGCSE (Association for
Computing Machinery, Special Interest Group on Computer Science Education)
brings together educators and researchers from around the world to present
papers, panels, posters, special sessions, and workshops, and to discuss
computer science education in birds-of-a-feather sessions and informal settings.
The SIGCSE Technical Symposium addresses problems common among educators working
to develop, implement and/or evaluate computing programs, curricula, and
courses. This project funds a workshop on use of GENI in the classroom at the
2013 ACM SIGCSE meeting in Denver, Colorado. Since computer systems are the core
infrastructure of modern society, the workshop supports maintaining and building
a workforce that is able to address critical national needs and exploit new
commercial opportunities. The tutorial will occur on Wednesday, March 6, 2013,
at the conference venue.