* 1332049
* I/UCRC FRP:  Electron Beam Atomic Spectroscopy (EBAS)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Diran Apelian, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 199,448.00

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Resource Recovery and Recycling
(CR3) located at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI). Funding Requests for
Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 11-570.
The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-
defined fundamental research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study "Electron
Beam Atomic Spectroscopy" (EBAS) is a method to determine elemental compositions
by measuring the atomic emission spectra produced when an electron beam impinges
on a target material. Although the mechanisms underlying EBAS are not well
understood, EBAS has the potential to greatly reduce the energy use and improve
the productivity of industrial processes that can use it for process control
while manufacturing a part. In these processes, high value and critical metals
are produced by melting recycled scrap. A key property of EBAS is its potential
to have much lower limits of detection (LOD) than conventional measurements,
especially of those used at industrial sites. With EBAS, the results are
provided nearly instantly, which allows the operator to reduce the melt time as
alloying can also be done nearly instantly. This saved time means less energy is
used to melt and alloy and more time is available on the furnace to produce
additional product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the potential to
enable the optimization of the recovery and recycling of high temperature metals
in ways that have not been done previously. The potential impact is the
development of a new measurement technique for vacuum processing of metals. The
center will encourage high school students and teachers, and minority students
to be involved. The PI will integrate the K-12 outreach into the existing
program at WPI. Interested high school students will be invited to the metal
Processing Institute and participate in sub-projects associated with the
proposed research under the supervision of the PI and graduate students.