* 1332208
* OPERATION OF CORNELL HIGH ENERGY SYNCHROTRON SOURCE (CHESS)
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2014,02/29/2020
* Joel Brock, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/29/2020
* USD 106,002,955.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award from the National Science Foundation
to Cornell University supports the operation of the Cornell High Energy
Synchrotron Source (CHESS) as a national user facility. User access is granted
free of charge through a competitive proposal review process. CHESS provides
high energy X-ray beams, for studies including the atomic and nanoscale
structure, properties, in operando, and time-resolved behavior of electronic,
structural, polymeric and biological materials, protein and virus
crystallography, environmental science, radiography of solids and fluids, and
micro-elemental analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synchrotron facility is used
by investigators from a wide range of science and engineering disciplines in
academia, industry, government, non-profits, and international institutions.
CHESS attracts new users through presenations at professional society meetings,
a monthly newsletter, and their website. This award also provides support to
upgrade the facility and enhance the capabilities of the existing instruments.
These upgrades enable CHESS to increase the number users and provide unique
capabilities to the research community. Technology development at CHESS on new
X-ray extraction devices, detectors, and optics will advance synchrotron
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHESS plays a national role in advanced training
of X-ray beamline scientists, expert X-ray users; and accelerator scientists.
CHESS educates the K-12 students and teachers, community college students, and
the public through science activities, after-school science programs, and tours.
CHESS has specific initiatives aimed at increasing participation of
underrepresented groups in Science Technology Education and Mathematics (STEM)
fields with goals of improving science literacy and the national workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award from
the National Science Foundation to Cornell University supports the operation of
the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) as a national user facility
for a five year period to advance materials science, condensed matter physics,
chemistry, engineering, and biology through advanced uses of X-ray radiation.
CHESS will deliver 140 user days per year to 11 beamlines that enable advanced
imaging, the determination of atomic and larger scale structure in materials,
and various spectroscopies to probe electronic organization and transitions in
materials. User access is granted free of charge through a competitive external
proposal review process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHESS will pursue the following
seven collaborative user initiatives, which are expected to drive their
respective scientific fields and will guide beamline upgrades: Computationally-
Enabled Total Scattering Studies of Complex Materials; Designer Solids:
Structure, Processing and Performance; Rapidly Evolving Systems; X-Ray Imaging:
Scanning Probe and Full-Field; Spectroscopic Studies; Energy and Structural
Materials: In Operando Studies; and, Macromolecules and Biochemistry. This award
also provides support for upgrades of the facility, most notably the
installation of three Cornell designed undulators, which are an order of
magnitude less expensive than current technology. The increased flux from the
undulators at 7 of the 11 beamlines will enable new experiments at CHESS such as
probing the structure of excited electronic states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHESS
plays a national role in advanced training of X-ray beamline scientists, expert
X-ray users; and accelerator scientists. The Xraise program reaches out to K-12,
community college students and public school teachers. Xraise collaborates with
other Cornell research centers and local schools to offer classroom science
activities, creates and sponsors after-school science programs, and hosts tours
and demonstrations for the public in the eXploration Station. CHESS has specific
initiatives aimed at increasing participation of underrepresented groups in
Science Technology Education and Mathematics (STEM) fields with goals of
improving science literacy and the national workforce.