* 1332433
* Measuring Anisotropy in Fibrous Soft Materials by MR Imaging of Slow and Fast Shear Waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Philip Bayly, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2017
* USD 475,222.00

The objectives of this research are to measure the direction-dependent,
mechanical properties of fibrous soft materials, such as artificial tissue,
muscle or white matter in the brain. The proposed approach is to use magnetic
resonance imaging to visualize and measure the propagation of elastic waves in
the material. The speed of wave propagation through a solid material depends on
its stiffness, and in a fibrous material the stiffness depends on the direction
of loading. By using magnetic resonance imaging to visualize shear waves, it is
possible to estimate these mechanical properties without invasive procedures or
destructive testing. This approach will be validated by applying it to measure
mechanical properties of fibrin gels in which fiber alignment is produced by
polymerizing the gel in a magnetic field. It will then be used to non-invasively
characterize mechanical properties of the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the benefits of the research will include an improved ability to
model and simulate the behavior of fibrous materials. It will enable accurate
computer simulations of the mechanisms of traumatic brain injury and improved
understanding of injury mechanics. Since white matter in the brain is
particularly sensitive to mechanical deformation, the ability to model it
correctly is extremely important to the design of protective devices and the
development of therapeutic approaches. In addition, the proposed research may
lead to new methods to monitor the condition of muscle, tendon, brain, or
artificial tissue. The engineered gels used in this project may also have
medical applications as tissue surrogates or scaffolds for nerve growth. A broad
benefit of the project is that high school and undergraduate engineering
students will learn to apply state-of-the-art imaging methods to understand
complex mechanical behavior of an important class of materials.