* 1332147
* STTR Phase I:  Physics-based models of wind variability
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Mark Handschy, Enduring Energy, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project aims to
develop quantitative models of wind variability to aid the design of reliable,
low-carbon electric grid systems with high wind penetration. All abundant
renewable resources are naturally variable, creating a challenge for their
integra¬tion onto an ?always on? electric grid. While this variability challenge
is now beginning to rival the importance of further reductions in the costs of
generation hardware, existing variability models suffer numerous shortcomings
that limit their accuracy and flexibility. This STTR project aims to develop and
validate new models with a high degree of generality and universal applicability
based on atmospheric sciences and the physics of turbulent flows. The proposed
models will provide new conceptual insights into the temporal and geographic
aspects of wind variability along with superior performance for risk-assessment
and reliability estimation based on rare and infrequent events including wind
droughts. These models will enable design (without overdesign) of a reliable
grid, including not only changes to its electrical system, but also changes to
the policy, regulatory, and financial systems that are essential parts of the
electricity delivery system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be realized across multiple sectors. The project
will provide enabling tools to broad engineering and financial constituencies
involved in transforming the electricity system?s infrastructure and
organization as it moves towards a sustainable and renewable future. Application
of these tools will lower the costs of wind integration, thereby speeding grid
transformation and hastening the reduction of electric-sector greenhouse gas
emissions. Grid planners and operators will benefit from easier-to-use
engineering and simulation modules in commercial grid software packages. In the
financial sectors, the model tools will enable accurate estimation of wind
energy risks, allowing new risk-management market instruments and contract
structures. The fundamental conceptual understanding of variability along with
actionable quantitative metrics made possible by the proposed models will enable
the formation of new ventures and enterprises capitalizing on emerging
opportunities in the smart-grid space.