* 1332729
* Ion Beam Linking and Ion Beam Welding of Continuously Pulled Carbon Nanotube Yarns
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Lin Shao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 387,365.00

In this research, we study the effects of ion beam welding on structural and
property changes of carbon nanotube yarn. The approach of this research will be
creating carbon nanotube yarn by continuous pulling from self-aligned nanotube
arrays, and immediately irradiating the yarn by using an ion beam in air. The
key is to use ion bombardment to introduce inter-tube displacements as stable
contacts between tubes or to locally weld the junction of two joining carbon
nanotubes, in order to enhance inter-tube electrical conduction, phonon
transport and tube sliding friction. Ion beam treated yarns are expected to have
significantly enhanced thermal, electrical and mechanical properties. The ion
irradiation effects are characterized by using electron microscopy, Raman
spectroscopy, tensile testing, electrical resistance and heat conduction
experiments. This research includes multi-scale modeling to reveal atomic-scale
details of evolution of defects created by ion irradiation, how subsequent
structural relaxation leads to stable defect configurations, and how defects
influence various properties at spatial and temporal scales linkable to
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this research
will include development of an industry-ready ion beam technique for creation of
yarns or ropes of high strength and conductivity. The technique can be extended
to other non-carbon systems for materials applications under harsh environments.
The project will also have broad impact with its educational plans to increase
minority student participation, develop curricula, and create e-learning
resources to promote public learning in frontiers of nanotechnology. The
research activities will be integrated with existing Undergraduate Student
Research Scholar Program and Enrichment Experience in Engineering for Teachers
Program at the Texas A&amp;M University to promote undergraduate student and
high school teacher participation.