* 1332428
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Theory of Reward Stability and Group Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* David Melamed, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 7,734.00

David Melamed Hyomin Park The University of South Carolina

This research investigates the stability of rewards on group cooperation.
Justice theory has shown that justice evaluations play a key role in producing
emotional and behavioral reactions among group members. However, little
attention has been paid to role of the stability of rewards over time in
producing its perceptual, emotional, and behavioral consequences. In the real
world, however, most people belong to a group and conduct exchange relations
repeatedly. To understand justice evaluations, it is important to investigate
the effects of the stability of rewards over an extended period of time.
Negativity bias explains that a negative event has a stronger effect on people's
evaluations than a positive effect of the same size. Combining justice theory
with the principle of negativity bias over time, this research tests the effect
of reward stability on justice evaluations and subsequent behavioral
consequences. Specifically, the theory suggests that an under-reward at one time
cannot be compensated for by the same size over-reward at another time. Rather,
the fluctuation of rewards over time will reduce justice evaluations of group
members. This is predicted to effect cooperation and other group-related
behaviors.

The first study tests the effect of unstable rewards on justice evaluations.
This is liely the first empirical study which tests the relationship between
reward consistency and justice evaluations. The second study will test how the
justice evaluations generated by unstable rewards can produce emotional distress
and consequently reduce group cooperation. In this way, the investigators expect
to comprehend how the stability of a reward system facilitates group
cooperation. These findings will broaden our knowledge of group processes and
lay a theoretical and empirical foundation for future research regarding justice
theory and group cooperation.

Broader Impacts

The research has sociological implications for social justice theory as well as
cognitive psychology, and organizational behavior. Combining literatures across
those diverse fields, the findings are expected to facilitate interdisciplinary
research on justice processes. At the societal-level, the research results are
relevant to organizational decision making processes and government policy. This
study predicts that an unstable reward system will promote extra costs for the
organization to maintain people's commitment to the group. The research also
suggests implications for government policy that inconsistency of a policy over
time will make people regard the government not only as unreliable, but also as
unfair. Third, the research provides undergraduate students with first hand
research training.