* 1332504
* Targeted Infusion Project: Integrating Mobile Computing and Security into a Computer Science Curriculum
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Kenneth Williams, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2018
* USD 489,544.00

Mobile platforms have become extremely popular among users and an important
platform for developers. New privacy and security issues arise with the
prevalence of mobile computing since mobile devices often store tremendous
amount of personal, financial and commercial data, and therefore attract both
targeted and mass-scale attacks. To meet the growing demand for mobile computing
and security professionals, it is vitally important to provide education in
mobile computing and security to students in computer science and other related
disciplines. The overall goal of the project at North Carolina A&amp;T
University is to address this workforce need by developing course modules in
mobile computing and security. The modules will be integrated into existing
Computer Science courses such as computer programming, software development,
operating systems, and information assurance courses. Each course module
includes a tutorial, presentation slides, hands-on labs and/or case studies, and
test questions. To actively disseminate these new course materials, two faculty
summer development workshops will be offered, as well as a mobile programming
contest for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
strengthen the Computer Science program at North Carolina A&amp;T University by
updating the Computer Science curriculum to address state-of-art technology.
Students will be more competitive in the workforce and well-prepared for
graduate studies in the areas of mobile computing and security. Therefore, this
project will increase the education and career opportunities of African American
students. This project will also develop and strengthen the University's Center
for Cyber Defense, a Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance
Education designated by the National Security Agency and the Department of
Homeland Security, by expanding its education and research programs. Societal
benefits of this project include increased educational materials and improved
opportunities for training students to address mobile computing and security
challenges.