* 1332761
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: POLITICAL ECONOMY AND STATE FORMATION  OF PRE-ANGKORIAN CAMBODIA: A VIEW FROM THALA BORIVAT
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Miriam Stark, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 22,652.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Miriam Stark, Heng Piphal will study settlement
patterns and materials associated with the pre-Angkorian site of Thala Borivat
in Stoeng Treng province, Cambodia. Thala Borivat is located along the Mekong
River, and served as a regional center in the lower Mekong Basin between the 6th
and 9th centuries CE. The site is of particular importance because its
distinctive lintel style (found on brick temples from the site) is echoed across
the lower Mekong and may reflect a period of political dominance by a polity
centered on the Thala Borivat region. This research is unique because little
archaeological research in the region has been done previously, and because the
epigraphic record suggests the region's importance in controlling trade routes
between the Mekong basin and what is now Laos. Mr. Heng's research combines
spatial analysis techniques with systematic excavations to determine the timing,
scale and nature of this poorly-documented region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars
now agree that early polities arose in several parts of the lower Mekong basin
during the first millennium CE, and laid the groundwork for the Angkorian Empire
that dominated the region a few centuries later. However, few field-based
archaeological projects have documented developments associated with this pre-
Angkorian period. The case of Thala Borivat is particularly salient because of
its association with both a distinctive and widespread art style, and epigraphic
suggestions of a power base in the region. Knowledge of settlement configuration
and associated archaeological assemblages is essential to placing this pre-
Angkorian center into the Mekong basin chronology. Work through this project
will also produce archaeological data for macroregional comparisons across the
basin that are critical for evaluating how interregional interaction shaped the
subsequent emergence of mainland Southeast Asia's largest state. Combining
spatial, archaeological, epigraphic, and art historical data to study the Thala
Borivat site in its local and regional contexts expands the knowledge base of
early Southeast Asian state formation and offers a valuable case for comparative
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a broader impact beyond the
production of archaeological knowledge. Both data recovery and data analysis
phases of the project weave together research with training undergraduates from
the Archaeology Faculty at the Royal University of Fine Arts (Phnom Penh,
Cambodia). Results from the project will be shared through public outreach
programs with local communities in Stoeng Treng province, and with the academic
community through peer-reviewed English-language publications and Khmer
publications. These efforts will seek to improve public understanding of
science, archaeology, and anthropology. Primary data will be available through
the Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts (Cambodia), and will form the basis of
undergraduate theses for archaeology students in Cambodia. By incorporating
training into the research program, mentoring undergraduate students, and
collaborating closely with Cambodian institutions, this research will revise
archaeological and popular understandings of the Cambodian past, and open
avenues for future inquiry.