* 1332371
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research:  Using Available Sentry AUV aboard R/V Atlantis to Measure Hydrothermal Heat Flux at Axial and Main Endeavour Fields
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2015
* Eric Mittelstaedt, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2015
* USD 12,243.00

This project leverages available AUV Sentry and R/V Atlantis time to implement
and test new methods for quantifying heat and fluid fluxes at deep-sea
hydrothermal vents. Simultaneous AUV-mounted flow velocity and temperature
gradient measurements will be obtained and corrections for vehicle motion will
be used to compute flux in/out of a control volume that surrounds the known
venting. At Main Endeavour Field on the Juan de Fuca Ridge, the control volume
estimates will be compared to the 2000 FlowMow results to better delimit
contributions of diffuse flow. At Ashes hydrothermal field on Axial Volcano, a
series of surveys at 5 m height will help test the new method for measuring
diffuse flow from an AUV. These near-bottom measurements will be validated and
synthesized with direct measurements of diffuse and focused flow provided by
camera systems deployed for a separate project. Simultaneous measurement of
different scales (very near-bottom and 100?s m control volumes) of heat flux and
turbulence within the hydrothermal effluent is an expected outcome. The methods
developed will provide the oceanographic community with new capabilities for
quantifying fluxes with AUVs at hydrothermal vents and possibly in other
environments as well, including cold seeps and natural or artificial hydrocarbon
leaks.