* 1332152
* I/UCRC FRP:  Collaborative Research: Exploring Statistical Analysis Methodologies in Selected EMC/SI Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Jun Fan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2016
* USD 133,272.00

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Electromagnetic Compatibility
(CEMC) comprised of the Missouri University of Science and Technology (MUST) and
the University of Houston (UH). Funding Requests for Fundamental Research are
authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 11-570. The solicitation invites
I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental
research.

The goal of the project is to explore and develop statistical analysis
methodologies for practical EMC and Signal Integrity applications. The proposed
research will be focused on two areas: 1) charactering effects of
geometry/material variations, manufacturing tolerances, and process variations
on high-speed signal channel performance; and, 2) characterizing random noise
sources through nearfield scanning. Various methodologies will be investigated
through modeling and measurements, and the gained insights can be used to
develop effective design tools for specific practical engineering applications
in the next step. The high-speed design community has neither systematic
experimental procedures nor simulation-based tools for addressing random effects
in complex real-world problems, which are critical when the industry moves ahead
to the next generation of designs. The proposed study will close this gap by
developing and improving general statistical analysis methodologies for real-
world EMC and signal integrity applications.

The successful completion of the project will result in a deep understanding of
various statistical analysis methodologies for high-speed designs, which can
provide useful insights and guideline for engineering CAD tool development. The
outcome of the project can help the nation to maintain its competitive
advantages in high tech industry. The next generation of electronic, computer,
and communication systems will benefit when more accurate modeling and
measurement techniques to address random effects become available. The knowledge
gained in this project can inspire similar ideas and approaches in other
engineering fields to incorporate statistical methodologies. The proposed
innovative research will be effectively integrated into education to transfer
the developed technologies into the minds and hands of the next generation
workforce. Research findings and results will be disseminated through the IUCRC
CEMC to the center members, and through conferences, publications, and websites
to the general public.