* 1332230
* Meeting of PULSE Leadership Fellows - Spreading the PULSE Subgroup
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* David Marcey, California Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 02/28/2014
* USD 17,988.00

An award has been made to California Lutheran University to organize and conduct
a workshop in support of the Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science
Education (PULSE). This workshop is scheduled for March 1-3, 2013 in St. Louis,
MO. Last September, the PULSE partners appointed 40 Vision and Change Leadership
Fellows to stimulate transformative changes in the undergraduate life science
education community. All Fellows met in October, 2012 and have since organized
into four working groups to address different challenges to reforming how
biology is taught at all types of undergraduate institutions. The Vision and
Change Leadership Fellows are focusing on how life science departments can
encourage and reward faculty member?s efforts to improve undergraduate life
sciences education. Such improvements should increase student learning, should
increase retention rates for students in the sciences, and should prepare all
students to be more curious and scientifically literate citizens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current award is to fund a workshop for twelve of the
Leadership Fellows who are part of the "Spreading the Pulse" working group. This
group has the overall goal of determining how to assist those departments that
request help in implementing recommendations made in the Vision and Change
report. The working group will engage the entire pulse community to identify,
train, and deploy teams of Ambassadors who will visit different departments over
the next year. The Ambassadors will help departments evaluate their progress so
far, then provide guidelines, resources, planning recommendations, and
assessment rubrics being developed by the other working groups. Therefore,
representatives from the other three working groups will be invited to the
workshop so that the activities of all four working groups can be better
coordinated throughout this fieldwork phase in advance of a second meeting of
all the Fellows in June, 2013. The guidelines from this workshop will be shared
with the life sciences community, primarily via the www.pulsecommunity.org
website.