* 1332228
* Fundamental Nanomechanics with SCC-DFTB Objective Molecular Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Traian Dumitrica, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2018
* USD 408,923.00

The research objective of this award is to understand and model the helical
structure and mechanics of amyloid fibrils, and the stability and mechanical
energy storage in helical zinc oxide nanostructures. Because these structures
exist on a scale comparable to interatomic distances, atomistic detail is
essential to understanding their behavior. The planned nanomechanical
computations are prohibitive with current quantum methods, which are dependent
on the translational symmetry of crystalline solids. They become possible,
however, with the new objective molecular dynamics method coupled with the self-
consistent-charge density-functional tight-binding. This coupling relies on a
proposed generalization of the Ewald method to a helical charge distribution.
Preliminary results indicate that this generalization is feasible and could
enable efficient nanostructure and biomolecule simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the methodology will allow for the first
time the evaluation of electrostatic fields generated by discrete charge
distributions over helical structures in modern materials and life sciences on a
quantitative level. The amyloid fibril studies, aimed at understanding key
atomistic details, mechanical properties and correlations between polymorphism
and mechanical response, will help elucidate molecular mechanisms in Alzheimer's
and other prion diseases. Also, they will have implications for the meso-scale
modeling of amyloid fibrils and for the biomimetic development of nanomaterials.
The helical zinc oxide nanobelts simulations, focused on super elasticity,
buckling, fracture, and the transfer of mechanical into electric energy, will
produce a phenomenological Landau model useful for designing power nano-
generators. The planned research is integrated with an educational program that
facilitates the incorporation of nanomechanics into the engineering curriculum;
it is also accompanied by efforts to encourage participation of underrepresented
minorities. A cyber-module will illustrate for the Minnesota public underlying
effects related to prion diseases, and mechanisms responsible for nano-energy
storage. This module will be made available to the Minnesota Science Museum.