* 1332035
* I/UCRC FRP:  Risk Assessment Techniques for Off-line and On-line Security Evaluation of Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Krishna Kavi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 07/31/2016
* USD 89,468.00

Understanding the risk and reliance on specific system security practices is
critical in order to formulate a coherent strategy on safe cloud adoption. This
work will investigate techniques for security risk evaluation for cloud
computing with specific focus on the two areas of off-line risk management and
on-line trust evaluation. The research will develop a project assessment model
to capture relations between threats, tasks, assets and business logic; develop
a vender assessment model to evaluate the vender?s share of security
responsibility; and develop a cost benefit trade-off methodology for optimal
cloud adoption strategy. Based on these, will develop an on-line assessment
methodology for cloud service providers assessment based on different
applications, services and vendor compositions.

With the proliferation of cloud architectures, it is critical that their
security be assessable and issues addressable. The proposed work has the
potential to enable loud users to gauge the trust-worthiness of individual cloud
elements or aggregated cloud resources and to analyze and suggest appropriate
risk mitigation strategy. The work is supported by the Industry Advisory Board
and will engage multiple industry members of the center. The center will involve
graduate students and be integrated in graduate course offerings. Industry
tutorials will also be developed and offered.