* 1332411
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Foldable Self-Replicating DNA Nanostructures for Organization of Functional Nanomaterials and 3D Meta-Material Assembly
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Paul Chaikin, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,260,585.00

The research objective of this project is to develop DNA nanostructures that can
self-assemble into larger one dimensional and two dimensional arrays capable of
programmable self-replication and programmable origami folding into complex,
predictable three dimensional shapes. The resulting nanostructured origami will
organize embedded non-DNA components into intricate geometries that enable new
material properties and device functionalities. This project brings together a
team of leading experts and practitioners from the sciences, mathematics, and
sculptural arts who will draw upon their diverse expertise and inspirations to
tackle collaboratively the technical challenges from both theoretical and
experimental perspectives. The project is also educating a new generation of
scientists and students capable of developing new paradigms for functional
nanomaterial and communicating the excitement and possibilities of these results
to the public at large.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of
this project will be to enable the easy and economical self-replication of
complex three dimensional nanostructures using mass produced components, through
our progress in meeting the challenges of preparing the difficult original
template structures. Self-replication will also facilitate the evolution of
better materials or devices from generation to generation. Thus, in the long
term, a research group may develop a DNA-organized optical metamaterial, and
then immediately obtain large quantities of the prototype by introducing the
initial template into a vat of components routinely ordered from a general
foundry; similarly, a medical team may be able to create a complex
immunotherapeutic vaccine by evolving a DNA nanostructure which displays a
variety of antigens and adjuvants in some optimal, but initially unknown, three
dimensional configuration; in the same vein, an environmental cleanup crew may
be able to produce rapidly large quantities of a nanodevice tailored for
breaking down different water borne pollutants via the solar powered activity of
multiple enzymes clustered around light harvesting complexes. Thus, the
capabilities we are developing will facilitate previously unimagined
methodologies in the production of useful and valuable new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly sponsored by the
National Science Foundation and the US Air Force Office of Scientific Research.