* 1332530
* Computational Modeling of Scar Formation and Remodeling in Mechanically Loaded Tissues
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Holmes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2018
* USD 395,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a computational model that
can predict how mechanical loading interacts with other factors to determine
scar structure across multiple tissues. A wide range of mechanically loaded
tissues including skin, tendon, ligament, and heart respond to injury by forming
a collagen-rich scar. The collagen fiber structure of the developing scar is
often the single most important determinant of how well the healing tissue
continues to function, and evidence suggests that manipulating collagen
alignment could improve everything from heart function after myocardial
infarction to the strength of surgically repaired tendons. Yet therapies for all
of these conditions, from polymer injection into myocardial infarcts to physical
therapy routines for tendon injuries, are devised entirely through trial-and-
error, because there is no way to predict the long-term effects of proposed
interventions on healing tissues. Work under this award will combine agent-based
models that simulate fibroblast decisions at the cellular level with finite-
element models that represent mechanics at the tissue level to understand,
incorporate, and predict the effects of regional heterogeneity, mechanical
loading history, and strain-dependent collagen degradation on scar formation in
mechanically loaded tissues.

Healing and repair of mechanically loaded tissues influences the societal impact
of everything from heart attacks to workplace injuries to aging. If successful,
these studies could therefore have a broad impact by providing the capability to
predict the long-term effects of a wide range of therapeutic interventions in
heart, tendon, ligament, and skin, enabling computational design of better
treatment strategies. Educational efforts under this proposal aim to excite
students at multiple educational levels about studying math, computing, and
engineering by introducing them to the power of computational modeling and the
role of engineers in integrating the ever-increasing supply of data to
understand systems-level behavior and problems.