* 1332446
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Nanoscaled Molybdenum-Oxide Clusters: Syntheses, Tuning Surface Properties and Counterion Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Tianbo Liu, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 83,190.00

Professor Tianbo Liu of Lehigh University is supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry for an
International Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) grant to develop rational methods
for the synthesis of new type of nanoporous molecular capsules and investigate
their complex interaction with counterions. Polyoxometalate clusters with
specific surface functionalities of the crown-ether type and a variety of porous
Keplerate nanocapsules with tunable pore sizes and charges will be synthesized.
The new capsules will be used as model systems to explore their interactions
with small counter-ions, counter-ion exchange and replacement, counter-ion
transport over the membranes of Keplerate assemblies, and the nature of the
surface water ligands on the capsules. This work includes an international
collaboration with Professor Achim Müller of the University of Bielefeld
(Germany). Professor Müller's work is supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft German Research Foundation (DFG) of
Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide important knowledge for
the design and preparation of new materials with catalytic, electronic, and
magnetic properties. The capsules synthesized may also serve as models for
biological and bio-mimetic processes. This project will, therefore, impact
diverse areas (including chemistry, biological science, and materials science).
Furthermore, this international collaboration provides unique research
environments for training students and postdoctoral researchers.