* 1332544
* Targeted Infusion Project: Integration of Renewable - Solar &amp; Wind Energy into the Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Showkat Chowdhury, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2016
* USD 289,903.00

The project in the College of Engineering, Technology &amp; Physical Sciences at
Alabama A&amp;M University (AAMU) will enhance the engineering and technology
curriculum by integrating theoretical and hands-on experiences in the field of
renewable energy. This will be achieved by introducing new undergraduate and
graduate courses in solar, wind and other renewable energies; introducing hands-
on laboratory experience in solar and wind energy; enhancing the quality of
education by introducing and expanding undergraduate and graduate research
opportunities; and strengthening the recruitment, retention and transition of
engineering and science students from secondary to post-graduate studies and
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will advance the knowledge of
the student participants, sharpen their skills and provide a support system that
empowers them to successfully graduate and succeed in a competitive job market.
By integrating theory, lab experiences and research into multidisciplinary
renewable energy courses, students will be engaged in the learning process. The
project will impact more than two hundred students at AAMU, as well as about
four hundred high school students. Project activities can serve as a model for
other institutions that desire to strengthen their engineering and technology
programs.