* 1332024
* I/UCRC FRP:  Collaborative Research: Fundamental Research in Visualization-based Gap Analysis and Link Prediction
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Xiaohua Hu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 07/31/2016
* USD 99,868.00

The proposed Visualization-Based Gap Analysis effort is aimed at providing an
intuitive visualization and analysis techniques to provide analysts with the
ability to understand what has happened within a domain, comprehend its current
status and operations, and explore the impact of changes to the system. Link
Discovery is seeking to automatically predict what relations arise in the future
between objects. The proposed research intends to reformulate the link discovery
problem to include predicting the strength of the link as well as create
techniques to detect and predict special categories of future links; such links
that arise that bridge two dense clusters of objects. Link prediction for
domains other than social media and specialized literature domains will be
explored.

Predictive analysis to determine future events in an industry environment based
on current and past data represents an outcome of tremendous economic and
societal impact. Through establishment of more rigorous capabilities for Visual
Gap Analysis and Link Discovery, industry may be better able to understand what
has happened, comprehend what is the current state, and obtain some grasp of
what is likely to happen, may be greatly enhanced increasing productivity and
allowing focus on problem resolution. The proposed effort is supported by the
Industry Advisory Board and will engage individual center members. Graduate
students will be trained through the research and results will be integrated
into courses and industry seminars and short courses.