* 1332362
* Northwest PULSE Workshop
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2014
* William Davis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 02/28/2014
* USD 4,214.00

An award has been made to Washington State University to organize and conduct a
workshop in support of the Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education
(PULSE). This workshop is scheduled for February 22-24, 2013 in Seattle, WA.
Last September, the PULSE partners (HHMI, NIH, and NSF) appointed 40 Vision and
Change Leadership Fellows to stimulate transformative changes in the
undergraduate life science education community. All Fellows met in October, 2012
and have since organized into four working groups to address different
challenges to reforming how biology is taught at all types of undergraduate
institutions. The Vision and Change Leadership Fellows are focusing on how life
science departments can encourage and reward faculty members? efforts to improve
undergraduate life sciences education. Such improvements should increase student
learning, should increase retention rates for students in the sciences, and
should prepare all students to be more curious and scientifically literate
citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current award is to fund a workshop in
Seattle, WA for six of the Leadership Fellows from a variety of institution
types located within the Pacific Northwest. At least one of these Fellows is a
member of each of the larger PULSE working groups. The beginning of the workshop
on February 22 will coincide with the regular meeting of the Biology Education
Research Group at the University of Washington that serves institutions in the
Puget Sound area. The major goal of this workshop is to plan a regional
conference on adopting the Vision and Change recommendations that will include
students, faculty, and administrators. Institutions in the Pacific Northwest
have a strong history already of working together on a variety of educational
reforms and regional educational networks. This regional conference will expand
the impact of PULSE by reaching out to institutions from states such as Alaska,
Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho that are currently not represented by the PULSE
Leadership Fellows. This regional network will be a "laboratory" for testing the
resources being developed by the four PULSE working groups, and the regional
focus of this workshop is expected to serve as a model for meetings of other
groups of Fellows with members of the life sciences community. Results from the
workshop and the larger conference will be shared with the life sciences
community, primarily via the www.pulsecommunity.org website.