* 1332449
* Targeted Infusion Project:  Piloting a Physics Partnership
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* James Payne, South Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 399,940.00

The Targeted Infusion Project will form a partnership between physics programs
at South Carolina State University (SCSU) and Orangeburg-Calhoun Technical
College (OCtech) that will strengthen both programs and serve as a model of best
practices for developing collaborations. This partnership will be accomplished
through shared resources and a variety of activities that include curriculum
revision, infusing cyberlearning into the coursework and faculty training in
current pedagogical methods. Efforts include an improved approach to recruitment
and retention that focuses on the first year, both for freshmen entering college
and for transfer students transitioning from OCtech to SCSU. Partner
institutions will use a variety of means to strengthen the academic and social
support for majors such as bringing first year students in contact with seniors
through hands-on research experiences. Activities and products include
institutionalization of five new courses, such as the LabVIEW course at OCtech
and the Research Methods class at SCSU; development of renewable energy lab
exercises; and online modules created for the physics courses that will lead to
the use of flip instruction at both institutions. Finally, the introduction of
iLabs will enable the development of the first physics hybrid course, mixing lab
exercises that are online with others that are taught face-to-
face.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growing need for STEM graduates in this country
is well documented as is the underrepresentation of minorities in STEM
disciplines, particularly in the field of physics. This project will address
these issues by strengthening the physics program at SCSU through a partnership
with OCtech to improve recruitment and retention. Lessons learned from the
adoption of products, practices and techniques such as on-line tutorials, iLabs
and Invention Instruction, will serve as a model for teaching physics at other
HBCUs. Attainment of the project goal, to form a successful physics partnership
between two institutions, will serve as a model of best practices for STEM
collaborations at other institutions.