* 1332907
* DMREF Integrating theory, computation and experiment to robustly design complex protein-based nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Todd Yeates, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,374,727.00

In this project funded by the Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer
our Future program of the Chemistry Division, Professors David Baker of the
University of Washington and Todd Yeates of the University of California, Los
Angeles will develop robust methods for the design of complex protein-based
nanomaterials. The research project will integrate theory, computation, and
experiment to describe the possible space of symmetric protein assemblies and
develop methods for the rapid and reliable production of novel materials. An
atlas of theoretical symmetric architectures will be delineated and integrated
with cutting-edge protein structure modeling software to identify novel amino
acid sequences predicted to self-assemble into precisely defined structures. The
corresponding proteins will be produced experimentally and their structures
determined at high resolution to provide feedback for the improvement of both
the theoretical and computational aspects of the program. In this way, a general
approach for patterning complex protein-based materials with sub-nanometer
resolution will be developed that is expected to have a profound impact on the
fields of molecular self-assembly and nanomaterials.

Biological systems use proteins to carry out complex tasks at the molecular
level. Proteins are "oligomers": they are composed of multiple chemical subunits
linked together in a long chain. The chain must fold into a specific, complex
shape in order for the protein to become functional. Additionally, protein units
can interact to form larger structures that perform an array of chemical and
mechanical functions. This research project involves a joint experimental and
computational effort to design proteins that can fold and assemble into
preordained structures. Long-term outcomes of this basic research could include
the development of new types of medicines, materials with unprecedented
properties, and other useful chemical technologies.