* 1332275
* EFRI-BioFlex: Cellphone-based Digital Immunoassay Platform for High-throughput Sensitive and Multiplexed Detection and Distributed Spatio-Temporal Analysis of Influenza
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Omai Garner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,000,000.00

There is an urgent need for portable, rapid, sensitive and specific influenza
surveillance systems worldwide. The PI proposes to fundamentally improve the
diagnostic landscape of influenza within a flexible, cost-effective, and field
portable telemedicine platform. They will develop a digital immunoassay system
that makes use of novel electro-adaptive and programmable microfluidics
technologies as well as cellphone based multispectral fluorescent cytometry and
computational microscopy tools. The proposed system will create arrays of
hundreds of thousands of encoded particles containing fluid droplets. These
particles will be first segmented equally using inertial-microfluidic sorting so
that there is a single particle per drop, where the presence of influenza
subtype antigens and the associated enzyme-linked antibody sandwich will lead to
an ?on or off? fluorescence signal in each drop. The number of drops lighting up
(corresponding to specific color- and shape-coded particles with different
subtype-specific antibodies) will then be imaged all in parallel using a
cellphone-based multispectral imaging cytometry system. Through a custom-
developed smart application running on the same cellphone, these immunoassay
images will immediately be analyzed for sensitive and rapid detection of various
influenza subtypes, where the test results will also be transmitted wirelessly
to secure servers, enabling real-time spatio-temporal mapping and analysis of
the disease.