* 1332503
* HBCU-UP Targeted Infusion: Interdisciplinary Bioenergy Undergraduate Research and Instruction program at FVSU
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2018
* Sarwan Dhir, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 02/28/2018
* USD 398,208.00

Fort Valley State University (FVSU) will address the undersupply of
professionals trained in renewable energy and efficiency through the National
Science Foundation's Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU-UP)
Undergraduate Program's 36-month Targeted Infusion Project. FVSU, a Historically
Black College/University (HBCU), through this project will address regional and
global issues in the biofuel industry through its curriculum development and
revision to incorporate multidisciplinary courses in bioenergy, e. g., policy
development, biotechnology, bioeconomy, fuel conversion in providing students
and faculty cutting edge research opportunities and science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) professional development. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Over 100 students will participate in the research and educational
courses during the three-year duration of the project. Collaborations with Iowa
State University's Department of Biosystems Engineering, the Donald Danforth
Plant Science Center, Delaware State University?s Center for Integrated
Biological and Environmental Research and the South Dakota State University
College of Agriculture and Biological Sciences, among other prominent research
institutions, provides broad opportunities for this minority-serving institution
(MSI) to offer cutting-edge research opportunities to project participants. The
impact from the project's implementation uniquely addresses the regional needs
contributing to the enhancement of rural economic development and green industry
in the South and the nation in addition to contributing to a diverse STEM
workforce in the bioenergy sciences.