* 1332430
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identity and the Process of Goal Accomplishment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Jan Stets, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,960.00

SES-1332430&lt;br/&gt;Jan Stets&lt;br/&gt;Ryan Trettevik&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As individuals work
towards a goal, for example, being a "marathon runner," "college graduate," or
"successful businessperson," they evaluate their progress toward goal
accomplishment on the basis of the feedback they receive from others. If their
progress toward goal accomplishment is slower than their expected rate, they
should feel negative emotions, and if their progress toward goal accomplishment
is faster than expected, they should feel positive emotions. In turn, these
emotions should help us understand when people remain committed to their goals
with positive emotions fueling commitment to goals and negative emotions
curtailing commitment to goals. In this dissertation, the Co-PI tests the long-
standing identity argument that the verification of one's goals generates
positive feelings and the non-verification of one's goals generates negative
feelings. At the same time, the Co-PI investigates the rate of verifying one's
goal, that is, whether feedback as to one's performance reveals slower progress,
faster progress, or progress at one's expected rate. The analysis is of college
students as they go through a 10-week, undergraduate course. Students will be
closely followed during the course through a series of surveys that track their
self-views' on their identity as student, their goals (expected grades as they
go through the course), expected rate of achieving their goals, and their
emotional responses to feedback on their performance. Statistical tests using
regression will allow the Co-PI to examine the effects of goal attainment and
the rate of progress towards goal attainment on students' emotional state.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Having a better understanding of
how goal accomplishment and progress toward goal accomplishment influences
individuals' feelings over time can provide insights into better ways to help
people as they work towards their goals. It may be important for individuals to
modify their goals, or modify the rate at which they expect to reach their goals
in order to feel good and continue persisting in their efforts. This would have
implications in all areas of life including at school, at work, at home, and in
relationships. Employers, coaches, teachers, and mentors may be more effective
in guiding others when they face difficulties if they have a better
understanding of the ways in which people view themselves, their goals, and the
anticipated pace at which they expect to achieve their goals since these
characteristics influence the emotions individuals experience and impact how
they respond accordingly.