* 1332249
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Origami and Assembly Techniques for Human-Tissue-Engineering (OATH)
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Roger Alperin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,240,328.00

The overall research objective of this project is to create assembly- and
origami-based techniques for the generation of fully three-dimensional living
tissues that are structured like natural tissues and include effective vascular
networks. To accomplish this goal, the research first uses two-dimensional
directed assembly to selectively locate multiple cell types in their proper
locations on two-dimensional scaffold structures. The scaffolds are then
origami-folded to convert the two-dimensional cell assemblies into three-
dimensional structures that replicate the structure of natural tissues. This
research addresses the three limitations to tissue engineering - tissue quality,
tissue quantity, and speed of production - that have stood in the way of
generating tissues for medical therapies. The project will also create new K-12
teacher training materials on origami in mathematics; involve high school
students and teachers directly in the research; enable research opportunities
for undergraduates from a diversity of backgrounds; and engage with high school
students and the public through museum and high school level mathematics
outreach.

If successful, this project offers the potential to save lives through the
creation of tissues rapidly and efficiently with an extremely high level of
control over tissue structure. At present, the limited supply of donor organs
leads to thousands of deaths every year. The improved engineering of human
tissues has the potential to save lives directly, through the provision of
transplants to supplement the supply of donor organs, as well as indirectly, by
creating tissues for the screening of new medical therapies before human testing
takes place. From an educational and societal perspective, the benefits include
enhancement of grade school and high school mathematics education through wide
distribution of teacher training materials; increased opportunities for public
engagement with origami mathematics through museum exhibits; and broadened
research engagement of high school students, undergraduates, and teachers, with
a particular emphasis on those from underrepresented minority backgrounds or who
serve predominantly underrepresented minority communities.

This research project is jointly supported by the National Science Foundation
and the US Air Force Office of Scientific Research.