* 1332934
* US-India workshop on organic photovoltaic materials and devices
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Vikram Dalal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 12/31/2014
* USD 48,948.00

PI: Dalal, Vikram L.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1332934&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: US-India workshop on organic photovoltaic
materials and devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded by the
Office of International and Integrated Activities. The primary objective of this
proposal is to improve the science and technology of organic photovoltaic
materials and devices through active collaboration between scientists in the
U.S. and in India. A further objective is to further the education of U.S.
graduate students in this field by providing opportunities for them to work
collaboratively with their peers at Universities and research laboratories in
India. This proposal is focused on starting such collaboration by holding two
workshops in this field, one in the U.S., and one in India. The effort is to be
jointly supported by U.S. NSF for U.S. scientists and by India's Indo-US Science
and Technology Forum for the Indian scientists. This workshop will focus on the
organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices that are an up and coming technology of
significant interest for delivering low cost, distributed electric power for
rural populations. In principle, OPV devices offer a very low cost pathway for
generating electricity using energy from the sun. However, for economical
generation of energy, both the conversion efficiency, and the stability of
organic solar cells has to improve significantly. The current generation of OPV
devices has reached energy efficiencies but degrade in a very short time. These
are significant problems that need to be overcome to make the technology
economically feasible, and this workshop will bring together some of the best
people working in this field from both the U.S. and India to address the
critical issues in this technology. It is expected that the workshops will lead
to complementary and synergistic research projects in this field in both
countries, thereby accelerating the development of the science and technology of
OPV materials and devices. OPV technology offers a potential low-cost pathway
for meeting some of the energy needs. Both India and the U.S. have a significant
industrial base in the area of photovoltaic technology, and this joint effort
will benefit industries in both countries. The impact on education of U.S.
graduate students is likely to be significant. It is important that U.S.
students in Engineering and Sciences experience the research and economic
infrastructure in developing countries such as India, so that they can design
the devices appropriate to India which is a vast potential market for U.S.
companies.