* 1332615
* Renewable Energy:  Interdisciplinary Science of Solar Fuels  2014 Renewable Energy: Solar Fuels Gordon Research Conference and Gordon  Research Seminar
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2013,03/31/2014
* Michael Wasielewski, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 03/31/2014
* USD 34,750.00

PI: Wasielewski, Michael R&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1332615&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Gordon Research Conferences&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Renewable Energy: Interdisciplinary Science of Solar
Fuels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the participation of
student and postdoctoral researchers in the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Renewable Energy: Solar Fuels. The GRS and GRC
will be held at the Four Points Sheraton Hotel in Ventura, CA on January 18-19,
2014 and January 19-24, 2014, respectively. The GRS, which is primarily attended
by students and postdocs, and the GRC, which features oral presentations by the
leading scientists in the field, will bring together senior and junior
researchers, including engineers, chemists, materials scientists, biologists,
and physicists, to explore the most outstanding technological challenge of the
21st century: the efficient, and ultimately cost-effective and globally
scalable, transformation and storage of solar energy using carbon-neutral
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRS program will feature oral and poster
presentations accompanied by informal and formal discussions with a small number
of attendees (60 participants). The presentations will be divided into three
sessions, in which the most important aspects of solar fuels research and
development will be addressed. The first session will be devoted to the light-
capture and charge transfer in solid-state and biological/biomimetic systems.
The second session will be focused on materials and molecules that can catalyze
reactions desirable for the development of solar fuel cells. The concluding
session will emphasize integrated systems for solar fuels production.
Approximately half of the GRS participants are expected to attend the GRC, where
attendance will be capped at 200. The GRC program will include invited and
contributed oral and poster presentations by both younger and more established
researchers, focusing on the best emerging science in the field. The GRC will
provide participants a state-of-the-art view of the interdisciplinary science of
solar fuels, with eight topical sessions, two poster sessions, and one final
session of late-breaking results and short talks drawn from the poster
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This problem is of key importance in
developing a sustainable energy economy, as solar fuels will ultimately provide
a supply of transportation and aviation fuel from domestic, renewable resources.
However, the technical problems are formidable and are in many ways distinct
from the well-established technology of solar photovoltaics. The field is
inherently interdisciplinary, requiring basic scientific advances on several
fronts, coupled with efforts to integrate them into functioning systems. The
themes of the GRC and GRS have been chosen to represent the key problems in the
field and to stimulate the exchange of ideas between a diverse group of
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC and GRS will promote
international collaboration in the science and engineering that underpins the
development of a future solar fuels technology to provide a sustainable source
of clean energy. It will also provide networking opportunities, mentoring, and
perspectives on new research for younger participants at a critical stage in
their scientific careers.