* 1332568
* Improving Critical Thinking in Underserved Minority Students through Broad-based Explicit and Discipline-specific Pedagogical Approaches
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Linda Johnson, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2019
* USD 468,576.00

The University of Maryland Eastern Shore will implement an HBCU-UP Targeted
Infusion Project that aims to enhance student critical thinking skills and
practice through redesign of an entry level biology course. The course redesign
incorporates instructional strategies that teach and provide an environment to
practice critical thinking. The goals are to enhance faculty expertise in
critical thinking instruction, infuse critical thinking skill development in
biology curricula using broad-based and discipline-specific pedagogical
approaches, and to initiate the development of a resource center for critical
thinking efforts and practices for the institution.

The project stems from the university?s strategic plan to review and/or modify
academic programs to produce a more competitive global workforce and a series of
faculty workshops on critical thinking. The existing Critical Thinking in
Science Course ultimately was modified, and data showed that the students
enrolled in the general course performed better in science gatekeeper courses
than those who were not enrolled. The proposed project will extend this
experiment by developing a discipline-specific course and pedagogical strategies
for all biology majors.

While the project is intended to target underrepresented students, the
curriculum transformation to enhance the development of critical thinking skills
will enhance STEM education in general and could impact undergraduate education
at all types of institutions. Specifically, through traditional and non-
traditional modes of dissemination, the best practices related to infusing
critical thinking into STEM curricula will broadly introduce, inform, and expose
faculty at HBCUs and other institutions to processes associated with improving
STEM student success.