* 1332750
* Interdisciplinary Research and Training at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Program
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2014,01/31/2020
* Claudia Cenedese, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 1,342,182.00

Overview: The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Summer Program (GFD) is a ten-week
program of interdisciplinary research and graduate training. GFD began in 1959
and has been held for all 54 years of its lifetime at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The GFD
program has two equally important governing purposes. The first is to provide
the right environment and nurture the right atmosphere to foster the transfer of
ideas between a wide range of subjects including applied mathematics,
oceanography, fluid dynamics, geophysics, geology, meteorology, astrophysics,
planetary science, engineering, and physics. The second is to train through
research a small group of graduate students (typically nine or ten), who are
charged with conducting an advanced project for the bulk of the summer, and to
present their results in both oral and written reports during the final week.
These two purposes are by design intertwined: the student research projects are
individually or jointly supervised by members of the GFD Staff, a group of
summer-long participants who are academics from the diverse fields represented
at GFD and thereby, often catalyze new long-lasting collaborations between
multiple advisors and their students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, the
Program focuses on a particular topic relevant to geophysical fluid dynamics,
often selected to address the needs of the scientific community at the time. The
summer opens with two weeks of principal lectures on the theme. After these two
pedagogical weeks, daily seminars are given by invited visitors throughout the
remainder of the Program, both on work related to the theme, but also on topics
from geophysical fluid dynamics in general. The idea is to expose the
participants to a new subject, with its particular phenomenology and techniques,
while simultaneously maintaining a broader perspective, thus setting the stage
for interdisciplinary interactions. In the next five years, the following themes
will be explored, each of which has a strong societal relevance and
interdisciplinary nature: Climate Dynamics; Bio-fluid mechanics (Synchronized
Swimming); Ice-Ocean Interaction: Submarine Melting; Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
and environmental sustainability; and Stochastic Effects in Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By virtue of its very discursive
and interactive style, GFD naturally promotes the dissemination of scientific
results among researchers from very different backgrounds; techniques from
different disciplines are readily transferred across disciplinary borders, and
parallels between problems in very different fields can be easily appreciated.
GFD advances discovery and understanding, while promoting teaching and training
by involving graduate students in research. The Program often introduces the
graduate students to prospective employers at the postdoctoral level and beyond,
and broadens their scientific network; GFD has in the past helped to attract
many extremely talented young scientists to the US for postdoctoral research and
academic positions. The topics selected for the proposed five-year cycle have
strong broader impacts; for example aiming at improving future projections of
climate change, with impact on human societies and well-being, and at improving
the representation of ice sheet dynamics in climate models, hence the ability to
accurately predict sea-level rise, an issue of vital and important societal
concern. An entire summer will also be dedicated to environmental sustainability
with a broader impact on energy and resource use. Finally, the annual GFD Public
Lecture targeted toward a general audience introduces the local community (both
scientific and general public) to the science of geophysical fluid dynamics and
its many important and interesting applications.