* 1332171
* STTR Phase I:  Corrosion Protection via Self-healing Top-coat for Aerospace Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Aaron Kushner, GK Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at
demonstrating commercial viability for a new self-healing corrosion-protection
system. Corrosion significantly impacts both the costs and availability of
commercial aircraft, costing tens of billions of dollars annually. The proposed
Self-Healing Anti-Corrosion Coating (SHAC) is capable of repeatable repair and
sustained protection of aluminum components. The SHAC proposed is unique from
the current state of the art in that it is innately, at the molecular level,
self-healing; it does not require catalysts/healing-agents or any form of
external input. The research proposed here focuses on reducing the cost of the
system in terms of both raw material and eventual industrial scale manufacture,
as well as improving its performance and reducing its environmental impact. To
reduce material costs, GK will employ inexpensive commodity monomers that
nonetheless possess the desired functionality to yield self-healing properties,
as well as switch to a macromolecular architecture that is compatible with
established industrial scale synthesis and processing. To improve mechanical and
barrier performance, we will add light crosslinking and nano-fillers. These
goals will be combined in a definitive prototype demonstration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will be derived from a substantial reduction of the lifecycle cost of
airframes in the commercial and military aviation industry, both by increasing
the lifetime by preventing corrosion, and by removing the large maintenance
costs associated with corrosion prevention and repair. This will broadly improve
the economic sustainability and reduce the environmental impact of the aviation
industry, which would likely further resulting in efficiency and productivity
enhancement across the whole spectrum of travel and freight industries. Economy-
wide, about 2% of US GDP ($100 billion/year) is spent to prevent/remediate
damage from corrosion. A commercially viable self-healing top-coat technology
would dramatically reduce the frequency and costs of corrosion repair and extend
product life-cycles, improving the overall efficiency and sustainability of the
economy. Successful SHAC demonstration and commercialization will lead to
improved safety and lifetime across all elastomeric and composite material
applications. In addition, by careful selection of the composition of the
different phases, new advanced multifunctional coatings, encapsulants,
structural composites, textiles, and and opto-electronic materials will be
obtained, all with the performance and lifetime-enhancing self-healing property
inherent to our dynamic multiphase design, ultimately resulting in a new game-
changing "material by design" paradigm.