* 1332348
* EFRI-ODISSEI: Novel Perpetual Reconfigurable &amp; Multi-Band
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2021
* John Etnyre, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 01/31/2021
* USD 2,530,890.00

The objective of this research is to discover revolutionary origami-based
electromagnetic components, radiofrequency circuits, and systems, that will
transform the fields of communications, energy autonomy and sensing. This
research is producing the first origami engineered systems with cognitive
capabilities, that are exploitating numerous bands of the ambient radiation
spectrum. The scientific objective of this work is to derive rigorous and
integrated Mathematical-Computational-Electromagnetic models of origami
geometries in order to study and develop novel foldable, energy autonomous and
self-deployable electromagnetic systems with multi-band and folding-dependent
operation. This comprehensive, fundamental study of origami foldable and self-
deployable electromagnetic systems focuses on the development of advanced
miniaturized, perpetual (that is, autonomous battery-less operation through
energy harvesting and wireless power transfer) and reconfigurable
electromagnetic systems for next generation communication, reconnaissance,
sensing, as well as wireless power systems that support civilian and military
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this work will benefit the
fields of autonomous near-zero-power reconfigurable wireless telecommunications
and sensing systems operating in harsh environments, such as disaster areas,
structural health monitoring, Internet-of-Things, agricultural and water quality
monitoring. Also, this work is expected to revolutionize airborne and wearable
antennas, antenna arrays, resonators, harvesters, radiofrequency circuits and
Wireless Sensor Networks realized in a variety of flexible materials with an
easy to launch and carry miniaturized folded area. The project will also bring
benefits to autonomous radio frequency devices with enhanced electromagnetic
compatibility capabilities that can be integrated with biomedical implants and
biosensors. This will enhance our national capabilities for disease prevention
and real-time treatment as well as improving health and quality of life. The
project's educational efforts are focused on broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
through curriculum development, undergraduate research experiences and outreach
efforts. Broad dissemination of the project results will be accomplished through
presentations to schools and the industrial community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the National Science
Foundation and the US Air Force Office of Scientific Research.