* 1332598
* SHF:CSR:Small:Improving Processor Efficiency with Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Daniel Jimenez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

For several decades, computers have been getting faster. Much of this
improvement in performance is due to Moore's Law, i.e., the rapid growth in the
number of devices that can be integrated into a single microchip. However,
techniques that exploit the growing resources provided by Moore's Law are often
inefficient and wasteful. This project takes a hard look at techniques used to
improve performance, showing how resource-hungry techniques can be made less
wasteful. The improved structures use techniques borrowed from other areas of
Computer Science to predict the near-term resource usage of the computer to do a
better job of allocating those resources. These prediction techniques result in
a system that is both more power efficient and better
performing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in power efficiency and
performance have a wide-ranging impact, from improving battery life in mobile
devices to reducing energy costs and environmental impact of data centers. The
project will involve university students in research, helping to train the next
generation of technology workers and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project applies microarchitectural prediction techniques to recover wasted
resources and thus improve the efficiency of microprocessors. The project
explores the following opportunities for reducing waste with prediction: 1)
applying highly accurate branch prediction techniques to other domains such as
caches, 2) using mixed analog/digital circuit implementations to improve
prediction accuracy while reducing waste in the predictor itself, and 3)
developing a set of new confidence estimation techniques and considering their
use in a variety of microarchitectural optimizations.