* 1332548
* Developing A Renewable Energy Systems Laboratory for Education &amp; Research at Tennessee State University
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* S. Keith Hargrove, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 399,807.00

The Targeted Infusion Project at Tennessee State University will produce
mechanical and electrical engineering graduates with knowledge and skills in
renewable/alternative energy systems through a selection of undergraduate
elective courses and research experiences. The project deploys an effective
pedagogy for delivering coursework in renewable/alternative energy systems,
develops a laboratory for instruction and research to promote engineering
education and research solutions in energy storage devices and fuel production,
and enhances faculty expertise through collaboration with university and
industry partners in advanced energy systems. Partner institutions include Wayne
State University, University of Tennessee, the University of Michigan, Nissan
Corporation, Pennsylvania State University and the US Air Force Research
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of a renewable/alternative
energy systems laboratory at Tennessee State University represents the efforts
of an alliance of universities, representation from industry, and federal
agencies with shared interests in the development in advanced energy systems.
This unique partnership informs curriculum development efforts in mechanical and
electrical engineering. Over 150 African American students directly benefit from
enhanced coursework and undergraduate research experiences. The project provides
engineering students with critical skills and knowledge for the automotive
industry and federal organizations by addressing workforce demands in the
emerging technologies of energy storage devices and bio-fuels.