* 1332807
* Integrated Hot-Phonon Harvesting Barriers in High-Power Circuit Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Massoud Kaviany, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2018
* USD 291,175.00

CBET 1332807&lt;br/&gt;PI: Massoud Kaviany (U.
Michigan)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to use (integrate) a
novel hot phonon absorption barrier structure converting phonon energy to
harvestable electric potential, in high-power electric circuits and devices.
This electric potential barrier (barrier is formed by heterostructures, e.g., Al
alloying, and its height matches optical phonon energy) allows only those
electrons with high momentum/energy to pass through it, while the remaining
electrons with lower energy will have a favorable phonon absorption condition.
For the proposed example of GaN high electron mobility transistor, the expected
reduction in the maximum operating temperature is as much as 40 degC at 5 W/mm
Joule heating rate, and up to 20% of the phonons will be recycled corresponding
to the same saving in power consumption (i.e., in-situ direct conversion of
emitted phonons back to electric potential energy). The results are expected to
also apply to light emitting diodes and other high-power electronics, and
contribute to thermal management at atomic scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use
of a heterobarrier, or abrupt change in material composition, in a circuit
allows electricity-generated heat to boost electric potential instead of
draining efficiency. Using this architecture in high-power circuits lowers the
device temperature and improves the device efficiency. Electrons in a circuit
gain energy by absorbing phonons, the interatomic vibrations associated with
heat. In a circuit, a ?heterobarrier? may be inserted to take advantage of these
excited electrons, boosting them up in electrical potential. The heterobarrier
is engineered such that the increase in the band gap energy of the new material
is equal to the energy given the electron by the phonons. Monte Carlo
simulations based on interaction kinetics between electron and phonon show up to
19% of phonon energy converts to electric potential. This heterobarrier reverses
the role of phonon from causing electric potential drop to causing potential
gain.