* 1332110
* STTR Phase I:  Autonomous Electrochromic Windows Enabled by Visibly Transparent Energy Harvesting Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Miles Barr, Ubiquitous Energy, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project explores an autonomous
electrochromic (EC) window enabled by a visibly transparent photovoltaic coating
technology. EC windows, which transition from a transparent state to a dark
state (and vice-versa) based on an electrical input, represent a promising
pathway to increasing building energy efficiency by effectively regulating the
solar flux into the building. Though well-developed technologically, broad
adoption of EC windows is limited by installation challenges rooted in a lack of
autonomy (i.e. wiring to an external energy source, sensors, and control
systems). The team has identified a key solution in which visibly-transparent
photovoltaic coatings are integrated over the EC to serve as (1) an onboard
energy source that harvests ambient light to power EC transitions, and (2) a
photodetector that enables dynamic transparency control in response to changes
in external lighting conditions. This project will demonstrate relevant
performance and durability specifications of the photovoltaic coating to
initiate large-area window integration and commercial deployment of autonomous
EC windows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is embodied by unprecedented freedom for architectural EC window
adoption, which can reduce electricity consumption for cooling, lighting, and
peak power demands in buildings by up to 15%-50%. By integrating power and
sensing functionalities onboard with the EC window without impacting visual
aesthetics, a fully autonomous insulated glazing unit (IGU) can be constructed
that requires no specialized installation or external balance of systems.
Ultimately this will significantly broaden adoption of EC windows, by
eliminating concerns related to the cost and complexity of EC installation, thus
improving payback period and simplifying the decision-making process within the
supply chain of the built environment. Moreover, this project will result in the
development of knowledge that will guide future generations of visibly-
transparent photovoltaics for other products in which a local energy source and
light detection functionality can provide significant value (e.g. electronic
displays and mobile electronic accessories), enhancing the functionality of
those products without impacting aesthetics.