* 1332472
* Stochastic Vortex Structure Model for Adhesive Particles in Turbulent Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Marshall, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 284,621.00

Marshall, Jeffrey &lt;br/&gt;1332472&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particles present in
turbulent flows are transported because of a large-scale diffusive process
caused by exchange of fluid between turbulent eddies and by a small-scale anti-
diffusive process. The latter (which we will refer to as particle dispersion) is
associated with the tendency of heavy particles to be thrown out of turbulent
eddies, forming high-concentration particle sheets in the interstitial region
between the turbulent eddies. This small-scale heterogeneity is known to cause
fluctuations in the particle concentration of several orders of magnitude, which
in turn have a dramatic effect on processes that involve particle collision and
agglomeration. While stochastic Lagrangian models (SLMs) have been shown to
accurately simulate large-scale particle diffusion, these methods lack the
spatial correlation necessary to account for small-scale concentration
heterogeneity. The work proposed here will replace random forcing used in
stochastic Lagrangian models with a spatially-correlated stochastic forcing
based on approximating the turbulent eddies by a set of random vortex
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop a stochastic vortex structure (SVS) model for simulating
collision and agglomeration of adhesive particles in turbulent flows. The SVS
model will generate a turbulent velocity field with correct spatial correlation
over a length scale interval ranging between the energy-containing turbulence
integral scale and a minimum scale that is associated with the length scale at
which the eddy Stokes number is equal to unity. The proposed stochastic model
will be validated by comparison to direct numerical simulations of particle
agglomerate formation in homogeneous turbulence and turbulent shear flows.
Simulations will be performed using a discrete element method for adhesive
particles, a fast multipole method for solution of the vorticity-induced
velocity field, and a pseudospectral method for direct numerical simulation
(DNS) of turbulence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;Adhesive
particles dominate critical problems ranging from bioengineering systems (blood
flow, GI flows, microorganism suspensions), manufacturing processes
(electrospray, electrocoating, dust mitigation), energy generation (pulverized
coal combustion, biomass combustion, ash mitigation), environmental processes
(sediment transport, volcanic processes, filtration processes), and nano- and
microscale technology (nanoparticle dispersion, nanotube alignment, self-
assembly). The proposed research will develop and validate a novel structurally-
based stochastic model that will enable an entirely new simulation approach for
a wide range of problems involving adhesive particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be shared with a minority-serving institution via an existing
arrangement between University of Vermont and City University of New York.