* 1332320
* Critical Transitions Across the Phanerozoic: A Roundtable Workshop on Sino-US Collaborative Research on Major Events in the History of Life during the Past 600 Million Years
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* David Bottjer, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2014
* USD 25,206.00

Critical Transitions across the Phanerozoic: A Roundtable Workshop on Sino-US
Collaborative Research on Major Events in the History of Life during the Past
600 Million Years EAR-1332320 Xiaoming Wang, Los Angeles County Museum of
Natural History Ray Bernor, Howard University David Bottjer, University of
Southern California Nigel Hughes, University of California, Riverside Xiangdong
Wang, Nanjing Institute of Palaeontology and Geology

ABSTRACT In the past 20 years, some of the most exciting fossil discoveries have
been found in China. Spectacular fossils are brought to light that are
previously unheard of or unimagined, ranging from Precambrian embryos, Cambrian
basal animal groups, transitional fishes leading to invasion of land,
exquisitely preserved Mesozoic plants, birds and dinosaurs, and an abundance of
Cenozoic mammals. Such an unprecedented inventory of discoveries is accompanied
by an equally unprecedented increase in funding for Chinese geology and
paleontology. Amid this exciting context, collaborations between US and Chinese
paleontologists and related geologic disciplines are flourishing. There is much
to be gained in these broad collaborations. Specialists from the US bring to the
table innovative approaches as well as a large existing body of knowledge,
whereas Chinese scientists have rapidly acquired the state-of-the-art practice,
and have leveraged these collaborations for additional funding from Chinese
sources. PIs plan to bring approximately 50 paleontologists (~20 American) and
related geoscientists and students from US and China, as well as administrators
of relevant Chinese funding agencies, for a four-day workshop in Kunming, China.
Cost for the participation of Chinese scientists and students will be borne by
the Natural National Science Foundation of China.