* 1332178
* I/UCRC FRP:  Dynamic Imaging of Cancer Stem Cell Proliferation Using Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Labels
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2014
* James Chan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 09/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Biophotonics Sensors and Systems
(CBSS) located at the University of California, Davis (UC-D). Funding Requests
for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF
11-570. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of
industry-defined fundamental research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tumor resistance to
anti-cancer therapy is a major obstacle to further improving cancer patient
survival. Accumulating experimental and clinical data suggest that cancer stem
cells (CSCs), which comprise less than 1% of total tumor cells, are able to
self-renew and are responsible for the aggressive phenotype of many human
cancers. There is an unmet need in elucidating the unique features of cancer
stem cells. Identification of the markers that best delineate this population of
cells is essential to develop more effective cancer treatment. This proposed
study will detect the development and evolution of these markers in CSC-enriched
cancer cell populations to better identify cells responsible for tumor
resistance to anti-cancer therapy and tumor metastasis and to understand cancer
cell proliferation. This project proposes to demonstrate the application of
novel cellular labels based on surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) for
monitoring CSC development during cell division. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the proposed project will be able to trace the dynamic alterations
of a CSC to address many unanswered questions about how these cells proliferate.
This information will be important for future development of targeted therapies
to inhibit cancer growth and ultimately enhance patient survival. The industry
support of the I/UCRC and its active participation in this research project
enhances the graduate educational experience by providing a pipeline for
talented engineers and scientist to industry.. UC Davis' commitment to develop
the academic potential of underrepresented groups in STEM fields will be further
enhanced by offering industrial career options, informal mentorships and
internships with its I/UCRC partners. The close interaction with the industry
partner (BD Biosciences) will lead to the development of new biomedical
technology of immediate relevance to the company. Application of this technology
specifically to breast cancer stem cell research will have a major impact in the
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of the disease, which will impact the
discovery of new treatments.