* 1332341
* EFRI-PSBR: Closing the loop- towards a PSBR design framework for self-sustained marine microalgal-based fuel production
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Amy Grunden, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,999,985.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algal oils have many characteristics of an ideal
feedstock for biofuels production, offering the ability to use poor quality
water (municipal wastewater, brackish water, etc.), atmospheric carbon dioxide
(CO2), and to reuse CO2 in flue gases in their preparation. However, there are
several technical challenges associated with culturing and harvesting algae in
current generation photosynthetic biorefineries (PSBRs). The overall goal of
this project awarded jointly by NSF Emerging Frontiers in Research and
Innovation Division and the Division of Molecular &amp; Cellular Biosciences to
Professors Amy Grunden, Francis de los Reyes III, Joel Ducoste, S. Ranji
Ranjithan, and Heike Sederoff, all of North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
NC, is to model, develop, implement, and evaluate a scalable PSBR that uses
transformational nutrient recycle processes and supports efficient conversion of
CO2 to oils in a marine microalgae-based system. Using synergistic engineering
and biotechnological approaches, the team will: 1) genetically engineer a marine
microalgae species (Dunaliella spp.) with enhanced CO2 uptake/fixation and the
capability to recycle nitrogen and phosphorous from microalgal biomass; 2)
design a small-scale PSBR using a kinetic model, which will be used to develop a
scalable dynamic reactor model based on computational fluids dynamics simulation
of the PSBR; 3) develop innovative, scalable approaches for algal harvesting and
lipid extraction; and 4) develop a life-cycle analysis (LCA) framework that
includes flexible and scalable cost and life-cycle inventory process models of
the microalgal PSBR system. In a novel feature of the effort, the North Carolina
State team plan the demonstration of novel Lagrangian microsensors that can
assess accumulation of light radiation in proportion to its exposure during
transport through the reactor, which will significantly aid in the modeling and
testing of PSBR operation in response to light. Thus, genetic enhancement,
reactor modeling, and LCA will be used to optimize the production of algal
biomass and lipids in the PSBR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;Development of truly scalable and sustainable PSBRs offers tremendous
economic and environmental impact by reducing the transportation sector reliance
on fossil fuels. Innovative and transformative enabling-technologies that will
permit robust production of marine microalgae biomass and lipids in scalable and
sustainable PSBRs will bring significant environmental and economic benefits to
the nation through the development of an efficient, high-yield alternative
energy feedstock production platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, through
the proposed mentoring and outreach programs, this interdisciplinary project
involving engineers, microbiologists, molecular biologists, and plant
physiologists provides unique opportunities for broadening STEM participation
among high school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scholars who will
be required to bridge traditional disciplines and become the new generation of
scientists and engineers to develop renewable energy for future generations.
Specifically, the NCSU team will develop widely distributable web-based teaching
modules for secondary students based on PSBR technologies in collaboration with
faculty from Research Triangle High School (RTHS, www.rthighschool.org), a STEM-
focused public charter school serving a diverse population from seven North
Carolina counties. The PIs will also host a 6-week high school student summer
research program for students that have matriculated through a 1-week
preparatory Research Methods Bootcamp developed by the RTHS team. In addition,
the team will introduce a new undergraduate special topics honors course,
Photosynthetic Biorefineries for Fuel Production, to train undergraduate
engineering and biology students in an integrated Honors seminar/discussion
course providing opportunities for independent study as well as teamwork on
topics relevant to photosynthetic biorefinery design, modeling, and operation.