* 1332265
* Tunable On-Demand Microfluidic Separations Using Traveling Wave Electrophoresis
* ENG,CBET
* 05/31/2012,12/31/2015
* Boyd Edwards, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2015
* USD 238,136.00

1066730&lt;br/&gt;Carroll&lt;br/&gt;Proposed is the additional development of a
new technique for microfluidic separations called traveling-wave electrophoresis
(TWE). This technique employs an electric field wave produced by interdigitated
electrode arrays to transport charged species through a microchannel. To
investigate approaches for efficient separations of complex mixtures of peptides
and other biomolecular systems, the proposed research will focus on two aims:
(a) establishing the dependence of band dispersion on molecular concentration,
electrophoretic mobility, and molecular diffusion in TWE, and (b) demonstrating
TWE separations of complex mixtures of peptides using novel separation modes
accessible through TWE. These experimental aims will synergistically interact
with theoretical modeling of the TWE system to understand the fundamental
capabilities and limits of the process. The proposed goals will be accomplished
through experiments and modeling stemming from preliminary models and
experiments that have unequivocally demonstrated the feasibility of the
technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses the critical
need for robust, controllable, on-demand separation techniques for high-
resolution, high-throughput characterization of complex biomolecular samples.
TWE separations distinguish themselves from other electrophoretic microfluidic
separation techniques by the use of an electric wave to transport species whose
mobilities exceed a tunable threshold. TWE holds promise for separations with
minimal dispersion and separations of infinite length achieved via real-time
switching between separative and non-separative transport, allowing extremely
high resolution separations of closely migrating analytes. The impact of this
work will be felt in proteomics, molecular biology, cell biology, genetics,
materials synthesis, and nanoscience. The system has the potential to make
particularly strong contributions to proteomics and molecular biology based on
its capability to separate closely related molecular species present in vastly
different concentrations. The ability to independently control the velocities of
separated bands in a single channel based on their local position without
sacrificing separation efficiency will prove to be revolutionary if realized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work consist of five major
areas. Of particular importance in the state of West Virginia is the
incorporation of a Research Experience for Teachers. We will incorporate
secondary school teachers into the research program, providing opportunities for
professional development credits, and developing curricular elements meeting
state guidelines for incorporation into their classrooms. The program will
extend beyond the summer with the PIs interacting with the teachers and their
students in the classroom, and providing opportunities for participating
teachers to present their research and curricular efforts in both local and
national settings. The PIs are actively involved in the development of
undergraduate and graduate course work that emphasizes the importance of
nanoscience and nanotechnology, both in science and in society at large. These
courses reach students across different disciplines in the physical sciences,
engineering, biomedicine, and the humanities and provide a common forum to
facilitate cross-pollination of ideas within the university. The project will
provide funding for two graduate students, one theoretical and one experimental.
Work on this project will promote interdisciplinary interactions between
developing physicists and chemists during their training, a very important
benefit in this era of multi-disciplinary research. Outreach to underrepresented
groups will be accomplished in summer research experiences for undergraduates
through existing SURE, REU, and LSAMP programs. In addition, ongoing
relationships with a local company, Protea, Inc. will allow immediate
incorporation of research innovations in the development of commercial products
for protein analysis.