* 1332633
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Meaning and Evaluation of Fathers in the Professional Workplace
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Melissa Milkie, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 12/31/2014
* USD 11,055.00

SES-1332633&lt;br/&gt;Melissa Milkie&lt;br/&gt;Kathleen
Denny&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland College Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
else being equal, fathers earn more than childless men and all women in the
professional workplace, a phenomenon referred to as the "fatherhood wage
premium." Moreover, survey research shows that certain fathers, namely those who
are married, white, and highly involved with their children, are privileged over
others. Individual-level explanations, such as positive selection and
productivity, do not fully explain fathers' earnings advantage or variation in
that advantage. Employer bias is often cited, though rarely empirically
examined, as an important factor responsible for privileging fathers over non-
fathers and certain fathers over others in the professional workplace. This
dissertation project examines the contours of father preference in the workplace
and attends to several critical gaps in our understanding of how, why, and which
fathers are advantaged in the workplace. The primary research objectives are to
analyze: (1) how fathers' level of involvement with their children is evaluated
in the professional workplace; (2) how level of involvement is evaluated for
fathers of different racial/ethnic backgrounds; (3) how fathers of different
racial/ethnic backgrounds are evaluated without involvement level specified; and
(4) how employer characteristics, including gender, race, and parental status,
influence evaluations of fathers in the professional workplace. The study
addresses these objectives through an experimental vignette study and a semi-
structured interview study. The experiment examines how a representative sample
of employed adults evaluates fathers in the context of the professional
workplace. The semi-structured interview study augments the experiment by
interviewing employers to determine the meanings, assumptions and stereotypes
held about fathers in the workplace. This research is expected to contribute
both theoretically and empirically to multiple literatures. Specifically, the
sociological fatherhood wage premium literature will benefit from a
clarification of the consequential yet poorly understood role of employer bias
that perpetuates a pattern of workplace inequality. Further, the research is
poised to challenge the broader literature on the theory of the "ideal worker."
By empirically analyzing variation in what constitutes an ideal worker who is
favored and privileged in the professional workplace, this research has the
potential to transform our taken-for-granted understanding of who embodies the
ideal worker and why.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Findings
from the proposed study will be useful both within and outside of academia.
Within the academic literature, the project will contribute to our understanding
of certain advantage hierarchies in the workplace. The research will also serve
applied and practical purposes given its overall focus on gender- and race-based
workplace bias and discrimination. With effective publicizing and circulation of
results, this research has the potential to induce action and encourage
organizations to seriously assess their own workplace patterns and practices. In
doing so, project results are expected to bring critical yet likely largely
unperceived sources of workplace inequality to light within and across
workplaces.