* 1332284
* Implementation Project: Fisk University STEM Transformation via Strategies for Accelerated Mathematics Confidence, Deeper Learning, and Course-embedded Authentic Research
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Princilla Evans, Fisk University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,138,766.00

The project at Fisk University, a Historically Black University, builds on
lessons learned from a planning grant. The overall goal of the project is to
enhance undergraduate student interest, retention, learning success, and pursuit
of post-graduation training or careers in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) areas. Three main strategies were selected to overcome
barriers to student success: innovation in developmental and early mathematics
courses to achieve accelerated acquisition of STEM pre-requisite skills;
introduction of Supplementary Instruction in all Gatekeeper STEM courses to
achieve deeper learning and student retention; and introduction of course-
embedded research in two required courses in each Natural Science discipline,
and in one mathematics and computer science course, to enhance STEM interest,
critical thinking and concept mastery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
collect data concerning the suitability of evidence-based practices successful
in research-based universities for implementation in small liberal arts colleges
focused on increasing minority student access to STEM careers. Additionally,
accelerated mathematics confidence and a deeper understanding of fundamental
concepts for application in novel settings will facilitate academic success of
students at Fisk University as STEM majors and in seeking STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential for becoming a model for
STEM education at small liberal arts institutions. The project is likely to have
an impact on STEM education, student learning, and faculty practice.