* 1332118
* I/UCRC FRP:  Collaborative Research: Enabling Biometrics Research in the Cloud -- Design and Demonstration
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Bojan Cukic, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Shashank Priya
* 07/31/2014
* USD 65,000.00

Program Director's Recommendation &lt;br/&gt;Center for Identification
Technology Research (CITeR) &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #1332046, 1332118, 1331395
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for the Center for
Identification Technology Research (CITeR) located at Clarkson University, West
Virginia University, and the University of Arizona. Funding Requests for
Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF approved solicitation, NSF 11-570.
The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit proposals for support of industry-
defined fundamental research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this Fundamental Research
proposal the PIs will explore the migration of biometric applications into a
Cloud Computing environment. Using existing cloud hardware and software
infrastructure at participating Universities, the PIs will design and
demonstrate a multi-university, multi-domain, multi-dataset virtual biometric
cloud - BioCloud. The PIs plan to analyze access control, privacy protection and
data sharing policies and techniques. Selected solutions will then be used to
develop the BioCloud prototype that will support Biometric Software
(Identification) as a Service (B-SaaS), Biometric Data as a Service (B-DaaS),
and Biometric Platform as a Service (B-PaaS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposed work, the PIs will develop the catalog of requirements, futures and
constraints that must be addressed in identity management applications.
Verifiable protection policies and techniques that guard personally identifiable
information in pervasive next generation government and commercial identity
management cloud-based applications are the prerequisite for the improved public
trust, which in turn allows for sustainable protection of security and civil
liberties. The project will further improve the industry/ university
collaboration in the field of biometrics, thus increasing the chances of speedy
transition of best research ideas into practice. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be included in the research and prototyping. BioCloud will create
a platform for innovative undergraduate and graduate school projects at the
three participating universities. Special attention will be given to the
recruitment of minorities and students from traditionally underrepresented
groups in STEM fields