* 1332342
* EFRI-PSBR: Biodiversity &amp; Biofuels: Finding Win-Win Scenarios for Conservation and Energy Production in the Next Century
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Todd Oakley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,099,585.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of renewable energy resources like
algal biofuels has become a national priority due to climate change and
dwindling fossil fuel reserves. To date, most research on algal biofuel has
focused on identifying "super-species" - strains of algae that can be
genetically modified and grown in environmental conditions that maximize
production of combustible lipids. While it is relatively easy to grow high lipid
algal monocultures in idealistic lab conditions, it has been challenging to
scale-up these cultures to commercially viable scales where populations often
fluctuate wildly. Monocultures also tend to be inefficient at capturing and
recycling nutrient waste streams, leading to concerns about their environmental
impacts and sustainability. Indeed, some have argued that single-species
approaches to energy production could generate the same environmental problems
that have plagued single species approaches to food production. During the green
revolution, vast tracts of land were converted into high-yield crop monocultures
that required intensive management and application of biocides and fertilizers
to maintain productivity. While the advent of modern agriculture was a huge
success for feeding people, it also became the leading cause of biodiversity
loss, organic pollution, and degraded water quality worldwide. Commercial-scale
'farming' of algal monocultures to produce biofuel has potential to repeat many
of the same environmentally damaging practices, and poses the same challenges to
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Is it a possibility to find 'win-win'
scenarios for biodiversity and biofuel production? Can we develop sustainable
biofuels while, at the same time, avoiding unintended environmental impacts and
conserving the diversity of life that is the ultimate source of all renewable
resources? The interdisciplinary team of ecologists and engineers of Professors
Bradley Cardinale, Phillip Savage, and Nina Lin of the University of Michigan
and Todd Oakley of the University of California Santa Barbara believe this is
possible. In this project awarded by the National Science Foundation through its
Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation initiative, the team intends to
test the hypothesis that certain naturally diverse groups of algae have
complementary traits that enhance the efficiency and stability of biofuel yield
beyond what any single species can achieve alone. This hypothesis stems from a
wealth of ecological research that shows whenever species specialize in their
use of nutrients or light, or respond to environmental fluctuations differently,
diverse communities will (a) more efficiently capture available resources, (b)
produce more biomass than even the single most productive species, and (c)
maintain yields more stably through time. The ultimate goal of this work is to
identify the most productive and sustainable multi-species algal biofuel
systems, and then, on a longer term, scale these up to commercially viable
biorefineries. One of the key products of the project work will be the
generation of a new genomics database that will identify the genes that code for
metabolic pathways involved in the production of biocrude oil. This database
will not only help identify the genetic code that leads to biofuel production,
it will make that code available to future researchers who wish to use genetic
engineering to enhance the efficiency, productivity, and stability of algal
biofuels even further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigative team has
partnered with established programs like the University of Michigan's Center for
Engineering Diversity and Outreach, and the Ecological Society of America's
SEEDS extension service, to aid in selecting the student personnel. Utilizing
these programs will foster participation by minority groups in the sciences by
connecting researchers to ethnic and economically disadvantaged minorities who
are seeking research opportunities. In addition to training a new cohort of
scientists, the team has also partnered with the Leslie Science &amp; Nature
Center to promote public education on sustainable algal biofuels. The Leslie
Science &amp; Nature Center is a Michigan nonprofit that provides environmental
education and experiences to &gt;25,000 visitors annually, mostly kindergarten
through high-school students. A hands-on science exhibit will be developed to
teach the public about the benefits of algal derived sustainable bio-oils, and
"Citizen Scientist" summer camps will be used to show kids how to collect,
identify, culture, and digest algae that are commonly used in biofuel
production.