* 1332328
* Support for US Participants and Phrasing Open Questions in the Kavli Program on Fluid-Particle Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* James Jenkins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 43,236.00

1332328 PI: Jenkins

A three-month long program devoted to fluid-mediated particle transport in
geophysical flows will take place at the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics
in Santa Barbara, California, between September 23 and December 20, 2013. This
program will provide an opportunity to develop a consensus regarding the
important issues that must be addressed and the key questions to be answered in
order to advance the understanding of natural fluid-particle flows. Associated
with the program are two focus weeks and a concluding conference.

There are many elements of natural fluid-particle flows that are poorly
understood. Examples are the in-fluence of the unsteady mean and fluctuating
velocities on particles in a turbulent flow over a range of particle
concentration and ratios of particle-fluid mass density; the nature of the
inter-actions between particles and between the particles and fluid at the
surface of a particle bed; and the mechanisms by which large-scale features
develop on the bed in systems driven by water and the wind. Within the three-
month program, two focus weeks and a concluding conference will take place that
will involve researchers not attending the program. One focus week will be
devoted to the interactions of particles with fluid turblence, the other will
concentrate on mechanisms of erosion and deposition at the bed. The concluding
confence, "Particle-Laden Flows in Nature", will take place during the last week
of the program and attempt to provide an overview of the state of understanding
of its subject.

Particle-laden flows occur naturally and in many industrial processes. They are
not so well understood as flows involving only a fluid. This is because the
interaction between the fluid and the particles and those between particles in
the fluid are complicated and not easy to describe mathematically. It is
important to try to achieve such descriptions in order to predict phenomena such
as dune formation by wind-blown sand, underwater avalanches that threaten
pipeline and communications cables, avalanches of powder and granular snow, and
flows of ash and hot gases or rocks in molten lava during volcanic eruptions.