* 1332913
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of State Violence on Mobility and Urban Space
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Anna Secor, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 09/30/2014
* USD 10,837.00

This research project investigates how the daily mobility practices of two
generations of low-income individuals are affected by state violence. The
project will provide insight into how the experience of state violence
influences practices of daily life (for example, mobility, leisure activities,
and errands), the subsequent ramifications for political transitions and
democracy building, its emotional and bodily implications and the way in which
these experiences are refracted by generational differences and gender. This
project is underpinned by theoretical analyses from feminist geopolitics,
emotional geography, and sociological analyses which have shown that daily life,
despite violence, is filled with imagination, ethical imperatives, and mundane
everyday enactments of strategies and tactics to live a life beyond the basic
needs of survival. Additionally, through comparing the way that two generations
frame their experiences of the state, violence, and urban life, this research
will verify if perceptions and emotional processes differ by age and will unpack
how these two generational groups understand each other's hopes, aspirations,
and daily negotiations. The three primary research questions are: RQ 1: How does
state violence impact daily urban mobility practices? RQ 2: What elements of the
urban environment are symbolic of periods of emergency laws and how are they
represented and interpreted? and RQ 3: How do people represent and interpret
post-upheaval events? For each of these questions, the research will compare the
two age cohorts in order to gain insight into the role of youth and memory in
interpretations and representations of the emergency law era and the recent
revolution.

To interrogate these phenomena, this project is located in Cairo, Egypt, which
had been under Emergency law from 1981-2012 and in which there are still many
documented reports of violence committed by state authorities. The project will
work within select urban sites in Cairo that represent different nodes of daily
life for low-income Cairenes: shopping, leisure, education, and political
participation. Research methods will include participant observation, focus
groups and interviews with low-income Cairo residents in two age cohorts: one
group of participants between the ages of 18 and 26, and a second cohort between
the ages of 49 and 57. This project will provide a site-specific analysis of the
effects of emergency law on everyday life in the Middle East, aiding policy
analysts and social scientist in their research of the changing political
landscape of Egypt and producing generalizable results on changes occurring in
the region. Research on the use of emergency law is needed, as its use is a
global phenomenon. Further, the United States is one of Egypt's major donors,
providing economic and social aid. Projects such as this one can highlight the
importance and/or effectiveness of aid toward the development of a just and
democratic society. Results will be shared with human rights organizations
operating within Egypt through workshops and disseminated within academic
journals, national and international conferences, and through non-academic media
such as online magazines and websites. Data collected will also be used for
purposes related to teaching in and outside of the academic classroom. Finally,
as a result of these activities, the doctoral dissertation research improvement
award will enable the development of an independent research career for a rising
scholar.