* 1332499
* Collaborative Research: Self-Exfoliation as Promising Route to Novel Nanocomposite Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Tadanori Koga, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2016
* USD 186,211.00

The project aims to find a powerful new route towards exfoliated clay/polymer
nanocomposites at high clay loading. A recently discovered self-organizing
process is able to disintegrate (exfoliate) clay particles into their individual
thin sheets (leaves) when being gently mixed into a suitable polymer. The
phenomenon is called self-exfoliation, since no external energy input is
required. In the resulting nanocomposite, the clay leaves were found to
distribute uniformly throughout the polymer matrix (i.e., random leaves), which
can be beneficial for many applications that require high connectivity
(mechanical, electrical, and thermal). While such self-exfoliation has great
potential as a novel nanocomposite synthesis process, it has not yet been
applied due to the lack of a better understanding of the self-exfoliation
mechanism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research has the objective of
explaining the origins of the self-exfoliation so that it can be utilized
systematically as a new path for creating novel polymer nanocomposites at high
loadings of random leaves including graphene. The synergistic expertise of the
PI and co-PI will allow a full characterization of the nanocomposite formation.
Diverse experimental methods will probe the four relevant length scales of this
system. The macro-scale bulk properties and their mechanical evolution during
exfoliation, which are most relevant industrially, will be studied through
rheology. Rheology will also provide the time scales of the exfoliation dynamics
and will guide the other experiments in this way. The micron-scale will be
probed with optical microscopy to observe aggregate swelling and the homogeneity
and randomness of the final exfoliated state. The nano-scale structure/dynamics
will be observed with SAXS (small angle x-ray scattering), USAXS (ultra-SAXS),
and SANS (small angle neutron scattering) to monitor clay gallery spacing and a
polymer conformation anchored to a clay leaf, and AFM (atomic force microscopy)
to test for the presence of an entropic-pulling force from the tethered polymer
chains. The bonding at the atomic scale will be probed with NMR (nuclear
magnetic resonance) spectroscopy to confirm the presence of hydrogen bonds and
determine if hydrogen bonds form on the face and/or sides of a clay leaf. The
initial part of the research will be guided by hypothesizing two possible self-
exfoliation mechanisms and by following up with experiments on several different
self-exfoliating clay/polymer systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on these
research findings, other self-exfoliating material combinations (graphene
instead of clay; semicrystalline polymers instead of amorphous polymers) and
their processing conditions will be explored. Research results from the two
research groups will feed into each other and lead to a broad education of
graduate and undergraduate students of the two research groups. This includes
the co-PI's SAXS/WAXS beamline at the National Synchrotron Light Source, which
will provide undergraduate/graduate students with an unusually broad perspective
on scientific research.