* 1332238
* Characterizing Multicomponent Vaporization of Petroleum-Biofuel Drops at High-Pressure Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Song-Charng Kong, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 254,000.00

1332238&lt;br/&gt;Kong&lt;br/&gt;This project conducts vaporization experiments
and modeling of petroleum and biofuel droplets. The fuels to be studied include
both traditional petroleum-biofuel blends and novel biofuels, including
pyrolysis oil, green diesel, hydrotreated diesel, and various aviation biofuels.
Liquid biofuels are usually blended with petroleum fuels; their clean and
efficient combustion is of vast interest in terms of economy and environmental
impacts. One of the major obstacles to their widespread application arises from
their unusual vaporization characteristics, which have a determining effect on
mixture distribution and combustion. The intellectual merit of this proposal is
the experimental characterization, and creation, of predictive models for
petroleum-biofuel vaporization under high-pressure and high-temperature
conditions. Such experimental data are very rare and can be used by the research
community for model validation, thus making significant impacts. This work will
address several critical fundamental aspects of droplet vaporization, including
effects of biofuel components, effects of high pressure on droplet lifetime,
relative importance of latent heat and boiling point on vaporization, the role
of internal mixing in the liquid phase, and micro-explosion of pyrolysis oil
drops. The broader impact of this project is the promotion of bio-renewable
energy through research and education. The proposed activities include the
research training of K-12 science teachers, who can then serve to inspire their
students, and a plan to foster long-term relationships and regular interactions
between the PI and the visiting teachers. The proposed outreach activities also
include the visits by undergraduate students to K-12 students in regional high-
need school districts, demonstrating racing vehicles using biofuels.