* 1332157
* I-Corps:  Teams Project: iRODS-to-Market
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Arcot Rajasekar, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 10/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This project plans to provide policy-driven data management for distributed
collections. The technology developed through this effort supports data
virtualization, affording a global view and controlled management and sharing of
distributed data, across heterogeneous and cloud resources. As a data grid, it
provides abstractions for data objects, resources, and users and manages access
to underlying physical infrastructure. This technology also abstracts data
management, separating policy implementation from physical storage; the
technology's rules allow data managers to automate administrative services and
to implement policies for replication, distribution, pre- and post-processing,
metadata management, etc. - independently of the (local or remote) data storage
system. This technology can be used for managing data distributed across the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific data collections represent intellectual
capital from which future research and evidence-based decisions can be derived.
As collections grow, demand increases for data sharing, data publication, and
data preservation; these are all necessary to enable data-based scientific
advancement when data volume is high and analysis is sophisticated. The
technology developed through this project has already proven itself in
scientific data management; it is widely used within national research projects
and around the world in institutions whose crushing data needs compel them to
seek new infrastructure technologies. The proposed project hopes to facilitate
the build-out of custom environments and new deployments that implement complex
data policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is synergistic with many
innovative business opportunities that will leverage big data. Harnessing
opportunities and creating value for businesses, scientists, and government
requires storing, managing, and analyzing high volumes and wide varieties of
data. This project provides technology for doing that.