* 1332965
* Non-Linear Homogenization of Porous Anisotropic Materials: Applications to Plastic and Magnetic Shape-Memory Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Pedro Ponte Castaneda, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2017
* USD 340,290.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the effect of porosity
and to develop constitutive models accounting for this effect in two different
types of kinematically constrained material systems. Examples of the first type
include low-symmetry metals, such as magnesium and zirconium alloys, which are
nominally incompressible polycrystalline aggregates, but which can undergo
significant volumetric strains when porosity is present. Examples of the second
type include magnetic shape-memory alloys, such as nickel-manganese-gallium
systems, which have been found to exhibit "giant" field-induced strains in
costly single crystals, but only minimal magnetostriction in cheaper
polycrystals. In this case, the presence of porosity can help relax the internal
kinematic constraints in the polycrystal due to the strong orientational
character of the magnetostriction in the grains that tend to block each other?s
strains. The main challenge is to properly account for the dilatational and
relaxational effects of the porosity in constitutive models for the response of
these materials under general loading conditions. This will be accomplished by
means of a recently developed "iterated" nonlinear homogenization technique,
which makes use of suitably chosen "linear comparison" media to generate highly
accurate and efficient estimates for the coupled, nonlinear response of porous
single-crystal and polycrystalline samples of these materials.

If successful, the benefits of this research will include improved understanding
and advanced modeling of the mechanical properties of high-performance metal
alloys for energy-efficient applications in the automotive, aerospace and
nuclear industries, as well as of the magneto-elastic response of magnetic
shape-memory alloys for applications such as actuators, sensors and energy-
harvesting devices. The research is also expected to lead to improved
characterization of net-shape metal-forming operations, as well as of ductile
failure in polycrystalline materials via void growth and coalescence. In
addition, the results will be of interest for modeling of geomaterials, such as
ice, halite and olivine. The work may also be relevant for the development of
other active material systems, such as certain types of polycrystalline
ferroelectrics.