* 1332862
* Nonlinear and Adaptive Acoustic Metamaterials for Novel Wave-Based Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Massimo Ruzzene, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 09/30/2018
* USD 390,988.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate nonlinear acoustic
metamaterials with adaptive properties for the design of next-generation wave-
based devices. The necessary nonlinear interactions and adaptivity will be
derived from two primary material systems: one based on controllable post-
buckled lattices, and the other based on piezoelectric tunable metamaterials.
The research will also exploit large deformations resulting from structural
instabilities as an effective way to adapt the topology and the periodicity of a
structured material. Stiffening and softening effects, amplitude-dependent
dispersion, and stability will be studied in terms of their effect on the wave
guiding characteristics. Fundamental understanding of nonlinear and adaptive
acoustic metamaterials, and the exploration of their wave propagation behavior,
will support the conception, fabrication, and experimental testing of innovative
wave-based devices, to include tunable filters, waveguides, acoustic diodes,
noise isolators, and directed-energy systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will significantly advance knowledge
and understanding in the general area of tunable and adaptive nonlinear
metamaterials. This understanding will be important for the development of
innovative devices for use in communication systems (mobile phones, GPS units,
etc.), noise isolation, energy redirection, and acoustic filters, logic ports
and switches. Advances from the research topics will be disseminated widely
through academic courses on wave mechanics at Georgia Tech and in undergraduate
research opportunities. Broadening of participation will be achieved by
specifically working with underrepresented students through ongoing programs
available at Georgia Tech. In addition, educational laboratory activities and
classroom modules, developed in partnership with the GIFT program at Georgia
Tech, will expose high school and middle school underrepresented students to
basic results of the research and to underlying wave mechanics principles.