* 1332349
* EFRI-PSBR: Continuous Liquid Fuel Production via Scalable Biosynthesis of Enzyme-Quantum Dot Hybrid Photocatalysts
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Ivan Korendovych, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1,999,999.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
solicitation was to develop concepts for a photosynthetic biorefinery, in which
micro-organisms are employed in the conversion of sunlight and carbon dioxide
(CO2) to produce biofuel and bioproduct species. A systems approach is needed,
and the system should be scalable. Life cycle analysis should be a tool used to
evaluate various approaches. These components have been organized in an
alternative manner in a project awarded jointly by the NSF Emerging Frontiers in
Research and Innovation Division and the Catalysis and Biocatalysis Program of
the CBET Division to the team of scientists and engineers of Professors Steven
McIntosh, Bryan W. Berger, Robert Skibbens and Christopher J. Kiely of Lehigh
University, Bethlehem, PA, and Ivan V. Korendovych of Syracuse University,
Syracuse, NY. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigative team proposes to create a
novel bio-synthesized enzyme-quantum dot hybrid photocatalyst for the direct
production of methanol fuel from sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide. The key
components of this system include (1) quantum dots (QDs) as electron donors and
(2) CO2-reducing enzymes for continuous conversion of CO2 and water to MeOH.
Absorption of photons by QDs will generate electron-hole exciton pairs. The hole
will be harnessed for water splitting to form protons, while the electron will
be utilized as the energy source for the enzymatic CO2 reduction steps. This
enzymatic process consumes the protons formed from water splitting, completing
the catalytic cycle. Combining these two components (QDs and enzymes) in the
proposed continuous flow process will create a cost-effective technology for the
large-scale production of renewable liquid fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QDs will
be synthesized using a unique bacterial system that facilitates precise control
over particle size and corresponding wavelength range of the harvested light. In
contrast to conventional, batch QD chemical synthesis, in which high
temperatures, pressures and toxic solvents are required, the team approach
allows for direct, extracellular production of water-soluble QDs directly from
culture supernatants, with a target of reducing the cost of these materials by
two orders of magnitude by removing the need for complex and expensive chemical
processing steps, which is critical for achieving a cost-effective and scalable
solution for direct liquid fuel production. A yeast-based system will be
engineered to continuously generate the three enzymes that sequentially catalyze
the reduction of carbon dioxide to methanol. Using a protein engineering
approach, the PIs will modify these enzymes to self-assemble into a
heterotrimeric complex on the surface of the quantum dot. These self-assembling
enzyme catalysts overcome the current requirements for expensive precious metal
based photocatalysts. Furthermore, the integrated enzyme-QD catalyst will
achieve high selectivity for desired liquid fuel products by eliminating non-
selective side reactions occurring with precious metal
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Both scalable
photocatalytic MeOH production and low cost QD fabrication offer significant
long term impact on society and the US economy. A low cost, green fuel, produced
continuously at commercial scale from carbon dioxide, sunlight, and water has
obvious potential. The application of QD technology in information technology,
lighting, and medicine is currently limited by the high cost of these
specialized, crystalline nanomaterials. Reducing their production cost has the
potential to foster new domestic industries. Likewise, the modular nature of the
enzyme-QD hybrid nanocatalyst platform opens up new opportunities for scalable
synthesis of other high-value chemical products from CO2 and sunlight.