* 1332432
* TIP: Transforming Computer Science Education using 'upside down' Curriculum, Course-embedded projects, Integration with other STEM disciplines, and Peer Mentors
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Sajid Hussain, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2017
* USD 394,952.00

The Targeted Infusion Project at Fisk University seeks to transform computer
science teaching through an innovative computer science curriculum and
pedagogical techniques that will create awareness, interest and success in
computer science, ultimately contributing to the workforce needs of the U.S. A
central feature of this project is to turn the computer science curriculum
"upside down", so that students will use the latest computer science tools and
techniques to develop real-life and relevant products in their introductory
courses. This is in contrast to the traditional curriculum, where exciting
features are introduced in sophomore or junior years, which is often too late to
retain students in the major. Project objectives are to: introduce computational
thinking in computer science courses for non-majors; introduce appealing tools
in introductory courses for computer science majors, and foster their use in
course-embedded projects; integrate computing into targeted mathematics and
physics cognate courses in the computer science major pathway; and utilize peer
mentoring to foster deeper learning of computer science in targeted computer
science, mathematics, and physics courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The involvement
of computer science faculty in addition to mathematics and physics faculty in
efforts to transform the computer science curriculum at Fisk University suggests
that project impact will extend across multiple disciplines. The project will
broaden the participation of currently underrepresented individuals in the
computer science and computational workforce. Furthermore, faculty development,
mentor training, and the enhancement of pedagogical techniques will promote
sustained and continuous improvements of the computer science curriculum and its
integration with other relevant disciplines. Project activities include broad
dissemination efforts to increase public computer science literacy.