* 1332996
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Java Colonial Encounters
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Kaoru Ueda, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 24,585.00

Food is a biological necessity, but it also assumes important dynamic social
functions and cultural symbolic values. To understand the nature of interaction
among early cultures, the analysis of archaeologically recovered food remains
can reveal important insights into social relationships, power negotiations, and
cultural adaptation that complement - and sometimes correct - the often biased
and incomplete historical records. The use of food in power negotiations and
boundary making can be especially enlightening when examining cultural
interaction in colonial settings, where a complex array of political, economic,
and social differences must be untangled.

In this project, Ms. Kaoru Ueda of Boston University (BU), under the guidance of
Dr. Robert Murowchick, will conduct archaeological excavations and analysis of
food and food-related remains from one of history's most important colonial
encounters, that of the Dutch East India Company (or VOC) in Southeast Asia
during the 17th and 18th centuries. As a powerful economic engine, the VOC
greatly impacted European international relationships and global empire-building
efforts. Importantly, it also left a legacy of colonial and post-colonial
politics that still resonates today in one of the most culturally diverse and
economically important regions of Asia.

This project will focus on the powerful Islamic sultanate located at Banten,
Java, Indonesia, and the key Dutch forts and trading centers that were built
there to establish and maintain VOC control over this highly lucrative spice
trade. Because of the subjectivity of existing historical records, the nature of
the cross-cultural interaction between these local elites and the Dutch at
Banten has been poorly understood. The archaeological research of sites at
Banten will provide an objective and revealing tool with which to evaluate
Indonesian-European cultural interactions in this early phase of global trade.
Banten is an important and unique colonial case study, different from the
Americas, because Europeans were only one of many foreign merchant groups in
this prominent cosmopolitan city at the beginning of their encounter. This new
data will advance our understanding of early colonialism around the world.

The proposed research will have a broad impact beyond its specific research
topics. The project will foster collaborative research and training among
Indonesian, Singaporean, and American archaeologists and students in one of the
most archaeologically under-studied regions of the world. It will improve the
practice of historical archaeology in Indonesia by introducing young local
archaeologists to new analytical techniques, such as the study of plant silica
remains from archaeological soil samples to better understand past diets (a
method particularly useful in the tropics, where ancient organic remains rarely
survive). These new materials will improve the collections of BU's Environmental
Archaeology Laboratory and provide analytical training to BU's undergraduate and
graduate students.

The project focuses on the evolving relationship between Muslim and European
societies in the early modern world, a relationship of obvious importance today.
The results of fieldwork at Banten, one of Indonesia's most revered Islamic
sites in the world's most populous Muslim-majority country, will be made
available to the public through publication in refereed journals, presentations
at academic conferences in the US and abroad, and in bilingual exhibitions in
Banten's local on-site museum. The results of this research are already
fostering international scholarly exchanges in the U.S., Indonesia, Singapore,
Taiwan, and Japan through presentation of conference papers, as well as
increasing public awareness of early colonial history in this spice trading
center through Massachusetts Archaeology Month events each October.