* 1332039
* STTR Phase I:  High-Reliability SiC power MOSFETs for Energy Efficient Power Electronics Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Sarit Dhar, Monolith Semiconductor Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2014
* USD 224,997.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project addresses one of
the key roadblocks for Silicon Carbide (SiC) power MOSFET technology. SiC power
MOSFETs have huge potential of increasing efficiency and reducing cost of power
converters due to superior material properties of SiC. Unfortunately, they have
not fulfilled their potential due to high channel resistance and instability of
threshold voltage. These limitations are primarily due to poor quality of the
interface between SiC and silicon dioxide. State-of-the-art gate oxide formation
processes achieve moderate channel mobility and demonstrate instability of
threshold voltage. The objective of this research is to develop an alternate
gate oxide processing technique that will achieve significantly higher channel
mobility while eliminating the instabilities. Initial studies will focus on test
structures to study potential techniques and to gain understanding into the
mechanism that cause poor mobility and instability. Once the most promising
technique is identified and optimized, it will be used to fabricate SiC power
MOSFETs. With higher channel mobility and stable threshold voltage, this new
process is expected to enable SiC power MOSFET technology that will result in
cheaper and more compact power converters with higher efficiency compared to
today's power systems.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is quite far reaching
for power converters which are a critical component in many systems like the
photovoltaic inverter, electric inverter, motor drives, etc. Existing converters
use silicon IGBTs which have high switching losses. SiC MOSFETs have
significantly lower switching losses compared to silicon IGBTs but currently
available SiC MOSFETs are too expensive and their reliability has not been
proven yet. This project can realize reliable and affordable SiC power MOSFETs.
Lower losses of SiC MOSFET result in power converters with higher efficiency.
Due to lower switching losses, SiC MOSFETs will also enable higher frequency
power conversion which results in more compact power converters that need less
material for other passive components. Lower losses also result into less heat
generation and reduction in cooling costs in a system. Overall, this will reduce
the cost of power converters. Lower losses and cheaper, compact power converters
will particularly benefit renewable energy generation and electric vehicles
resulting in direct reduction of greenhouse gas emission and associated benefits
to the society.