* 1332569
* Targeted Infusion Project: Developing a Shared Instrument Resource Laboratory at JCSU
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Timothy Champion, Johnson C. Smith University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,536.00

Johnson C. Smith University, a minority-serving institution, will create a
Shared Instrumentation Research Laboratory (SIRL) that will provide cutting edge
equipment for chemistry and biology research. The new instrumentation will be
located in the new 65,000-square foot Science Center on the campus in North
Carolina. A certification program will ensure that faculty and students are
masters in the use of the instrumentation. Researchers at the institution will
provide outreach to high school teachers to teach and collaborate on research
projects using the instrumentation. In addition, the STEM conference planned for
2014 will incorporate faculty and student research at the college and high
school level. Incentives for new research ideas and collaborations are
stimulated by the availability of mini-grant seed funding. Stakeholders from
higher education, K-12, community colleges and the private sector will provide
advisory assistance for continuous improvement of the project over the three-
year duration of the project. Current research indicates that students who have
hand-on exposure to instrumentation are better prepared for direct entry into
continuing STEM graduate studies or the STEM workforce. Both formative and
summative evaluation will be conducted to inform research and practice on
student achievement in STEM disciplines. Research questions to be examined from
this project, for example, include whether student achievement in Analytical
Chemistry and Instrumental Analysis changed as measured using the American
Chemical Society (ACS) exams?