* 1332161
* STTR Phase I:  All-composite Storage for Adsorbed Natural Gas
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Aaron Laney, CleanNG LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2014
* USD 224,969.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will create a fuel
storage system for natural gas using adsorbent technology. This adsorbed natural
gas (ANG) technology will allow this all-composite, conformable, lower pressure
system to hold equivalent amounts of natural gas as high-pressure, compressed
natural gas counterparts. Existing tanks, which must be cylindrical in shape,
occupy cargo space in vehicles. Operation at low pressures will allow for
conformable tanks to be placed more strategically, allowing more payload
capacity. The technical objectives of the project are 1) to produce a sorbent
material with adsorption of &gt;150V/V with the ability to desorb gas to supply
the demands of a vehicle, 2) to enhance and optimize the permeability and inter-
laminar fracture toughness of the composite material used in the ANG tanks, 3)
to develop the process for manufacturing a lightweight, all-composite, ANG tank.
The results of these tasks will be combined to produce a useable fuel system
with the required capacity. A final project goal is to meet 50-70% of the
Department of Energy's cost and performance metrics for tanks. The funding will
allow for design validation of the concept, production of prototypes, and
initial testing procedures for a minimal viable
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project will allow for two major breakthroughs in the natural gas vehicle
industry. The first is to provide a conformable fuel storage tank, which can
directly replace the original equipment manufacturer's fuel systems. In addition
to providing a safer, more adaptable fueling system; this technology will more
importantly allow for natural gas infrastructure to grow rapidly, by
significantly reducing the cost of the fueling infrastructure. The lowering the
operating pressure will permit the fueling of vehicles off a single compressor,
versus the currently-used three-stage system. This will save valuable energy and
reduce operating costs, allowing for rapid deployment and expansion. This
technology could allow for home fueling modules for natural gas vehicles to be
more affordable and effective. Providing easier access to natural gas for
consumers will help create a more energy-independent America and will lead to
healthier living conditions.