* 1332422
* GOALI:Deformation Mechanisms and Microstructure Evolution in Thermo-Mechanical Processing of Mg Alloys for Structural Automotive Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 01/29/2013,08/31/2014
* Surya Kalidindi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2014
* USD 316,837.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Although it has been widely observed that deformation
twinning plays a dominant role in the deformation response of Mg alloys at room
and elevated temperatures, its precise role on the ductility of these alloys is
not yet understood. Establishing the physics of the underlying deformation
mechanisms in Mg alloys has been complicated by many factors, including (i) the
dramatic morphological and strain hardening rate differences between the two
families of deformation twins observed in Mg alloys, (ii) the strong influence
of grain size and temperature on the extent of deformation twinning, (iii) the
activation of dynamic recrystallization during plastic deformation at elevated
temperature, (iv) the activation of rotational dynamic recrystallization in some
coarse-grained Mg alloys in certain temperature ranges, and (v) the potentially
different influences of extension and contraction twins on the recrystallization
processes. It is proposed to undertake a detailed experimental and modeling
study to develop quantitative insights into the underlying deformation
mechanisms in thermo-mechanical processing of two specific Mg alloys: AZ31 and
Mg-0.2wt% Ce. Experimental investigations will include room and high temperature
simple compression tests which will be interrupted for detailed microstructure
investigations using orientation image microscopy and measurements of the local
stored energy at the grain scale in plastically deformed samples. It is also
proposed to develop and validate new physics-based elastic-viscoplastic crystal
plasticity models to predict the anisotropic stress-strain response and the
evolution of the microstructure in thermo-mechanical deformation of these
alloys. These models will be subsequently employed to develop novel processing
routes for cost-effective manufacture of structural automotive parts made from
Mg alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Strong but light
magnesium (Mg) alloys offer tremendous potential for dramatic increases in the
fuel efficiency of automobiles, with corresponding reductions in automotive CO2
emissions. The primary impediment to widespread application of these alloys is
their very limited room temperature ductility, which prevents successful
manufacture of the desired automotive structural components by standard
inexpensive wrought processing methods. This proposal aims to produce the
fundamental physical data sets and computational models of Mg alloy structure
which are needed to find ways to improve the room temperature ductility of these
alloys. The proposed interdisciplinary collaboration between researchers at
Drexel University and at the General Motors Global R&amp;D Center will result in
the development of better Mg alloys for the automotive industry and may also
have implications for the processing of other metals with similar crystalline
structures. This project will produce two PhDs skilled in interdisciplinary
research involving novel material characterization techniques, advanced
computational mechanics, and applied mathematics. The project will expose
numerous domestic undergraduate and graduate students, especially members of
underrepresented groups in science and engineering, to cutting edge research
methodologies and equipment.