* 1332738
* GOALI: Enabling Real-Time Detection and Identification of Friction Stir Welding Defects Through the Use of Physics-Based Process Dynamic Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Nicola Ferrier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2017
* USD 374,880.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
provides funding for the investigation and development of a real-time defect
detection approach for the material joining process known as friction stir
welding. The defect detection approach will use physics-based process and defect
dynamic modeling to filter or condition real-time process measurements to
significantly improve the reliability of detection. The research project will
develop and validate the physics-based process and defect disturbance models
through a combination of process-level system identification, using both
computational and experimental data, and system level validation, including
verification of real-time in-situ defect detection capabilities. The project
will investigate the limitations and applicability of the overall defect
detection approach to include the evaluation of the sensitivity to variations in
defect size and defect type and the evaluation of the robustness of the approach
in the presence of non-defect related process disturbances.

If successful, real-time weld defect detection would substantially reduce the
total cost of friction stir welding by reducing or eliminating the need for
costly post-process inspection work. In addition, the development and validation
of process and defect formation models will improve our understanding of the
complex solid-state friction stir welding process. The resulting reduction in
cost and increase in process understanding would help accelerate its adoption as
a joining process - providing the substantial economic, environmental, and
energy conservation advantages that wide-spread adoption of friction stir
welding and friction stir processing would bring. Finally, the project will have
a strong training and mentoring focus by providing an integrated educational and
research environment for graduate and undergraduate student researchers -
including those in underrepresented groups through established University
fellowship programs.