* 1332394
* EFRI-BioFlex: Hybrid polymer-paper based multi-sensor implants for continuous remote monitoring
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2019
* Ellis Meng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,000,000.00

Hydrocephalus is a chronic incurable condition that characterized by the excess
accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain and affects 1 to 2 in every
1000 births per year. Today, hydrocephalus is primarily treated using an
implanted shunt to drain excess fluid, a technique that is virtually unchanged
since its introduction in the 1950?s. Its temporary efficacy has made
hydrocephalus one of the most frequently encountered problems in neurosurgery
with repeated shunt revisions or replacements required over the lifetime of a
patient. A major unmet need is early diagnosis of shunt malfunction which is
difficult, unreliable, and costly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Rapid and accurate diagnoses are critically important to
initiate timely intervention and avoid prolonged suffering. Therefore, the
overall goal of this proposal is to realize a transformative wirelessly-operated
multi-sensor system comprising a self-aware, self-reporting hydrocephalus shunt.
Novel concepts will be introduced in materials, sensors, microfabrication, and
systems integration to overcome the current limitations and engineering
challenges. Flexible substrates will consist of paper selectively integrated
into a polymer carrier film that is either directly applied to catheters or
seamlessly connected to tissue using selectively patterned and strategically
placed thermosensitive bioadhesives. Composite thin film substrates with novel
material properties will contain sensors, electronics, and a power source while
still allowing conformal placement. Functional initiated chemical vapor
deposited polymers will be selectively applied using novel techniques to modify
surfaces to minimize immunologic responses and prevent biofouling and infection.
Electrodeposited films will be explored as novel sensor materials that are
easily integrated with BioFlex. Multi-sensor arrays will feature ?wet?
electrochemical impedance transduction technology that does not requiring
hermetic packaging. Flexibility and miniature form factor are critical for low
profile multi-sensor systems that conform to standard flexible polymer shunts
and occupy limited real estate in vivo. This system provides a wireless
technology platform for the objective diagnosis of shunt dysfunction and real-
time monitoring of hydrocephalus-shunt hydrodynamics to enable better patient
care and correlation of treatment to disease progression. The foundation
established here will promote long-term growth of BioFlex remote monitoring
implants for challenging critical care applications. The technical team brings
complementary strengths in biomaterials, surface coatings, modeling and
simulation, microelectronics, microelectromechanical systems fabrication and
sensors, wireless devices, implantable devices, and system integration to
realize transformational bioelectronic implants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;BioFlex will enable improved care of hydrocephalus, a
chronic, incurable disease typically starting at childhood and requiring a
lifetime of medical care. Remote monitoring followed by timely intervention will
improve care and quality of life while reducing both hospitalizations and
healthcare costs. The economic and environmental benefits of the development and
use of implantable, wireless BioFlex for hydrocephalus include reduced hospital
admissions, earlier interventions, prevention of crisis management, reduced
complications, and halting of disease progression. This platform will be the
basis for future development of self-aware . &lt;br/&gt;The diverse BioFlex team
is committed to broadening participation with an extensive track record to prove
it. A major focus is recruitment of diverse students for research experiences at
all education levels and focused mentoring. Students will amplify outreach as
BioFlex ambassadors to recruit future engineers to undergraduate programs.
International collaborations will be developed and enriched through
undergraduate, graduate, and researcher exchange through existing programs.
Partnership with the Center for Technology and Innovation in Pediatrics and
Center for Body Computing will promote timely collaboration between students,
researchers, clinicians, and industry.