* 1332782
* Collaborative proposal:   Cyanophage-Synechococcus interactions in complex communities
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Marcia Marston, Roger Williams University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2017
* USD 376,616.00

Viral-induced mortality of marine microorganisms alters the quantity and quality
of pools of dissolved organic matter in the oceans, shuttling organic matter
back into the microbial loop and away from the larger marine food web. A major
hindrance to understanding the role of viruses in biogeochemical cycling is that
we know surprisingly little about which viruses infect which bacteria in the
marine environment. In this project, a network-based framework will be used to
investigate marine phage-bacteria interactions in complex, multispecies
communities. The research focuses on cyanophages, viruses that infect
Synechococcus, an ecologically important cyanobacterium in the oceans. There are
three parts of the project. The first part will identify genetic signatures of
cyanophage-Synechococcus interactions by using laboratory evolution experiments
and genomic sequencing. The second part will examine the temporal and spatial
diversity of these candidate interaction genes in natural cyanophage
populations, by comparing the full genome sequences of hundreds of isolates
previously collected over many years. The third part will adapt the new method
of viral-tagging to natural host populations to characterize cyanophage-
Synechococcus interaction networks in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The role of viruses in global marine biogeochemical cycles depends on
viral-induced mortality rates, which have been estimated to vary widely. The
pattern and dynamics of who infects whom are central to our understanding of
these rates as well as the role viruses play in marine nutrient cycling. This
project will also contribute generally to our knowledge about viral diversity.
The vast majority of marine viral sequences are not similar to any known
diversity, and it is reasonable to conclude that many of these genes have to do
with host recognition and infection. Finally, this project will develop a method
of characterizing phage-bacteria interactions in natural, diverse microbial
communities, thereby opening avenues for similar studies of viruses in other
environments.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will provide training for
15 undergraduate students (including students from the California Alliance for
Minority Participation in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics), 2 graduate
students and a postdoc. The project will also build on a science-education
internship program that was developed with Crystal Cove State Park in
California. The Park is host to more than 1.2 million visitors and 10,000 K-12
students each year. The outcome of this program will be topical science teaching
kits that reside in the Marine Research Facility of the Park to be used by
middle and high school teachers and students. These kits will connect marine
microbiological research to the standards-based curricula of California and
National Science Standards, educate the public on this NSF research and assist
in the training of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) K-12
teachers. The results will be disseminated at national conferences, including
American Educational Researchers Association (AERA) and National Association of
Research on Science Teaching (NARST), while the curriculum and video productions
will be hosted on the website of the UCI Center for Learning in the Arts
Sciences and Sustainability.