* 1332666
* Understanding Annual to Decadal Variations in the Middle Atlantic Bight Cold Pool
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Steven Lentz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 599,667.00

The Cold Pool is a band of cold bottom water over the middle and outer shelf
that extends the length of the Middle Atlantic Bight (MAB) throughout the spring
and summer. The Cold Pool is remnant winter water surrounded by water that is up
to 10 C warmer. The processes that govern both the seasonal evolution and inter-
annual variations in the Cold Pool have significant ecosystem-wide implications.
A study of the Cold Pool is timely given growing concerns about the impact of
global climate change on the MAB ecosystem, especially fisheries. The remnant
winter water of the Cold Pool is capped in spring by the developing seasonal
thermocline. The Cold Pool warms gradually over the spring and summer and is
later destroyed in the fall by storms and surface cooling. Preliminary analyses
indicate that the gradual warming of the Cold Pool varies spatially and
temperature, size, and duration vary on inter-annual and decadal time scales.
However, it is unclear what processes contribute to the seasonal warming and
inter-annual variability. Historical physical data (1860s - present) and an
extensive set of moored observations will be utilized to develop the first
comprehensive climatology of the Cold Pool. This climatology, along with a 33
year numerical model hindcast and historical nutrient data will serve as tools
to address questions regarding the processes driving warming, the
characteristics of the variability, and the connections between physical
variations and nutrient concentrations in the Cold
Pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will provide the
first comprehensive description of the seasonal evolution of the Cold Pool,
including the processes contributing to the gradual summer warming. This will
also add to our understanding of how vertical mixing and shelf-slope exchange
modify water properties over the continental shelf. This project will also
provide the first characterization of inter-annual to decadal variations in the
temperature, spatial structure, and duration of the Cold Pool and the processes
that contribute to those variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: There
is growing evidence that climate changes impact the MAB ecosystem, including the
stocks and spatial distribution of commercially important fish and benthic
invertebrates. The Cold Pool plays a critical role in the structure of the MAB
ecosystem. Therefore a clear understanding of how the Cold Pool responds to
climate change is an important element in understanding the broader impacts on
the MAB ecosystem. The physical analysis and data generated by the project will
contribute to fisheries research and management. Results will be shared with
scientists at the National Marine Fisheries Service with the goal of linking
inter-annual to decadal variations in fish stocks and distributions to changes
in the Cold Pool. The datasets resulting from this study will also be shared
with the broad scientific community.