* 1332047
* I/UCRC FRP:  Collaborative Research:  The Physical Internet for a Sustainable Logistics Future -- Advancing CELDi's Leadership Position
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Kimberly Ellis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2016
* USD 59,663.00

Program Director's Recommendation &lt;br/&gt;Center for Excellence in Logistics
and Distribution (CELDi) &lt;br/&gt;Proposal #1332047, 1332007, 1331997, 1331989
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for the Center for Excellence
in Logistics and Distribution (CELDi) located at Virginia Tech, Clemson
University, the University of California-Berkeley, and the University of
Arkansas. Funding Requests for Fundamental Research are authorized by an NSF
approved solicitation, NSF 11-570. The solicitation invites I/UCRCs to submit
proposals for support of industry-defined fundamental research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Physical Internet (PI) is envisioned as a
transformative, open, global, intermodal logistics system that utilizes
standard, modular, reusable containers, real-time identification, and routing
through shared logistics facilities. In the proposed research, the PIs focus on
two aspects of operations: (1) algorithms for container-level processes so as to
build loads in the PI and handle these loads at intermodal interfaces; and (2)
algorithms for system-level processes so as to route, schedule and coordinate
loads that flow through the PI. CELDi is in a unique position to advance the PI
for a sustainable logistics future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the proposed research include the potential to dramatically increase the
efficiency of freight transportation systems. Direct benefits to member
organizations include access to the algorithms and operational insights
developed as part of this research. Other direct benefits are likely to result
as data from member organizations are used to test the algorithms through
insights into their data and potential operational improvements. Member
organizations will have early access to the results of the research. Indirect
benefits include enhancing the reputation and attractiveness of CELDi as an
organization, which is likely to lead to better retention and recruitment of
CELDi members.