* 1332898
* Collaborative Research:   Dissolved Phosphorus Processing by Trichodesmium Consortia: Quantitative Partitioning, Role of Microbial Coordination, and Impact on Nitrogen Fixation
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Benjamin Van Mooy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2016
* USD 606,678.00

Colonies of the cyanbacterium Trichodesmium are responsible for a large fraction
of N2 fixation in nutrient-poor, open-ocean ecosystems, ultimately fueling
primary production in both Trichodesmium and in the broader planktonic
community. However, in some parts of the ocean, the scarcity of dissolved
phosphorus limits rates of Trichodesmium N2 fixation. Trichodesmium colonies
employ an arsenal of strategies to mitigate the effects of phosphorus
limitation, and the consortia of epibiotic bacteria in the colonies may play a
significant role in phosphorus acquisition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study,
researchers from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Columbia University
will use metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing to investigate how
phosphorus metabolism is coordinated in Trichodesmium consortia, and to discern
the role of quorum sensing in phosphorus acquisition and partitioning. Results
from this study are expected to expand understanding of Trichodesmium from a
monospecific colony whose primary function is fixing CO2 and N2 toward a unique
planktonic consortium with a diverse, complex, and highly coordinated overall
metabolism that exerts profound control over the cycling of inorganic and
organic nutrients in the oligotrophic upper ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project will provide research experience for an under-represented
ethnic graduate student and take advantage of established K-12 standards-based
outreach programs to increase ocean literacy in children and amongst the public.