* 1332117
* STTR Phase I:  Software tools for sustainable nutrient management on specialty crop farms
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2013,09/30/2014
* Giulia Stellari, AgSquared LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2014
* USD 224,967.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will
determine whether a mass balance approach can be used to evaluate inputs and
outputs in complex agronomic systems and whether this soil nutrient management
model can be delivered via an online software platform to help farmers improve
the sustainability of their soil nutrient management practices. The use of mass
balance approaches is common in other complex systems but infrequently used in
agronomic systems because of the dominance of soil testing as a means to
evaluate plant-available nutrient content. These tests are poorly suited to
complex production systems or those that use biologically derived nutrient
sources, such as animal manures. Thus they are not an effective means of
evaluating nutrient management strategies in organic or intensive vegetable
systems ? both of which are growing sectors of US agriculture. This project will
increase knowledge about the factors that drive the major nutrient flows in
these systems, leading to the development of a soil nutrient management decision
support tool that will enable farmers to respond to this information and effect
change in their soil management practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is a decrease in the over-
application of animal-based soil amendments through the adoption of a mass
balance approach to soil nutrient management. This approach can be used to
increase the sustainability of intensive crop production practices by reducing
the accumulation of nutrients which increase weed competition, crop
susceptibility to pests and pathogens, and nutrient losses that contaminate
water supplies, damage natural aquatic ecosystems, and increase greenhouse
gases. This project will greatly improve an existing mass balance model of soil
nutrient content and research and prototype a nutrient budgeting software tool
that will guide vegetable and specialty crop farmers toward adopting more
sustainable soil management practices while increasing the profitability of
their farm businesses. Because of the financial incentive to adopt this
technology, the end result of this project will be a highly commercializable
online software tool that will interact with an existing farm planning,
management and record keeping software platform that is already in use by more
than 5000 farmers across the U.S. The nutrient management tool to be developed
will impact the technology, agricultural, and environmental monitoring and
management sectors and benefit the more than 250,000 US specialty crop
producers.