* 1333514
* Collaborative Research : The multi-scale physics of massive black hole formation, fueling and feedback
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Drake, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Boboltz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 562,761.00

This project will create a Theoretical and Computational Astrophysics Network
with major nodes at the University of Maryland, the Georgia Institute of
Technology, and Yale University to advance the theory of formation, fueling, and
feedback of supermassive black holes (SMBHs). The project proposes to accomplish
this task by linking computational codes simulating large-scale SMBH phenomena
(i.e. cosmological gravitational collapse and AGN jets) to the small-scale
phenomena (i.e. SMBH formation and feedback on galactic structure). For the
"formation stage", the project intends to answer the question of how the first
black hole (BH) seeds formed within the early universe by numerically simulating
the coupling of large-scale baryonic structures and dark-matter halos to small-
scale collapse of primordial gas disks into massive BH seeds. For the "fueling
stage" the project aims to explore the growth of the BH seed into a SMBH from
galaxy-scale accretion flows to SMBH mergers. Finally, for the "feedback stage"
the goal is to explore the mechanisms by which the SMBHs at the centers of
active galactic nuclei (AGN) couple to the inter-cluster plasma on cosmological
scales. The network will contribute to scientific workforce development through
the involvement of undergraduate students, graduate students and postdocs. The
project will communicate results to the public through development of a 3-D
visualization taking the viewer on a journey to witness the birth and growth of
a SMBH and its influence on the cosmological environment.