* 1333311
* Collaborative Research:   Hikurangi Ocean Bottom Investigation of Tremor and Slow Slip (HOBITSS)
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Spahr Webb, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 10/31/2016
* USD 195,872.00

Deployment of a network of pressure gauges and seismometers on the Hikurangi
portion of the subduction zone off North Island New Zealand is designed to
record a slow-slip event (SSE) expected to occur on the plate boundary fault in
the 2014-2015 timeframe. SSE occur every ~18 months in this region, so
documenting the deformation associated with this type of event and comparing
that couple-week activity with ongoing microseismicity should illustrate the
evolution of forces and associated hazards in this region. Twenty US seafloor
instruments, including 10 from OBSIP, will be combined with a similar number of
Japanese instruments for ~12 months. These data will be evaluated together with
data from onshore geodetic and seismic stations in this international
collaboration. Results will inform planning for possible future seafloor
drilling by IODP and subsequent in-situ measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due
to the shallow dip of the subducting plate, the Hikurangi site offers a unique
opportunity to document the small signals associated with SSE, for which motion
is too minor for human perception. Insights into this newly-recognized mode of
plate interaction, are expected to be applicable to other convergent margins.
How far 'up-dip' the slip extends, whether all the way to the seafloor near the
subduction trench or not, is a key unknown in current estimates of earthquake
shaking and tsunami hazard. The extent of slow slip can indicate how much stress
on the plate boundary fault is relieved versus building up toward an eventual
megathrust earthquake.