* 1333651
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing and Supra-Assembly of Virus-Hybrid Janus Bionanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Nicole Steinmetz, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2016
* USD 434,300.00

This grant provides funding for scaled-up nanomanufacturing and assembly of
virus-based Janus bio-nanoparticles including higher-order structures. The Janus
term refers to the Roman god of beginnings and transitions, depicted with two
faces. As dual-faced nano-objects, Janus-type nanomaterials offer a higher
degree of functionality and tunability of properties compared to most
traditional nanoparticles. They also have unique self-assembly properties,
allowing new phases to form and phase transitions to occur that were not
previously observed. Research under this program is focused on devising scalable
and in-solution synthetic methods for the production of these bio-nanoparticle
assemblies with high yields, and involving fewer synthetic and purification
steps, while maintaining high-precision nanostructuring and scalable
manufacturing. Specifically, plant virus-based nanoparticles will be produced
through genetic engineering and scalable molecular farming in plants. Sphere-
and tube-like bio-nanoparticles will be applied in various geometries for
solution-based chemical and colloidal synthesis. Chemical functionalization will
be carried out in situ, minimizing yield-limiting purification procedures.

The methods and materials produced under this award will provide a new avenue
towards scalable nanomanufacturing of Janus-based nanoparticles and their
higher-ordered structures. Based on the broad applicability of such materials in
areas of medicine, materials, and energy, devising methods for efficient
nanomanufacturing is expected to have wide-ranging applications and impact on
commercialization. For example, the proposed Janus-type materials, when
functionalized with appropriate ligands or ions, have possible applications in
healthcare, sensors, display optics, energy conversion, and data storage
devices. These materials and devices can contribute towards enhanced quality of
life, sustainability, and technological competitiveness.