* 1333775
* Investigation of Electrohydrodynamic 3D Printing for Super-Resolution Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jingyan Dong, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 279,613.00

This award supports fundamental research on high-resolution additive
manufacturing based on electrohydrodynamic 3D printing of melted thermoplastic
materials. This research will develop a melt electrohydrodynamic printing
process for thermoplastic materials to achieve high precision additive
manufacturing of complex objects with single micron-scale resolution, which will
overcome the resolution barrier of most existing additive manufacturing
approaches and significantly improve the accuracy and surface finish of the
produced parts. Theoretical and empirical process models will be investigated
for the analysis of the melt electrohydrodynamic printing process with respect
to material properties and process parameters. This research will integrate
process development, process modeling, and a novel manufacturing system into a
new framework that enables high-resolution 3D printing of complex industrial and
biomedical products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has potential to advance
the emerging additive manufacturing industry by providing a low-cost high-
resolution 3D printing process for the manufacturing of high precision parts
with superior surface finish. Additive manufacturing have became a fast growing
industry that enables rapid prototyping or production of components for
automotive, aerospace, and medical applications. Considering the demanding
requirements on the resolution and accuracy of the industrial products and
advanced biomedical scaffolds, this research will provide a transformative
approach that solves the long-existing resolution limitation of current additive
manufacturing approaches. Moreover, the multidisciplinary education program in
this project will link the research outcomes and students' activities to the
needs of the industry for additive manufacturing, super-resolution printing, and
instrumentation. The project will also contribute to undergraduate education,
provide research experience for undergraduate and minority students, and
disseminate discoveries to K-12 students through its outreach program.