* 1333418
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Variable Spatial and Temporal Strategies for Livestock Management
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Brian King, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 12,878.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the role of women in
pastoral herd management strategies. Despite the global scope of pastoralism and
the fact that two-thirds of the world's 600 million poor livestock keepers are
women, little is known about how women contribute to livestock management. While
much is known about the ways in which male herders manage inputs (forage
available to livestock) and expenditures (distance required to move to access
that forage), there is little information on the ways that output (milk yields)
and investment (future energy stores for cows, their calves, and for human
sustenance) are managed. This doctoral dissertation research project will focus
on milk production and management strategies to reveal the ways in which women's
diverse socio-spatial and environmental knowledge affect herd-production
strategies within the household. Studying a region in southern Kenya, the
doctoral student will employ mixed methods, including ethnographic and
physiological data collected in focal households, semi-structured interviews,
and focus groups to assess how livestock management strategies vary by gender
and how decisions by women regarding output and investment shape livestock
management strategies. Strategies to be examined include intra- and inter-
household negotiations to wean calves earlier or later in the season depending
on anticipated or uncertain drought, ensuring that proper rest for cattle
showing signs of joint stress or disease, and ensuring that both young calves
and humans have access to adequate amounts of milk on a daily basis.

This project will enhance basic research about gender and development and human-
environment relations by integrating theories and perspectives from political
ecology, feminist and gender studies, and environmental physiology to analyze
the relationships between humans and animals in heterogeneous dryland
environments. The project will yield qualitative and quantitative reports about
pre-and post-milking strategies, milk yield and quality scores, animal health
indices, and animal behavioral observations in order to better understand the
gendered nature of livestock management practices. This project will produce new
information and insights regarding how herd management practices are related to
livestock well-being and maintenance, particularly given the nutritional,
economic, and social significance of milk for food security in pastoral
communities. The research will contribute to policy development by enhancing
existing analyses of livestock-based development efforts that tend to focus more
on herding and grazing patterns rather than milking processes. Societal benefits
are expected to include new knowledge that facilitates enhanced food production
in parts of the world where maintenance and expansion of food supplies are
critical for human health and welfare. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will also provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.