* 1333264
* Collaborative Research: Toward an Integrated, Lifecycle Governance Framework for Delivering Civil Infrastructure Systems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Garvin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* chu-hsiang chang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 203,010.00

In an era when governments worldwide are too cash-strapped to build or upgrade
sorely needed infrastructure, some have experimented with long-term concessions
(often referred to as public-private partnerships, or P3s) to private consortia
to finance, design, build, operate and maintain infrastructure assets. P3s offer
potential solutions to this infrastructure challenge, along with political
challenges. Existing governance theories (typically drawn from economics,
sociology, psychology or public administration) provide partial insights for
governing shorter-lived, less complex transactions, but are inadequate to guide
the necessary legislation, contracts, and management practices for P3
infrastructure projects to thrive and remain sustainable over their typical
30-year concession terms. This project integrates and expands upon previous work
to build a cross disciplinary theoretical framework that will ultimately help
design new governance approaches for enhancing the efficiency and speed-of-
delivery advantages of P3s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economists agree that
investments in expanded delivery of high quality civil infrastructure assets
provide enormous and widely shared public benefits. Such investments can also
generate multi-decade, relatively low-risk, inflation-adjusted cash flows, so
they offer excellent investment opportunities for pension funds, sovereign
wealth funds, and other institutional investors who could deploy their huge
pools of capital into P3 infrastructure projects to stabilize and boost their
portfolio investment returns while supporting worthy economic development. This
project will also inform the governance of complex and multi-faceted
organizations, such as P3s, with recommendations for both future research and
new public policy initiatives.