* 1333977
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Polymer Nanodielectric Systems Using a Descriptor-Based Design Methodology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Linda Schadler, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 254,359.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to develop a
microstructure-mediated design methodology that provides a seamless integration
of design optimization, predictive materials modeling, processing and surface
engineering, to enable accelerated discovery and development of new materials.
Through the synergy of experts in engineering design, mechanics, and materials
science, a descriptor-based computational microstructure design framework and a
combined theoretical, computational, and experimental approach to design new
microstructural systems with tailored system properties. Using emerging
nanodielectric polymer systems as a testbed, final proof of concept will reside
in design of filler morphology, interphase properties, and chemistry
combinations for achieving specific mechanical and dielectric properties for a
wide range of engineering applications. The computational microstructure design
framework will create a shift from discovery-based materials development to
systematic and computer-assisted materials design. This research will also make
significant strides in predicting interphase behavior based on interaction of
material constituents.

The results of this research could have important societal impact through
innovations of new nanodielectric polymers used in electrical transmission and
storage systems across a wide range of industries such as utility, energy,
consumer electronics, and manufacturing. Since this research provides a general
methodology for designing microstructural material systems, the techniques will
transcend to broader applications and benefit a wide range of domestic and
military applications. To disseminate the results to a broader community, a
workshop on "Design of Emerging Microstructural Material Systems" will be
organized. Research will be integrated with education and students will have the
opportunity to participate in interdisciplinary materials system design projects
that offer innovation and leadership experiences.