* 1333882
* Collaborative Research: Degassing-based constraints on the dynamics of submarine eruptions
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* James Gardner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 91,126.00

The dynamics (ascent rate, mass eruption rate, lava flow rate, etc.) of
submarine eruptions, which account for roughly 70% of the Earth's annual
volcanic activity, are essentially unknown. This research will develop a
degassing-based "geospeedometer" (i.e., a method for determining how fast magma
moves from its magma chamber to its final resting place on the sea floor). for
mid-ocean ridge basalts that will allow quantification of eruption dynamics in
Earth's largest volcanic system (i.e., the mid-ocean ridge spreading centers)
and help to evaluate how those dynamics impact carbon fluxes from the vast mid-
ocean ridge system. A combination of detailed microanalysis of textures and
volatiles in lava samples from submarine volcanic lava flows and a unique set of
laboratory experiments will be used to quantify the mechanisms and rates of
degassing and vesiculation in mid-ocean ridge basalts. A "geospeedometer" will
be developed on the basis of those results. This geospeedometer will allow us to
understand and measure flow rates of mid-ocean ridge lavas, decompression rates
of the eruptions feeding them, and how flow morphologies (sheet flow vs. pillow
lava) reflect eruption rate. Analyses will be focused on samples from the well
mapped and comprehensively sampled 2011 eruption of Axial Volcano on the Juan de
Fuca Ridge off the northwest coast of the US and Canada. Samples from this
eruption will be analyzed for degassing via volatile concentrations and vesicle-
size distributions of samples collected along the Axial Volcano eruptive
fissures and flow paths. A central challenge will be the linking of temerature,
depressurization rate, and composition to volatile concentrations and vesicle
populations. Thus, a series of laboratory decompression and cooling experiments
using natural, CO2-supersaturated, mid-ocean ridge basalts will be undertaken to
provide insights and input parameters for model calculations, leading to the
quantification of results. the 2011 eruption of Axial Volcano will serve as the
test case and be used to refine models of degassing and provide the vehicle for
incorporating research reesults into broadly applicable models for submarine
volcanic systems. The research will also help improve estimates of carbon flux
by evaluating more rigorously and quantitatively the controls on seafloor basalt
degassing of CO2. Broader impacts of the research include support of graduate
and undergraduate students and engagement of the investigators with K-12 STEM
teachers via already plannedteacher training workshops. Research will also be
incorporated into courses taught by the investigators and data will be made
freely available to the public through NSF-funded data management facilities.