* 1333731
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Emergence of Sociological Institutions in the Field of Corporate Social Responsibility
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,05/31/2016
* Shawn Pope, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 9,506.00

SES-1333731&lt;br/&gt;Mark Granovetter&lt;br/&gt;Shawn Pope&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sociological institutions are "standardized
interaction sequences" such as double-entry accounting and internal labor
markets. Core questions about institutions are how they emerge, diffuse,
entrench, and dissolve. Institutional emergence, in particular, is at the heart
of the proposed dissertation project. This study examines discursive contests
about the meaning of organizational performance, the outcomes of which are often
reflected in rankings, ratings, and indices, which attempt to evaluate
organizations against their peers. Changes in these evaluation criteria can be
precursors to institutionalization, as they often precede a series of new
organizational practices. Changes, for example, in recent years in how the U.S.
News and World Report ranks colleges have had a large, almost immediate effect
on such university practices as class size, freshmen retention, and alumni
giving. The case of the current study is the field of corporate social
responsibility (CSR), which surrounds the idea that firms should commit to
society by going beyond a narrow profit focus or minimum legal requirements.
Dozens of groups now evaluate CSR performance, such that some commentators
describe a brewing "rankings war." Understanding how these evaluation schemes
shape organizational performance and how organizations, in turn, seek to shape
changes in the evaluation schemes is the primary object of the proposed study.
The research plan is to (a) identify the CSR evaluator population and catalog
changes in their methodologies; (b) capture discourse about these changes
through (c) a large-scale, longitudinal (1991-2011), automated analysis of the
voluntary CSR reports of the population of all Russell 2000 companies; and
through semi-structured interviews with (e) 24 evaluators and (d) and an
industry-stratified random sample of 48 CSR officers at Russell 2000 companies.
Grounded theory will be used to indentify recurring narrative patterns, group
them into concepts, assemble them into categories, and finally chart the life-
course of the various categories against the changes performance metrics in the
field of corporate social responsibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Much work on CSR inherently concerns broader impacts, by
seeking the best practices, for example, to reduce pollution or increase
minority representation on executive boards. This study furthers this research
by yielding a dataset of great general use, for example, for answering questions
about (a) which social issues corporations are taking up and (b) how they do so.
Broader impacts in teaching and training will come from including undergraduates
as research assistants in each stage of scientific discovery. Assistants will be
trained in workflow protocols, confidentiality maintenance, date coding, data
storage, reference management software, interviewing methods, content analysis,
academic writing, and oral presentation. Broader impacts are also increased by
making the findings easily and inexpensively available. All coding in this study
will employ open-source software (the R programming language). Findings will be
disseminated not only to scholars (e.g., at CSR conferences), but to
practitioners, and to students. The findings, codebook, and programming script
will be published the investigator's personal website, in a format accessible
and understandable to a general audience. To ensure transparency and
reproducibility, the investigator intends to submit the dataset to the ICPSR
data repository.