* 1333260
* Analysis and Algorithms for Countably Infinite Linear Programming Models of Markov Decision Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Marina Epelman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2017
* USD 350,000.00

The objective of this award is to provide theoretical analysis and solution
methods for a large sub-class of countably infinite linear optimization problems
(CILPs), i.e., linear programming problems in which the number of variables and
constraints is countably infinite. CILPs arise in a variety of applications,
including infinite-horizon non-stationary Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) and
stationary MDPs with countably infinite state spaces, both with and without
constraints. This work will build a strong theoretical, algorithmic and
computational framework for this as yet underdeveloped field of mathematical
optimization, establishing conditions under which important theoretical and
algorithmic results from the well developed field of finite LPs can be extended
to important classes of CILPs. This includes development and rigorous
theoretical analysis of simplex-like algorithms for non-stationary MDPs and
improvements and extensive tests of the computational performance of these
algorithms. Moreover, the research will extend existing and new theoretical and
algorithmic results to CILP representations of other important types of MDPs,
including stationary MDPs with countably infinite state spaces, and non-
stationary infinite-horizon MDPs with side constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this work will deepen the current understanding of the fundamental
structural properties of CILPs, and lead to development of new algorithmic
approaches to find their solutions. Moreover, this research will directly
contribute to better analysis and solution tools for many types of problems of
long-term planning under uncertainty, including applications in economics,
finance, and manufacturing and service operations management. Theoretical
results and algorithmic solution methods developed under this award will enable
decision makers to better understand the structure and behavior of optimal
decisions in such problems, and in particular to better understand the interplay
between the ability to make better decisions today and the amount of future
forecasting required. Software developed under this award will be distributed
and documented online, and graduate students will benefit from research
participation and curriculum development resulting from this work.