* 1333672
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Understanding the Cognitive Processes in Religion, Spirituality and Secularism
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Eric Moore, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,723.00

SES-1333672&lt;br/&gt;John Levi Martin&lt;br/&gt;Eric Moore&lt;br/&gt;Univesity
of Chicago &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the social sciences have studied the
everyday use of categories, the category of religion is often treated as a pre-
defined independent variable rather than an object of study itself. This
tendency has resulted in a gap within our understanding of what religion
actually is to various groups of people. The problem with this situation is that
we can only truly understand public debates surrounding religion if we
understand the contours of what happens when people call something religion and
how religion's referents may change systematically, not randomly, across social
contexts, including those associated with sociological research. One way to
address this issue is through research methods associated with cognitive
sociology. Cognitive sociology attempts to build off of practices and theories
from the cognitive sciences to better understand the social aspects of cognitive
and cultural processes. This project therefore works towards solving three
persisting empirical methodological problems related to the study of the
category of religion. 1) It addresses the unanswered question of how people
distinguish the religious from the secular and spiritual in everyday
interactions. The project investigates this question through a study of two very
different groups of people, self-identified atheists and practicing Christians.
By examining the cultural and cognitive processes people use in making
distinctions between religion, the secular and the spiritual we can learn about
the shape of religion as a real-world category. These groups are studied both in
the Bible Belt and the Midwest. 2) Because the project looks at the category of
religion partially from the perspectives of non-believers, it also explores the
American atheist experience in a way that has been lacking up until now. The
importance of this exploration is clear in light of the growing secular
population and ongoing debates over the correct place for religion in politics
and public life. 3) The project makes use of insights from cognitive sociology
to create a unique research design that incorporates both traditional
qualitative techniques along with new interpretive strategies and additional
quantitative measures. We literally think differently in different cognitive
situations and this fact can be used to our advantage in sociological research.
By using participant observation, in-depth interviews and adding a variety of
cognitive exercises a more accurate picture of cultural phenomena can be created
than would be possible with any one method alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its contributions to social science, this
project furthers the larger public conversation over the appropriate role of
religion in the United States. Ambiguity over religion as a category, and
specifically our lack of understanding of it, makes it difficult to analyze
religion and its place in many current controversies, including those
surrounding healthcare funding (e.g. paying for contraception), electoral
politics (e.g. perceived and actual religious positions of major party
presidential candidates), and international relations (e.g. the United States
and the politics of the Middle East). Taking into account the re-emergence of
religion in recent years, on-going debates over the place of religion in a
modern democracy and the numerous controversies involving religion worldwide,
understanding the processes of how religion is created and understood as a
category by ordinary persons becomes crucial. Likewise, it is also vital to
increase our understanding of the non-religious and their relationships to
religion. About 1.6% of the U.S. population is estimated to self-identify as
atheist; this is approximately the same size as the U.S. Jewish population and
more than twice the American Buddhist, Muslim or Hindu populations. However,
relatively little is known about atheists, and this lack of knowledge creates
difficulties in the ongoing conversation over the place of religion in United
States.