* 1333083
* GOALI: Microstructure-Sensitive Design of Multiphase Structural Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Surya Kalidindi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2017
* USD 719,530.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project
combines material microstructure-level modeling and simulation with materials
processing, characterization and recent advances in materials property
measurement protocols and data analytics to realize more rapid search,
evaluation and design exploration of alpha-beta titanium alloys for next
generation aerospace structures. The work focuses on three underdeveloped
technologies necessary to achieve this goal: (i) protocols for three-dimensional
microstructure data acquisition, statistical analyses, compression, and
reconstruction, (ii) estimates of elastic stiffness, minimum strength, fatigue
and fracture properties as a function of the salient features in real or virtual
microstructures, and (iii) more accurate grain/phase scale models, including
effects of grain and phase boundaries. This is the first simulation-supported
materials design study involving multiple property objectives for alpha-beta
titanium alloy systems with a substantial range of microstructure morphologies.
This project adds (i) the Materials Knowledge System extension to polycrystal
and polyphase plasticity to achieve rapid design exploration, (ii) coupling in
situ arrays of spherical nanoindentation with crystal plasticity models of
individual phases and interface regions to develop more physically based crystal
plasticity models for the individual phases and interface slip transfer, and
(iii) pursuing the Inductive Design Exploration Method as a means of guiding the
strategy for parametric simulations to explore the design space for conflicting
material property goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of this work include
bringing modeling and simulation-informed design of new and improved materials
from the supercomputing to the desktop computing environment, thereby enabling a
practical engineering approach to design exploration of a potentially large set
of microstructures to address desired multiple property targets. The future
workforce relevant to the Materials Genome Initiative will benefit through the
graduate students receiving direct support, undergraduate research experiences,
and incorporation of results into materials modeling and design courses at
Georgia Tech, the nation's largest engineering program. Based on this
foundational research, it is expected that Boeing will incorporate relevant
elements into its engineering analysis and design practice given the important
role of the dual phase alpha-beta Ti structural alloy system in the aerospace
industry.