* 1333100
* Collaborative Research: Delegated Decision Making in Value-Driven Systems Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Jonathan Rogers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2016
* USD 148,043.00

The research objective of this collaborative award is to delineate the benefits
and limitations of value-driven decision authority delegation in large systems
engineering projects as compared to the more traditional approach of delegating
authority through a requirements flow-down process. A new and practical value-
driven decision delegation approach will be defined based on the mathematical
foundations of probability theory, decision theory, and game theory. Using
rigorous mathematical analysis, the investigation will characterize this new
approach and compare it to a requirements-driven approach. New methods will be
derived (1) by which subsystem engineers can communicate their beliefs about
technical capabilities to systems engineers and (2) by which systems engineers
can incentivize subsystem engineers to seek designs that maximize system-level
expected utility. The investigation will start by examining the case of a single
subsystem and will culminate with the analysis of decision delegation in the
general case of concurrent subsystem design.

If successful, this research will have a significant impact on the development
of large-scale complex engineered systems of interest to private industry, the
government, and the public at large. An improved understanding of decision
delegation will enable engineers to structure engineering projects in a more
efficient and effective matter, resulting in better systems, at lower cost, and
within less time. Furthermore, fundamental insights discovered in this research
will provide direction to future computational and empirical studies. Finally,
the discoveries made in this research will be incorporated into new systems
engineering curricula, which will lead to a better-prepared next generation of
systems engineers.