* 1333527
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Genetic Approach to Dispersal at the Alpine Treeline Ecotone
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Jeremy Johnson, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2016
* USD 15,987.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates the importance of seed
dispersal at the alpine treeline ecotone. In general, in studies of vegetation
transition zones, the question of whether seeds are dispersed locally or arrive
from distant populations is critical to our understanding of how such transition
zones may change over time. If seeds are only traveling short distances,
vegetation can only adapt slowly to changes in environmental conditions. If,
however, seeds are traveling long distances, vegetation zones may be able to
track a rapidly changing environment more closely. Previously, it has been
difficult to determine effective dispersal distances due to challenges in
tracking seeds across the landscape. Using molecular genetics techniques, the
origin of established individual plants at treeline can be assessed to determine
to what degree seed production is a local process or the result of long distance
dispersal. This is particularly important when future climates are expected to
change much more rapidly than they have in the past, and it is important that
researchers understand migration potential of species to predict what future
ecosystems may look like. This study will investigate dispersal and flow of
genetic information both regional and local scales. The research will integrate
a combination of geographic and genetics techniques to test two hypotheses 1)
long distance dispersal is occurring at treelines, and 2) clonal reproduction is
not the dominant mode of reproduction at treeline populations. Improved
understanding of the importance of long distance seed dispersal and the relative
abundance of clonal reproduction will be broadly transferrable to other ecotone
studies. Furthermore, the incorporation of genetic analyses into a spatial-
ecology context will facilitate additional research of this kind in the future.

This study is a novel integration of geography and genetics to answer a
pertinent set of questions allowing for a deeper understanding of how treelines
may migrate under altered climate. Additionally, the results from this study
will contribute to a stronger understanding of the influence of seed dispersal
on treeline dynamics in general. The dispersal data generated will contribute to
improved parameterization of fat tailed dispersal curves that can be used in
future research to model migration under changing climate scenarios. The project
will also be used to generate additional hypotheses related to dispersal, gene
flow, and the importance of landscape configuration and geography on the ability
of plants to respond to changing ecosystems. The team will develop a
presentation of the study's findings to present to research and management staff
and to the general public at the Kenai National Wildlife Refuge and Kenai Fjords
National Park. The team will write an article for the Peninsula Clarion, via the
Refuge Notebook column, and will publish in refereed journals to further
disseminate their findings. Findings will also be disseminated at conferences
and through online data sharing. The project will foster science education and
training to an undergraduate at Texas A&M University in both field and
laboratory work. Undergraduate involvement will target inclusion of
underrepresented groups. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this project will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.