* 1333212
* Collaborative Research: An Autonomous Vertical Sampling Vehicle for Global Ocean Biogeochemical Mapping
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,084,195.00

The PIs request funding to develop a rapid vertical profiling autonomous
underwater vehicle with biogeochemical sampling capabilities. This system will
add a new, and much needed, biological dimension to the GEOTRACES program, and
would most likely become the central instrument for a GENOTRACES microbial and
enzymes research initiative - ultimately enabling the global marine mapping of
microbial DNA, RNA and proteins, including key biogeochemical enzymes. The PIs
will develop a wireless water-column sampling technology: a 6000m rated
autonomous vertical sampling vehicle with a high throughput sampling and sensing
payload. The combination&lt;br/&gt;of rapid vertical transport, the 6000 m depth
range, and the need to stop at numerous target depths represents a novel and
significant engineering challenge and developing a vehicle capable of this task
with the sampling capacity needed for GENOTRACES "-omic" sampling is the
objective of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leads oceanic sample collection into the
future where they will need to be collected from a variety of autonomous
platforms. This is of great societal importance because understanding the ocean,
its sheer magnitude, and its role in global processes will require more than
ships and moorings, it will take samples from many parts of the ocean and their
analysis by many techniques for many different analytes. This project will also
sponsor two consecutive teams of undergraduate female engineering students from
Smith College's Picker Engineering Program during their senior engineering
design course. This is seen as a real plus and an innovative outreach effort.
The PI has very successfully done this in the past.