* 1333351
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Historical Logging Activities on the Ecology and Geomorphology of Mountain Streams
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2013,12/31/2015
* Walter Dodds, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 12/31/2015
* USD 15,972.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project is about historic stream
channel disturbances and associated implications for ecosystem functioning.
Previous research has demonstrated strong relationships between stream
geomorphology and ecosystem processes such as stream metabolism, but little is
known about how past stream channel disturbances influence these relationships
or how streams recover from these historic disturbances. Understanding the link
between geomorphic processes and ecosystem function as well as how these
relationships are affected by disturbance has implications for the environmental
management of streams, particularly the practice of stream restoration.
Ecosystem metabolism refers to the balance between the processes of gross
primary production (GPP) by algal and aquatic plant communities and ecosystem
respiration (ER), which accounts for the total consumption of organic carbon by
all aquatic communities in the system. Light, temperature, stream flow, and
channel complexity all interact and influence rates of GPP and ER. This research
will address the degree to which past stream channel disturbances and recent
restoration efforts affect these controls. The project's research questions are
1) how do structural and functional geomorphic characteristics vary between
disturbed, non-disturbed, and restored channel conditions?; and 2) how do GPP
and ER respond to these changes? In the past mountain streams were impacted by a
forest harvesting strategy known as 'tie-driving,' during which there was
systematic clearing and channelizing of streams to aid in the transport of
railroad ties. This practice was very common in Wyoming and Colorado and the
legacy of this practice is still evident on the landscape today. We hypothesize
that 1) GPP will be higher in tie-driven streams as compared to non-disturbed
streams because of increased light availability as a result of thinner riparian
cover and lower channel banks, 2) ER will be lowest in tie-driven streams
compared to non-disturbed streams because of decreased organic matter standing
stocks and decreased channel complexity, and 3) rates of ER will be greater than
rates of GPP in all streams indicating that communities are reliant on energy
subsidies originating from outside the channel. Results from this study will
address knowledge gaps related to the interactions between stream geomorphology,
riparian composition, and ecosystem metabolism and will develop an integrative
foundation for understanding ecological outcomes of stream restoration projects.

Results of this project will help to inform future stream restoration and
management efforts through the integrative investigation of stream geomorphology
and ecosystem function within the context of a disturbance regime. Improving
these disciplinary links will result in more efficient and effective stream
restoration projects and more efficient use of federal and state restoration
investments. Over the course of this project, results and associated data will
be shared directly with local agencies such as the USDA Forest Service and the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, ensuring that research findings will be
incorporated in agency management efforts quickly and efficiently. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, the project will provide support to
enable a promising graduate student to establish an independent research career.