* 1333357
* Effects of carbonate chemistry and calcium ions on the boron partitioning between aqueous solution and inorganic calcium carbonate
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2016
* USD 203,560.00

Dissolved boron is an important constituent of natural seawater, and its ratio
with calcium can be used to estimate concentrations of atmospheric carbon
dioxide in the past - a highly desired tool in climate research. However, at
present, the mechanism of boron incorporation into inorganic, as well as
biogenic carbonates is still largely unknown, impairing the utility of boron as
a tool to estimate past climate. Researchers from University of Hawaii will aim
to shed light on these processes by (1) conducting controlled inorganic
precipitation experiments to analyze B/Ca ratios in calcium carbonate samples,
(2) developing a theoretical, thermodynamic framework for the inorganic
incorporation of boron into carbonates as a function of the solution chemistry,
and (3) using available data of biological systems and the inorganic framework
as a baseline to explain features of boron incorporation into biogenic
carbonates. Results from this study will advance fundamental understanding of
trace element incorporation into carbonate minerals, which has important
implications for research focusing on reaction mechanisms, proxy development,
climatology, and global biogeochemical cycles.

Broader Impacts: This project will provide scientific research experience and
education to graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Hawaii,
and conduct public outreach through the University of Hawaii and Bishop Museum
in Honolulu.