* 1333884
* Design of  High Temperature Shape Memory Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Huseyin Sehitoglu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2016
* USD 322,670.00

There is a recent, significant interest in high temperature shape memory alloy
capabilities that will broaden the utilization of these materials. Shape memory
alloys are unique in their ability to return to their original shape after
deformation. The research emphasis of this proposal is on the development of new
high temperature shape memory alloys with capabilities above 400 degree Celsius.
The crystallography and the atomic displacements leading to the creation of
twins, a rearrangement of the atoms, will be investigated via meso-scale
modeling. The compositions will be optimized to control the strengths of
secondary phases within the material and hence the reversibility of the phase
transformations which dictate the material behavior. The research will also hone
in on the processing of these materials for sample preparation, including
polycrystals and single crystals. The investigation will include experiments to
measure the behavior during loading and unloading and heating and cooling under
stress in order to develop high temperature resistance for several potential
compositions of nickel, titanium, cobalt and iron based shape memory materials
with ternary additions. The proposed measurements of local displacements and
strains will provide a critical check on the atomic deformation planes and the
predicted stress at the onset of twinning in these materials. These measurements
will be made with digital image correlation techniques, which will also be
advanced during this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected benefit of the
research is to establish multi-component shape memory alloys that can operate at
higher temperatures with actuation capabilities that can benefit the aerospace
and other high temperature industries. The aim is to develop high temperature
alloys with shape memory functionality without compromising strength, ductility
and durability. The scientific benefits of the research include a better
understanding of the mechanical response based on the underlying composition,
crystallography, and microstructure. The educational benefits of the research
will be enhanced with the preparation of a monograph on shape memory and a
series of lectures that combine atomistic calculations with mesoscopic theories.
This will be an advancement in the pedagogical treatment of shape memory alloys
elevating the materials science and continuum mechanics perspectives and
understanding.