* 1333561
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hispanic Population Growth and Black-White Relations in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Miguel Centeno, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,972.00

SES-1333561 &lt;br/&gt;Miguel Centeno &lt;br/&gt;Maria C. Abascal
&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How will the introduction
of a third, major ethnoracial group affect relations between pre-existing
ethnoracial groups? This dissertation broaches this question through the lens of
Hispanic population growth and its impact on black/white relations in the United
States. The black/white divide has characterized US race relations for most of
the country's history; Hispanics are changing that through high birth rates and
continued immigration. This project examines the impact of real and perceived
levels of Hispanic population growth on Blacks' and Whites' attitudes toward
each other and their support for race-targeted and race-coded policies, like
affirmative action and welfare. Previous research hints at two possible outcomes
of Hispanic population growth: 1) the reinforcement of a black-nonblack divide;
or 2) the merger of Blacks and Whites along a shared (American) identity that
excludes Hispanics on the basis of cultural rather than racial differences. The
study analyzes nationally representative survey data along with original
experimental data to address these questions. An analysis of trend data from the
General Social Survey and the American National Election Studies data documents
how Blacks' and Whites' racial and policy attitudes change over time and in
response to local levels of Hispanic population growth. Public goods games will
be conducted to extend survey findings to observable behaviors in a controlled
laboratory setting. By manipulating two aspects of the game (participants'
perceptions of Hispanic population growth and the racial composition of the game
group, the games examine whether Blacks' and Whites' contributions to a
racially-mixed group vary in response to perceived population trends.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As public
disagreement over the role of government grows, Americans' racial and policy
attitudes and the future of the American welfare state become important topics
of both academic and public policy concern. This is especially true in the
context of substantial Hispanic population growth, which is no longer limited to
a handful of immigration gateways. The recent shift toward new destinations of
immigration compels scholars to examine the impact of diversification in
communities without established immigrant or minority populations. Research
findings have important implications for social policy, including: 1) predicting
sites of racial/ethnic hostility, and 2) detailing the impact of diversification
on public support for policies like affirmative action and welfare. The study
will yield practical information about the value of experimental game methods
for the study of race relations. Accordingly, the experimental protocol and data
(with identifying information removed) from the games will be made available
online, and thus publicly accessible. The findings of this research will be
disseminated via interdisciplinary journals and conferences, facilitated in part
by ongoing affiliations with the Princeton University Center for Migration and
Development and the Center for the Study of Social Organization.