* 1333242
* Pilot-Wave Hydrodynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Bush, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 427,249.00

This research will be comprised of an integrated experimental and theoretical
investigation of pilot-wave hydrodynamics, as arises when droplets propel
themselves along the surface of a vibrating fluid bath through resonant
interaction with their own wave field. Discovered by Yves Couder in 2005, the
bouncing droplet system is reminiscent of the pilot-wave model of quantum
dynamics postulated by Louis de Broglie as a rational alternative to the
Copenhagen Interpretation, and exhibits several features once thought to be
exclusive to the microscopic, quantum realm, including tunneling, orbital
quantization and wavelike statistics. The research will be directed towards
elucidating the manner in which this quantum-like behavior arises. Particular
attention will be given to demonstrating how pilot-wave dynamics in the presence
of an external force gives rise to quantized states, and ultimately to chaotic
trajectories with wave-like statistics. The starting point will be a stability
analysis of orbital solutions arising for drops walking in a rotating frame, and
in the presence of a central force. Laboratory experiments will guide the
theoretical developments, and new quantum analog systems will be explored. Once
the behavior of this hydrodynamic system is thoroughly understood, we will
investigate the link between the bouncing droplets and quantum particles, their
statistics and dynamics. In addition to the direct educational value of this
research to the graduate and undergraduate students involved, it will encourage
communication across traditionally disparate disciplines, between workers in
fluid dynamics, quantum physics and dynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Einstein insisted that the statistical description
of microscopic particles provided by standard quantum theory is incomplete, and
underlaid by a rational dynamics. The first project for such a quantum dynamics
was the pilot-wave theory of Louis de Broglie, according to which microscopic
particles move in responseto a wave field generated by the particle's internal
vibration. More than 80 years later, only 8 years ago, the first pilot-wave
system was discovered by Yves Couder, in the form of millimetric drops walking
along the surface of a vibrating fluid bath. Remarkably, these walking droplets
exhibit many features thought to be peculiar to the microscopic world. In
addition to being a rich and subtle dynamical system worthy of study in its own
right, the walking droplets have the potential to yield insight into the
microscopic realm. This research will explore both question and inform the
philosophical foundations of modern physics. This research is interdisciplinary
in nature, spanning fluid dynamics, dynamical systems and quantum physics, so
will foster the development of new links between fields.