* 1333211
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migration, Nationalism, and Welfare State Reform
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Robin Stryker, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,208.00

SES-1333211&lt;br/&gt;Robin Stryker&lt;br/&gt;J. Taylor
Danielson&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 1990s marked
the movement of welfare states away from providing transfer payments and
benefits-in-kind (e.g., healthcare) toward policies that equip individuals with
the skills necessary to re-enter the labor market. Although these employment-
focused programs successfully incorporated previously excluded groups (e.g.,
women) into the labor force, existing research suggests that these programs
negatively impact immigrants in Europe by contributing to the development of new
forms of institutionalized inequality and legitimizing the forced assimilation
of immigrants into European society. To determine why these programs continue to
be implemented despite their unintended consequences for immigrants and how
immigration affects the structure and generosity of welfare state programs, this
project examines:&lt;br/&gt;1. How, and to what extent, changes in immigration
rates from non-EU/Muslim countries into Europe have affected public support for
welfare state programs.&lt;br/&gt;2. Whether politicians have used changes in
immigration to influence public support for policy reforms that cut back and
restructure existing welfare state programs and shift service provision from the
state onto the market.&lt;br/&gt;3. How changes in immigration rates from non-
EU/Muslim countries into previously ethnically homogeneous European countries
have contributed to the erosion/restructuring of welfare state programs in these
countries. &lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, this study uses publicly
available data from the European Value Survey (EVS) and the International Social
Survey Programme (ISSP) to analyze changes in public attitudes toward both the
welfare state and immigrants. These data will be used to determine if
populations have become more or less receptive to anti-immigrant rhetoric and
proposed welfare state reforms in response to changes in immigration. In
addition to these quantitative analyses, parliamentary records from the United
Kingdom will be examined and situated in a larger historical context to
determine if anti-immigrant rhetoric was used to call for reform of labor
activation programs, anti-poverty policies, and/or redistributive programs. The
findings from the U.K. case will be used to assess whether or not changes in
immigration may also be linked to welfare state restructuring efforts in Sweden,
traditionally a more robust and redistributive welfare
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining
the use of immigration to justify restructuring and cutting existing welfare
state policies, this study will help us understand what role group divisions
play in the policymaking process; whether or not European countries are
experiencing increases in anti-immigrant sentiment among their citizenry and
reduced support for the welfare state; and how certain group divisions are
rendered more or less salient in an attempt to generate support for welfare
state reform. Should the results of this study demonstrate that European
countries are experiencing increases in anti-immigrant sentiment among their
citizenry; findings could potentially assist European lawmakers in identifying
the potential causes of anti-immigrant sentiment and methods for addressing
these issues.