* 1333647
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rapid Urbanization and New Town Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Kevin Cox, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,714.00

This project investigates one of the most profound changes in human history -
the world-wide surge of urbanization. According to a 2007 UN report, the world
became more urban than rural in 2006, with more people living in cities than in
the countryside. A more recent UN report estimates that the world urban
population will increase by 72 percent by 2050, from 3.6 billion in 2011to 6.3
billion in 2050. This unprecedented global urbanization is profound in three
ways. First, such an urban revolution signifies the deep reorganization of local
and national politics and economy. It entails massive displacement of people and
production, the shattering of existing social and economic networks, and the
gradual formation of new governance schemes. Second, the rapid growth of cities
relies on vociferous consumption of resources and produces increasing pollution.
It, as a result, poses serious threats to the sustainability of human society.
Third, such rapid urbanization would not have happened without equally fast
globalization of the market. Cities now are much more inter-connected.

Yet urbanization is highly uneven across the globe. China, with its spectacular
economic rise, is now the fastest urbanizing region and the world's largest
construction site. How do Chinese cities contribute to global urbanization and
in so doing shape the global movements of capital, resources and ideas?
Moreover, most of China's urbanization occurs in the newly created towns. In the
process, millions of farmers are displaced and an immense amount of resources is
invested. However, many of the new towns remain 'ghost towns' or 'sleeping
towns', where few people live and work during the day. How do these new (ghost)
towns come into being? How should we understand China's rapid urban growth?
Using the Hexi New Town in Nanjing in eastern China as a case study site, the
research examines how different forces (domestic and foreign, social and
material) collaborate or come into conflict with each other and collectively
shape these new towns. It employs extensive archival research, semi-structured
interviews, and participant observation. Theoretically, the research will
integrate three strands of critical urban theory - urban political economy,
urban political ecology, and ordinary urbanism. This project will not only
provide a more nuanced and comprehensive understanding of China's urbanization
but also will create a dialogue between Western urban theory and the Chinese
experience. The results of the research will be distributed in both academic and
media venues in the West as well as in China. It will help local residents
better understand the forces affecting their lives, especially civil groups
whose interests are impacted by development. Moreover, the research will help
ordinary observers outside of China, including those in the US, better assess
the dramatic urban changes in China that influence their own lives from afar.
Last, as a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will
provide the necessary support for a promising student to enrich her
dissertation, complete her PhD Degree, and provide a solid foundation for her
future research career.