* 1333889
* A Novel Biomechanical Model of Bacterial Adhesion and Aggregation
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Sinan Muftu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2017
* USD 400,183.00

The research objective of this award is to derive a fundamental biomechanical
model capable of predicting and improving efficiency of water filtration and
bioremediation. The approach is as follows. Microbial strains identified by the
Department of Energy will be cultured in aqueous environment with ionic
concentration matching that of the polluted waterways. Micro-characterization
using atomic force microscopy will determine surface potential, intersurface
forces, adhesion energy, and elastic modulus of single cells, surface roughness
and zeta potential of sand grains etc. Macro-characterization using standard
packed column tests will measure filtration efficiency for different water flow
rates and temperature. Such information will be fed into a new model of
adhesion-detachment of cells, liquid-solid interaction, and statistical
retention of cells on sand substrates. Based on quick single cell
characterization, macroscopic filtration behavior of a myriad of bacterial
strains can ultimately be predicted and tested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the benefits of this research will include (i) prediction of fate
and transport behavior of microorganisms in porous media, (ii) design,
evaluation and feasibility studies of in-situ or enhanced subsurface
bioremediation and bioaugmentation, (iii) effective implementation of engineered
(sand filters) or natural (bank filtration) filtrations processes for water
treatments, (iv) migration of pathogens in drinking water supplies and microbial
enhanced oil recovery. The research results will in a long run contribute to
resolving the increasing need for clean drinking water in the 21st century with
growing world population and drastic global climate change.