* 1333279
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Conservation, Conflict, and Control in Tropical Protected Areas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Christoph Nolte, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 12,915.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine how conflict, costs,
and conservation priorities shape spatial enforcement decisions in four national
parks of Colombia. Protected areas like national parks are a cornerstone of
biodiversity conservation, but they are sites where officials often fail to
enforce existing regulations against human-related pressures. Recent studies
show that budgetary constraints alone do not provide sufficient explanation for
differences in the conservation impact of protected areas. This doctoral
dissertation research project seeks to assess the proposition that the costs of
conflict and access can prevent park managers from allocating enforcement
resources in ways that optimize conservation outcomes. To test this proposition,
the doctoral student will assess the conservation success of Colombian parks
using satellite imagery and econometric estimation techniques. He will examine
how estimated success varies with levels of conflict, accessibility, and park
budget. The student will conduct field research in four national parks to
examine how enforcement allocation decisions of protected area managers are
shaped by spatial differences in expected conflict, accessibility, and
conservation priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By empirically examining the role
of conflict and cost in spatial enforcement allocation, this research will
provide new insights regarding potentially crucial determinants of conservation
success in protected areas. Few studies have empirically examined how protected
area regulations are enforced in practice, let alone how enforcement allocation
varies spatially as a function of key decision variables such as conflict,
accessibility, and conservation priorities. Enhanced understanding of the
relative influence of these variables on enforcement allocation can improve the
efficiency of current and future policies and investments that seek to
strengthen tropical protected area networks. Project findings also will lay the
groundwork of a research program on modeling and optimizing enforcement dynamics
in tropical protected areas. Collected data will be used as the baseline for an
assessment of the impact of future enforcement investments on conservation
outcomes. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an independent
research career.