* 1333539
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating Conservation and Livelihood Outcomes from Community-Based Forest Management
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Rebecca Hardin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2015
* USD 12,915.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the effectiveness of
the United Nations' Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
(REDD+) program, which is an international funding mechanism to reduce emissions
from tropical deforestation and degradation by simultaneously attaining
emission-reduction, biodiversity-conservation, and livelihood-improvement goals.
The project will investigate the REDD+ principles that giving local people the
rights and powers to manage forest resources while promoting equitable sharing
of carbon revenues will sustainably avoid tropical deforestation and forest
degradation. This doctoral dissertation research project will assess the degree
to which current REDD+ expansion in more than 60 tropical developing countries
is occurring without sufficient understanding of whether and how to enhance
simultaneous achievement of multiple outcomes. To contribute in filling these
gaps, the doctoral student will conduct comparative case study assessment of
communities with and without REDD+ interventions. He will combine mixed methods
from the social and forest ecological sciences to empirically explore two
research questions: (1) How do specific REDD+ interventions affect carbon,
livelihood, and conservation outcomes separately and jointly? (2) What are the
trade-off and synergistic relationships between carbon, conservation, and
livelihood outcomes? The student will conduct a case study of REDD+
implementation in Tanzania, which was one of the first nine countries to pilot
this program starting in 2009. Qualitative narratives will be used to explain
the specific REDD+ interventions using data from focus group discussions, in-
depth interviews, participant observations, and review of literature. Assessment
of livelihood outcomes will rely on data from 240 household socioeconomic
surveys. Assessment of carbon and conservation outcomes will use data from 60
systematic forest inventories. Appropriate statistical analysis will be used to
determine relationships and statistical significance of differences in carbon,
conservation, and livelihood outcomes between
villages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze two emerging approaches
to renewable resource management, payment for environmental services (PES) and
recently decentralized community-based forest management (CBFM) programs, in
order to assess whether and how their combination under REDD+ has avoided
tropical deforestation. Successful REDD+ interventions promise affordable
significant emissions reductions options for industrialized nations while
protecting biodiversity and improving livelihoods of millions of forest
dependent communities. The research will help formulate empirical policy
recommendations to improve REDD+ effectiveness in nations piloting that UN
program under similar PES and CBFM arrangements. The doctoral student will help
develop a community level forest governance educational tool for tracking REDD+
impacts. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an independent
research career.