* 1333797
* Collaborative Research:   An integrated theoretical and empirical approach to across-shelf mixing and connectivity of mussel populations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Huijie Xue, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2019
* USD 306,015.00

Existing larval transport models focus mainly on along-shelf transport and have
done little to explicitly incorporate the effects of cross-shelf mixing and
transport processes. Yet cross-shelf transits (both outgoing and incoming legs)
are critical components of the dispersal paths of coastal invertebrates. This
project will explore the role of cross-shelf mixing in the connectivity of blue
mussel populations in eastern Maine. Previous work has shown that the Eastern
Maine Coastal Current (EMCC) begins to diverge from shore southwest of the Grand
Manan Channel and creates a gradient in cross-shelf mixing and larval transport,
with cross-shelf mixing being more common on the northeastern end, episodic in
the transitional middle area, and then becoming rare in the southwestern half of
the region of the Gulf of Maine. As a result, the investigators predict that
northeastern populations of mussels are seeded mostly from up-stream sources,
while a significant component of self-seeding (local retention) exists in
southwestern populations. Larvae settling in the intervening bays are expected
to be derived from a mixture of local and up-stream sources. Using a combined
empirical and theoretical approach hydrographic, current profile, and larval
vertical migration data will be collected and used to develop and validate a
high-resolution coastal circulation model coupled to a model of larval behavior.
The investigators will model simulations in different years using the empirical
data from mussel reproductive output and spawning times. Connectivity predicted
from this model will be then tested against independent empirical estimates of
connectivity based on trace element fingerprinting for larvae which can be
connected to specific natal habitats. Regions of agreement and discrepancy in
the model will be identified to guide additional data collection and model
refinement. This iterative process will ensure an understanding of both larval
transport patterns and processes, and provide estimates of inter-annual
variability in connectivity for blue mussel populations in the Gulf of Maine.

The project will provide interdisciplinary training for a number of
undergraduate and graduate students. All three investigators have established
track records of training students at either the undergraduate or graduate
level, or both. Inter-institutional and interdisciplinary exchange will be
fostered by a twice per year mini-symposium/retreat at which all project
participants from the three laboratories will present and discuss results from
their portions of the project. This project also has important implications for
the commercial mussel aquaculture industry in Maine, which relies heavily on
natural settlement and desires a better understanding of larval supply patterns
to facilitate site selection for collecting newly settled spat.