* 1333226
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Recruitment, Hiring Practices, and Wage Gaps
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Elizabeth Kiester, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 5,776.00

SES-1333226&lt;br/&gt;PI: Christy Glass&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Elizabeth
Kiester&lt;br/&gt;Utah State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars have
identified a phenomenon known as the motherhood wage penalty with research
demonstrating that women with children face wage discrepancies beyond those
associated with being female. Experimental research has allowed scholars to
document respondents' negative assessments of mothers' work-related aptitude
relative to childless women and men. However, the ways in which the policy
environment shapes employer behavior, and the correlation between what employers
do and what they say they do in actual work environments, has yet to be
examined. The primary research question of this project is "how do employer
recruitment and hiring practices shape mothers' access to jobs?" The
investigators hypothesize that employers' recruitment and hiring practices can
create barriers to mothers' employment through employer bias and discrimination.
This project employs a novel mixed-methods approach, combining a multi-state
audit study with qualitative employer interviews. First, the audit study
provides data for a quantitative analysis predicting the likelihood of a mother
receiving a callback for an interview. Second, qualitative interviews allow
employers to describe and explain in depth their policies and practices that
lead to the outcomes measured in the audit study. The project concludes by
comparing observations from the audit study with employer responses. This
research fills a gap in the existing literature by addressing this mechanism
that may not only be creating barriers to employment but contributing to the
motherhood wage penalty as well. This question comes at an important time when
legal precedence has long since been established to prevent discrimination yet
reports continue to reveal discriminatory practices and
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project tests whether, to
what degree and to what effect mothers are a target of employer discrimination.
In addition to contributing to theory and research in the fields of gender, work
and organizations, these findings will potentially influence employer practices,
anti-discrimination laws and employment policies. Additionally, this project
adds a comparative element that examines effects of both state- level policies
and firm-level characteristics.