* 1333070
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Characteristics and Consequences of Prehistoric Land Use in the Cahokia Region
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* John Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2015
* USD 14,509.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the role of climate
change and land use in the emergence and decline of the complex agricultural
society at Cahokia, the largest prehistoric Native American settlement north of
the Rio Grande. Cahokia was located in southwestern Illinois in the Mississippi
River valley near present-day St. Louis. Agriculture began to develop in eastern
North America around 4,000 years ago, and by 1050 CE, Cahokia had emerged in the
central Mississippi River valley with a population of approximately 10,000
inhabitants, monumental earthworks, and an expansive trade network. Despite its
role as a cultural and political center, Cahokia was almost completely abandoned
by 1350 CE for reasons that remain unclear. One hypothesis is that prolonged
drought or severe flooding caused Cahokia's decline. Other prehistoric
agricultural societies appear to have been highly vulnerable to periods of water
scarcity that reduced crop yields and triggered social instability.
Environmental degradation caused by agricultural intensification may have
exacerbated the effects of climatic change and further contributed to Cahokia's
decline. To assess the potential role of climate change and resource
overexploitation in the emergence and decline of Cahokia, the doctoral student
will collect lake sediment cores from four oxbow lakes in in the Mississippi
River floodplain along a transect beginning at Cahokia and moving southward
towards areas that were less populated during the late prehistoric period. From
all sediment cores, the student will develop long-term records of agricultural
expansion and contraction (using fossil pollen, charcoal, and carbon isotopes)
and hydroclimatic variability (using sediment mineral content and particle-size)
that span the last two millennia. These high-quality records of changing land
use, land cover, fire regimes, and hydroclimatic conditions that permit tests of
hypotheses concerning the role of environmental change in Cahokia's
abandonment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to a broader
understanding of the resilience and vulnerability of agricultural societies to
land-use intensification and climate variability. By developing an understanding
of why past agricultural societies collapsed, this project will provide insights
into how to manage contemporary agricultural systems in order to increase their
resilience in the face of environmental perturbations. This project lies at the
intersection of the earth sciences, ecology, geography, and anthropology, and
the researchers will present their work at national conferences to both social
and natural scientists. The results of this research will be shared with the
public through presentations at the interpretive center at Cahokia. All data
will be made publicly available through the Neotoma Paleoecology Database, an
online repository for data from lake sediment cores. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish an independent research career.