* 1333630
* Quantitative Uncertainty Modeling for Performance Based Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2013
* John van de Lindt, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 10/31/2013
* USD 307,532.00

The ultimate goal of earthquake engineering is to mitigate the adverse effects
of earthquakes on the society. This requires accurate prediction of structural
responses to earthquakes. Because of numerous factors, such as earthquake
intensity, material properties, and construction quality that are unknown, there
exists a certain level of uncertainty in the responses of structures. In
earthquake engineering, this uncertainty must be quantified and considered in
design of buildings to ensure safety. Currently, uncertainties are accounted for
using empirical equations in the design of buildings. In this project, a
systematic method to accurately calculate the level of uncertainty in building
responses during future earthquakes will be developed and demonstrated. Once the
model is developed and implemented, it will provide a mechanism to increase the
accuracy of earthquake response prediction, ultimately enabling engineers to
build safer buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, consideration of
uncertainty in Perfomance Based Earthquake Engineering (PBEE) is simplified,
empirical, and without experimental verification. The goal of this study is to
develop a quantitative framework for uncertainty propagation in PBEE and verify
it experimentally using a new approach termed herein as probabilistic shake
table tests. Initially, an uncertainty propagation model will be developed based
on principles of probability theory and structural dynamics. Then a specially
designed shake table testing procedure, which will isolate the uncertainty
contributions from different sources, will be conducted to collect the necessary
data to calibrate and verify this model. Finally, the calibrated model will be
applied to improve uncertainty modeling in performance based earthquake design
and shake table test planning. This project will provide encouragement to the
next generation of students to pursue a career in engineering through a Tri-
Level (8th grade, 11th grade, and 2nd year college students) Academic
Partnership program. Graduate students from different institutions will benefit
from a project-based competition component developed as part of this project for
graduate earthquake engineering classes.