* 1333500
* Linking Electronic Structure with Continuum Fields:  Coarse-Graining Density Functional Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Phanish Suryanarayana, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2016
* USD 237,585.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate the fundamental impact of
crystal defects on material behavior through quantum-mechanical Density
Functional Theory calculations. In particular, a seamless multiscale method that
will enable the accurate study of defects at realistic concentrations is
proposed. This method will be developed in the framework of a novel linear-
scaling technique for Density Functional Theory, which traditionally has a
cubic-scaling with respect to the number of atoms. Additionally, numerical
coarse-graining approximations tailored to the nature of the defect will be
utilized. The optimality of the overall formulation will be ensured through
rigorous mathematical analysis. As an application, the proposed multiscale
method will be used to study the effect of alloying on the strength and
ductility of Magnesium with the goal of discovering novel alloys. Also,
constitutive laws will be generated for dislocation dynamics simulations and,
using these, the size-dependent strength observed during compression of
nanopillars will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
project will provide a breakthrough in bridging the electronic structure and
continuum descriptions of crystal defects. This will significantly advance the
current understanding of deformation and failure mechanisms in solids.
Consequently, it will accelerate the discovery of novel materials with
properties tailored to technological applications. As an example, new magnesium
alloys with improved specific strength will have a noticeable impact on the
transportation industry where there is a need for weight reduction without
compromising structural integrity. Such alloys will help reduce fuel
consumption, thereby also having a positive influence on the environment. The
educational efforts of the project include broad dissemination of research
results through social media and academic curriculum, creating a new website
that documents the state of the art in crystal defect calculations, organizing
conference symposia, and training graduate, undergraduate and high school
students.