* 1333182
* Seedless Growth of Nanowires and Selective Positioning of Quantum Dots for Flexible and Panchromatic Photoelectrochemical Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jung-Kun Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 306,831.00

he grant provides funding to develop novel processing techniques for seedless
growth of transparent conducting oxide nanowires and selective coating of
nanowires with multiple kinds of semiconductor nanoparticles. We will probe to
uncover the mechanism responsible for the heterogeneous nucleation of the
nanowires on the oxide layer. The composition and thickness of the thin oxide
layer will be controlled to facilitate the nucleation and growth of the oxide
nanowires. On the surface of the nanowires, semiconductor nanoparticles will be
selectively positioned by a modified electrodeposition process. The location of
different semiconductor nanoparticle layers will be determined by their light
absorption spectrum. Nanoparticles absorbing the light with longer wavelength
will be placed to be close to the bottom of the nanowires to harvest all of
visible light spectrum. These hybrid nanowire arrays will be characterized using
electrical, optical, and chemical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the expected outcomes of this research will lead to inorganic composite arrays
that will harvest all visible components of incoming solar light. Multilayer
semiconductor nanoparticle arrays will make the light absorption spectrum of the
composite arrays much broader than that of current semiconductor materials.
Moreover, the proposed research will deliver a comprehensive understanding of
carrier loss mechanisms at various surfaces and interfaces for better electronic
conduction. A combination of panchromatic light absorption capability and fast
carrier transport will contribute to manufacturing high performance
photoelectrochemical cells. The broader impact of the research lies in its
potential to provide the highly efficient energy conversion and storage devices
using a low cost and continuous manufacturing process. This will take us one
step closer toward realizing the development of fully integrated complex hybrid,
flexible electronic systems for many applications such as healthcare and
environmental monitoring.