* 1333993
* Simulation and modeling of the interactions of liquid turbulent eddies and gas bubbles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Igor Bolotnov, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 275,764.00

Bolotnov, Igor &lt;br/&gt;1333993&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable prediction of
multiphase turbulent flows using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is important
in a wide range of engineering applications (e.g., flows in nuclear reactors,
chemical processing plants, heat exchangers etc). While some multiphase flows
can be successfully modeled, many questions remain unanswered regarding the
interactions between bubbles and the turbulence. Specifically, multiphase CFD
approaches utilize interfacial forces (e.g., lift, drag forces) to predict the
bubble distribution in the flow. However, the influence of the turbulence on the
interfacial forces is not fully understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The project objective is to quantify bubble/turbulence
interactions in a specific set of flow conditions by analyzing experimentally
validated interface tracking simulations and to create new turbulence spectrum
that accounts for interfacial forces to be used in multiphase CFD and multiphase
large-eddy simulations (LES). Advanced finite-element based flow solver (PHASTA)
with Level-Set method for interface tracking will be used to perform the
bubble/turbulence interaction studies. This code has been successfully applied
to large scale direct numerical simulation (DNS) of turbulent flows in various
geometries, as well as interface tracking simulations (including bubbly channel
flow, annular flow). The proposed research will test the following hypotheses:
(i) Bubbles deposit energy to the liquid turbulence eddies of the same size and
deformability of a bubble controls the amount of energy, and may result in
reverse energy transfer from the liquid turbulence; (ii) The energy deposition
into the liquid turbulence is affected by the presence of the wall and the
bubble/wall interactions modify the law of the wall and affect shear-induced
energy production; (iii) The lateral bubble distribution in turbulent shear flow
is governed by interfacial forces which strongly depend on bubble/turbulence
interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The success of
this project will be instrumental in developing new multiphase flow models that
have the ability to design advanced engineering systems with multiphase CFD.
More accurate models for this type of flows can allow the construction of more
efficient nuclear power plants, chemical processing plants as well as bring two-
phase flow applications in other areas of engineering. High-fidelity interface
tracking simulations will be introduced in graduate level courses on thermal
hydraulics in the Nuclear Engineering Department. In addition, basic concepts
related to the proposed research will be presented to high school students
through the yearly Young Investigator's Summer Program in Nuclear Technology
organized by the Nuclear Engineering Department's Outreach Program.