* 1333902
* Collaborative Research: Binary Constrained Convex Quadratic Programs with Complementarity Constraints and Extensions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2014
* Jong-Shi Pang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 01/31/2014
* USD 150,001.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to undertake an in-depth
study of the class of binary-constrained (BC), mathematical programs with
complementarity constraints (MPCCs). Such programs form a broad class of
constrained optimization problems with binary variables where some of the
constraints are described by the disjunctive condition of complementarity. The
latter features arise from a number of applied problems where the discrete
variables are used to model binary decisions and the complementarity constraints
are the result of some lower-level optimality or equilibrium conditions.
Building on recent advances in the global resolution of linear programs with
linear complementarity constraints (LPCCs) and their extensions to problems with
convex quadratic objective functions (QPCCs), both with continuous variables
only, this investigation will initially develop efficient solution methods for
the global resolution of binary-constrained LPCCs and QPCCs. Extensions of the
proposed methodology to the broader class of binary-constrained convex
mathematical programs with complementarity constraints will be the second phase
of the investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this
research will lead to improved understanding of such problems as optimal plant
location in competitive markets, discrete-choice portfolio selection under risk,
classification in medical decision making, and compressed sensing in signal and
image processing, as well as many related applications in complex engineering
and economic systems involving hierarchical decision making with logical
constraints. Computational advances from diverse areas of optimization need to
be integrated in order to effectively handle the discrete and continuous
features of the problems under consideration. The integration of such subdomains
of optimization and the expected theoretical advances in understanding the
intrinsic properties of this new class of optimization problems form the
intellectual core of the proposed project.