* 1333610
* A Clearinghouse on Natural Hazards Research Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Lori Peek, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,899,434.00

A Clearinghouse for Natural Hazards Research and Applications&lt;br/&gt;Kathleen
Tierney, Principal Investigator&lt;br/&gt;Natural Hazards Center, Institute of
Behavioral Science&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every year, disasters cause numerous deaths and
injuries and many economic losses in the U. S. The costs of disasters continue
to rise, owing largely to growing population density in hazardous areas such as
floodplains, coastal areas that are at risk from hurricane winds and storm
surges, and parts of the country that are at risk from wildland fires. Disasters
present complex and difficult recovery challenges for communities, businesses,
and households and their psychological effects can linger long after disaster
impact. The University of Colorado?s Natural Hazards Center seeks to prevent and
reduce these negative impacts and enhance the disaster resilience of the nation
through transferring knowledge on the social, economic, political, and
psychosocial dimensions of disasters to decision makers, the emergency
management community, and the general public, as well as through leadership and
advocacy. To advance these goals, the Center provides a range of information
products, including: 1) library and information services; 2) electronic
newsletters and listservs (Natural Hazards Observer, DR, Disaster Grads) aimed
at providing information to public officials, private entities, researchers,
students, and the general public; 3) a web site that is the most widely-
recognized in the hazards and disasters field, containing research reports,
bibliographies, guidance documents, and links to many other centers and
information sources; 4) publications on topics of special interest (Natural
Hazards Informer and monographs); 5) information distribution through social
media (e.g., on Twitter as HazCenter); and 6) an annual workshop that is
attended by hundreds of participants from universities, government, and the
private sector and that increasingly includes participation by international
researchers and practitioners. To provide rapid information on disasters and
their social impacts, the Center also sponsors quick-response research in the
aftermath of major U. S. disasters. Information products, including quick-
response research reports, are available free of charge, primarily through the
Center web site, http://www.colorado.edu/hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of Center activities is based on its contributions to hazards
and disaster theory and to the analysis of the causes and consequences of
disasters. Center faculty and staff are actively engaged in research and in
reporting research results in books (including textbooks), journal articles, and
conference presentations. Principal investigator Tierney is widely recognized
for her research on topics such as the social causes of risk and disaster
losses, disaster vulnerability and resilience, and disaster recovery, as well as
her work on improving multi-disciplinary collaboration for the in-depth study of
hazards, disasters, and risk. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of Center
activities and NSF funding can be measured along a variety of dimensions,
including visits to the Center web site, information requests handled by the
Hazards Center Library, newsletter and listserv subscriptions, attendance at
annual workshops, and the training of the next generation of disaster
researchers and practitioners. The PI incorporates state-of-the art research
findings into her undergraduate and graduate courses at the University of
Colorado Boulder and is frequently called upon to provide context and commentary
on disaster-related issues for the media. Additionally, her publications and
those of the Center are often included in graduate and undergraduate course
syllabi around the country. Recently, she has served as a source or on-air
participant for media outlets such as the New York Times, Washington Post, Wall
Street Journal, CNN, the Associated Press, National Public Radio and local NPR
stations, and HuffPost Live. Tierney speaks regularly at meetings of
professional societies and at conferences for emergency management and disaster
loss-reduction practitioners. She has also served on several National Academy of
Sciences committees and panels focusing both on disasters and on climate change.
NAS committee reports and activities are designed to provide guidance to various
governmental agencies and programs on ways of addressing issues of national
significance.