* 1333810
* Seismic Site Response Analysis Considering Partially Saturated Soil Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Majid Ghayoomi, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2016
* USD 179,006.00

The seismic response of partially saturated soils differs from that of dry or
water saturated soil deposits. Yet, the available site response analysis methods
ignore the influence of partial saturation in the soil. This research will study
the effects of partial saturation on the seismic site response analysis and how
different suction (degree of saturation) profiles affect the seismic response of
a soil layer. Suction due to partial saturation increases the effective stresses
acting on the soil, altering the shear modulus, shear wave velocity, nonlinear
deformation response, and damping. As a result, the distribution of suction with
depth is expected to affect the propagation of seismic waves and the resulting
ground accelerations. This, in turn, influences the seismic demand imposed on
the soil and surface structures. Although the shear wave velocity employed in
current site response analysis methods accounts for partial saturation of the
soil, it only reflects the degree of saturation at the time of shear wave
velocity measurement. Hence, the seasonal fluctuation of the water table and its
impact on degree of saturation may alter the site response. The current state of
practice commonly relies on procedures that include dynamic material properties
of either water saturated or dry soils as the most conservative scenarios. This
might be an appropriate assumption for problems dealing with soils' strength and
deformation. However, stiffer partially saturated soils due to inter-particle
suction forces result in a higher site natural frequency and lower damping,
which may adversely affect the site response. In this study, the steady state-
infiltration through an unsaturated soil layer inside a geotechnical centrifuge
will be implemented to control the soil layer?s degree of saturation. Cyclic
loads with different amplitudes and frequencies, and earthquake motions with
different intensities will be applied to the soil layers with various suction
profiles. These profiles are controlled by the infiltration rate and the
centrifugal acceleration. The experimental data will be compared with the
numerically estimated site responses incorporating effective stress-based,
suction-dependent dynamic material properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will advance the fundamental knowledge of unsaturated soil dynamics and
seismic performance of geotechnical systems by incorporating the effects of
seasonal fluctuation of degree of saturation on site response. The work will
assist in better understanding of fundamental mechanism of wave propagation
through an unsaturated soil layer. This project will be a substantial step
towards more sustainable and safer seismic designs of buildings and
infrastructure. The potential findings of the project will help in assessing the
performance of current approaches in evaluating the seismic site response and
provide practical recommendations to consider the partial saturation in current
seismic site response analysis methods. The graduate student development will
prepare students to lead the profession through advanced technical training in
geotechnical earthquake engineering, water infiltration, and physical modeling,
as well as mentoring opportunities. The importance of earthquake engineering and
seismic hazards will be introduced to college Civil Engineering and K-12
students through undergraduate research, courses, and outreach programs.