* 1333734
* Evaluating the relative importance of suspended and sinking particles to the meso and bathypelagic food web in the central North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2016
* Hilary Close, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2016
* USD 558,548.00

Overview: The ocean's midwaters are the largest living space on the planet. The
mesopelagic food web plays key roles in the biological carbon pump and the
production of food for commercially harvested species, but its functioning is
understudied because it is remote and technologically challenging to sample.
Recent estimates indicate respiratory demand outstrips measured sinking particle
supply by up to 2-3 orders of magnitude suggesting that some food inputs to the
mesopelagic food web have been underestimated or missed. Suspended particles
frequently are not sampled effectively and may be an overlooked food source.
Because identifying the principal inputs of organic matter to the deep-sea food
web is critical to understanding its function, the investigators propose to
evaluate the relative importance of suspended and sinking particles to the meso-
and bathypelagic food web in the central North Pacific. They will characterize
the isotopic compositions of specific groups of mesopelagic and bathypelagic
zooplankton and micronekton, and identify the extent to which they consume
suspended or sinking particles using mass balance approaches. The investigators
recently have recognized differences in delta 15N and delta 13C values of amino
acids (AA) of sinking and suspended particles; these patterns diverge with
depth, providing a means to distinguish between food web pathways. The research
will define the source-specific isotopic values of suspended and sinking
particles at several depths from the surface to the bathypelagic and test
proposed microbial mechanisms driving these depth patterns. At corresponding
depths, MOCNESS trawls will sample diverse metazoa: zooplankton size fractions,
plus targeted resident, migrating and likely suspension-feeding taxa of
zooplankton and micronekton. Preliminary data suggest that suspended particles
are a secondary food source, containing less labile organic matter than sinking
particles that exhibit a seasonal cycle in flux in the central North Pacific.
This study will determine if suspended particles become more important to
zooplankton and micronekton during a time of year when sinking particle flux is
low (Jan/Feb) in comparison to when it is high (Aug), allowing an evaluation of
how temporal change in surface ocean productivity affects the functioning of
mesopelagic food webs.

Intellectual Merit: Recent research has called for additional study of the
ocean's deep midwaters. This study will provide new insights into the
functioning of the meso- and bathypelagic food web and its coupling with surface
ocean processes in the central North Pacific. The recently-demonstrated
ecological tool of amino acid-specific isotopic analysis will provide a novel
and comprehensive approach with which to address our hypotheses, and the project
will develop the first AA isotopic dataset spanning particles to fish. Results
will help identify the ecological underpinnings of increasing delta 15N values
with depth in zooplankton -- apparently a common pattern. Zooplankton
consumption of suspended particles also could constitute a mechanistic link
between the microbial loop and higher trophic levels. The processes controlling
the enormous attenuation of particle flux by mesopelagic consumers -- and
thereby the strength of carbon sequestration to the deep ocean -- are not
understood. Seasonal sampling will help us relate mesopelagic food web processes
to changes in surface ocean productivity, furthering our understanding of future
climate change impacts on deep-sea food webs and carbon flux. With regard to
fisheries, many oceanic top predators such as tuna and swordfish feed on
mesopelagic micronekton. A clearer understanding of the structure of mesopelagic
food webs will help inform ecosystem models which are used to understand
variation in fisheries production.

Broader Impacts: This project will provide excellent training opportunities in
leadership, research and outreach for an early-career female investigator
(Close), a female postdoctoral researcher and for a graduate student and an
undergraduate student. Broader societal impacts of our work relate to fisheries
and climate change, subjects of great interest to the public, and many of the
animals we will study, such as squid and anglerfishes, are very charismatic. The
investigators will broadly communicate their results through two mass media
venues. Voices of the Sea is a local TV program, with potential distribution to
PBS that will highlight the research in two episodes. Second, the PIs will act
as advisors for a new international TV series, David Attenborough's "Natural
Curiosities" that will reach millions of viewers internationally.