* 1333903
* Aspects of Quantum Computational Universality in the Measurement-Based Models
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2017
* Tzu-Chieh Wei, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 02/28/2017
* USD 210,000.00

This research will investigate important issues of quantum computational
universality in measurement-based quantum computation (MBQC), explore
connections of MBQC to ideas in statistical mechanics and condensed matter
physics, and other quantum computational models. Specifically, the Affleck-
Kennedy-Lieb-Tasaki (AKLT) models supply a rich playground for exploring new
universal resource states and for understanding the intricate relations of
quantum computational universality to percolation, spatial connectivity,
magnetic order, and phase transitions in computational power. The long standing
open question of the existence of a finite spectral of any two-dimensional
rotationally symmetric (including AKLT) Hamiltonians is important also for the
stability of generating related resource states by cooling. This will be studied
with both analytic and numerical means. The research also includes searching for
new types of resource states and developing model Hamiltonians whose thermal
states can be used for quantum computation without the need to switch off
interactions. Furthermore, this program studies how topological order can be of
use to quantum computation, and conversely, how MBQC offers an efficient means
to create a large class of topologically ordered states. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: MBQC is one of the several models for building quantum computers.
Essentially, all that is needed is a suitable highly entangled resource state to
begin with and the ability to perform local measurements. This approach of
realizing a quantum computer is promising with several physical systems, such as
ultracold atoms in optical lattices and photons, complementing other approaches
of implementing quantum computation. MBQC also provides a conceptual framework
for answering fundamental questions in quantum computation and for bridging to
other areas of research. The questions that will be addressed include: (1) What
entangled states can qualify as an universal resource and can they arise as
unique ground states of physically reasonable Hamiltonians? A complete
understanding may lead to novel characterization of states of matter in terms of
computational capability. (2) Is there a generalized Haldane conjecture in
higher dimensions and how to test it? Tackling the long standing open question
of the spectral gaps of two-dimensional AKLT Hamiltonians will give insight to a
possible generalized Haldane conjecture in 2D and pave the road for probing
richer phases in isotropic spin Hamiltonians in higher dimensions. (3) Can
topological order provide insight to the quest of new resource states? (4) Are
there advantages over others that the MBQC model offers? The research findings
of MBQC from this program will not only advance our knowledge on various aspects
of quantum computation and its connection to ideas in condensed matter physics
and statistical mechanics, but also have potential impact on future quantum
computer technology. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts : The PI is taking the
initiative in organizing a forum for discussing scientific results in quantum
information science and stimulating collaboration across disciplines at Stony
Brook University. He will integrate his research on quantum computation in the
courses that he is currently and will be developing for both undergraduate and
graduate students. This project will also include training of a graduate student
and mentoring of a postoctoral researcher.