* 1333929
* Collaborative Research:   Linking physiological and molecular aspects of diatom silicification in field populations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kimberlee Thamatrakoln, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2017
* USD 337,995.00

Diatoms, unicellular, eukaryotic photoautotrophs, are among the most
ecologically successful and functionally diverse organisms in the ocean. In
addition to contributing one-fifth of total global primary productivity, diatoms
are also the largest group of silicifying organisms in the ocean. Thus, diatoms
form a critical link between the carbon and silicon (Si) cycles. The goal of
this project is to understand the molecular regulation of silicification
processes in natural diatom populations to better understand the processes
controlling diatom productivity in the sea. Through culture studies and two
research cruises, this research will couple classical measurements of silicon
uptake and silica production with molecular and biochemical analyses of
Silicification-Related Gene (SiRG) and protein expression. The proposed cruise
track off the West Coast of the US will target gradients in Si and iron (Fe)
concentrations with the following goals: 1) Characterize the expression pattern
of SiRGs, 2) Correlate SiRG expression patterns to Si concentrations, silicon
uptake kinetics, and silica production rates, 3) Develop a method to normalize
uptake kinetics and silica production to SiRG expression levels as a more
accurate measure of diatom activity and growth, 4) Characterize the diel
periodicity of silica production and SiRG expression.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: It is estimated that diatoms process 240 Teramoles of biogenic silica
each year and that each molecule of silicon is cycled through a diatom 39 times
before being exported to the deep ocean. Decades of oceanographic and field
research have provided detailed insight into the dynamics of silicon uptake and
silica production in natural populations, but a molecular understanding of the
factors that influence silicification processes is required for further
understanding the regulation of silicon and carbon fluxes in the ocean.
Characterizing the genetic potential for silicification will provide new
information on the factors that regulate the distribution of diatoms and
influence in situ rates of silicon uptake and silica production. This research
is expected to provide significant information about the molecular regulation of
silicification in natural populations and the physiological basis of Si
limitation in the sea.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project blends concepts
in physiology, molecular biology, and biochemistry with marine ecology and
oceanography, providing an opportunity for researchers with diverse interests to
interact. This project provides an opportunity for a female researcher to get
first-time PI experience and, at the same time, provides excellent hands-on,
cross-disciplinary training for undergraduate and graduate students. In
addition, underserved and underrepresented undergraduate students will be
involved in both lab and field-based research. Research activities will also
interface with established outreach programs at both Rutgers and UC Santa
Barbara to develop novel methods for translating scientific themes and data sets
generated from field work into innovative teaching materials aimed at K-12
educators, K-12 students, and undergraduates. Senior personnel will also work to
develop educational units to be distributed online and in professional
development workshops.