* 1333965
* Strain Response Measurement-Based Optimal Damage Identification of Civil Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Mahendra Singh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 08/31/2019
* USD 291,456.00

The objective of this project is to formulate an effective damage identification
approach for complex and large structural systems that are used in buildings and
bridge structures. The need for an approach that can reliably and efficiently
detect structural damage without extensive manual inspections to monitor the
health of civil infrastructure is urgent. The existing methods have focused on
the utilization of easily measured but less damage sensitive linear structural
acceleration responses but they are not yet adequately reliable for damage
identification. This project will focus on the utilization of more damage
sensitive and directly measurable dynamic strain responses to develop an
approach for reliable damage identification. The study involves a synthesis of
strain and acceleration sensor data within a new system identification concept
to solve an important problem of national and international interest. The
project will also develop methodologies to identify optimal locations of sensors
that provide the best data to achieve the most effective damage identification
objectives. The methodology will maximize a suitable norm of the Fisher
information matrix through the utilization of highly sensitive strain
measurements at selected locations to achieve the lowest Cramer-Rao bound often
used in the information theory. For the validation of new damage identification
schemes, the simulated and laboratory response data obtained for realistic
models of buildings and bridges will be used. The main feature of this strain
measurement-based health monitoring approach will be its robustness to the
measurement errors, analytical efficiency and accuracy for direct implementation
on the critical components of civil infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will provide a solution of a challenging problem for effective damage
identification of complex and large structural systems used in modern buildings
and bridges. The project will enhance the nation's educational and research
infrastructure by advanced training of students. It will provide a much needed
technology for efficient and economical interrogation and health monitoring of
civil structures. The project results will be made available to practitioners
and researchers through technical presentations in professional meetings and
conferences, dedicated Internet sites, publication in peer reviewed technical
journals, and classroom teaching.