* 1333948
* Collaborative Research: TC3 - Triboluminescent Crack Categorization Coating
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Erin Bell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 203,302.00

The goal of this project is to develop new materials, applied in the form of
paints, for damage detection in bridges. These paints are unique in that they
emit a visible light signal as cracks propagate through them. This allows an
inspector to identify and monitor active cracks during visual inspection of
bridges and other civil infrastructure. The project combines the development and
processing of luminescent paints with the testing of these materials as sensors
for crack detection and categorization in civil infrastructures. The paints will
be studied by a combination of laboratory experiments, which includes the design
of new material compositions, and the field-testing of the paints on both in-
service and decommissioned bridges, which will allow development of field
protocols for use of these materials. The emphasis is on systematically
optimizing basic materials processing and behavior that will result in enhanced
signal strength during field use and developing a model that describes the
luminescent response of a variety of materials for crack detection. The project
is divided into two parts: (1) the development of luminescent powders and their
incorporation into slurries to form a paint mixture that can be applied to
structures and (2) the testing of these materials under realistic conditions for
assessment of their effectiveness for structural health monitoring, specifically
detection and categorization of fatigue cracks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the benefit of this research will be the development of unique
paints that can visually detect active cracks in bridges, increasing the
effectiveness of the visual inspection and the timeliness of repair strategies.
As many state and federal agencies develop a replacement and rehabilitation
strategy for aging infrastructure, this is an opportune time to integrate an
innovative sensing methodology that exploits all available material
advancements. An innovative monitoring tool that provides real-time information,
does not require a power source, and is visual, would be a significant
advancement in the area of fatigue crack detection. This tool could be
integrated during hands-on inspection or during rehabilitation of bridge
structures.