* 1333367
* Dissertation Research: Moral Economies in Dairy Production.
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Philip McMichael, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 10,419.00

SES-1333367 Phillip McMichael Kathleen Sexsmith Cornell University

This dissertation examines the moral basis of the labor process and workplace
relationships between undocumented immigrants and farmers on New York dairies,
in the context of industrial growth and consolidation. Although sociological
theories of development expect labor relationships in industrial agriculture to
be governed by functional and impersonal norms, employment commitments on dairy
farms are often based on notions of justice and affective ties. This
dissertation research hypothesizes that farmers are compelled to meet workers'
ideals of fairness regarding the treatment of labor, including protection from
immigration enforcement and support in meeting basic needs, due to these
immigrants' skilled job performance and the risk of their labor flight. It
further hypothesizes that farmers' compliance with these moral economies
paradoxically contributes to the modernization of the dairy industry. The study
contributes to understanding industrialization processes in agrarian societies,
migrant networks, and agricultural labor under globalization, by seeking answers
to the following questions: (1) How does undocumented status combine with the
structure of production to shape: a) the material and social experience of dairy
labor, and b) the formation of migrant networks? (2) What ideals of fairness do
farm owners and workers draw upon to legitimate the division of labor on dairy
farms? (3) How, and with what impact on farms, do migrant workers resist when
their expectations of fairness are not met? The researchers will complete
comparative, ethnographic research in two New York dairying counties with
differing experiences of agro-industrial growth and immigration enforcement
activity. It analyzes the social fabric of dairy farm life through semi-
structured interviews, time use surveys, archival analysis, and participant
observation with farm and community members. Study

Broader Impacts

Findings could potentially inform immigration policies and agricultural
extension programs that aim to improve the employment conditions of migrant
workers and the viability of dairy farms. Results will be presented to the
Cornell Cooperative Extension offices. The research design includes English
classes for immigrant workers, helping them to integrate in the community. It
also benefits the teaching and learning of two undergraduate students, who will
be employed as research assistants. The theoretical positioning of the project
at the nexus of development sociology and migration studies will contribute to
interdisciplinary collaboration.