* 1333044
* Electromagnetic Force Assisted Centrifugal Nanocasting for Manufacturing Thermoelectric Energy Conversion Composite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yong Gan, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2017
* USD 185,605.00

This award supports fundamental research on electromagnetic force assisted
centrifugal casting in order to develop a fast, scalable and low cost
manufacturing process for making high performance thermoelectric energy
conversion composite materials. Specifically, the research will develop a
physics-based predictive model for coupled electromagnetic and mechanical forces
in centrifugal casting thermoelectric nanoparticle-containing semiconducting
polymers with a newly designed rotary machine and conduct experiments to verify
the model, test the hypothesis that incorporating nanoscale thermoelectric
components into polymers to form complex composite structures will significantly
enhance the energy conversion performance, evaluate the feasibility of using
electromagnetic force assisted centrifugal casting to make thermoelectric energy
conversion nanomaterials containing multilayer polymer/oxide nanotubes,
establish the relationship between the energy conversion behavior and
manufacturing conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results will provide
knowledge and understanding to meet the critical need of energy challenge for
the nation. A globally competitive energy manufacturing industry will contribute
to the nation's economy. Thermoelectric units with higher energy conversion
efficiency and lower manufacturing cost will benefit consumers and the society.
Research results will also enhance undergraduate students' learning in such
courses as Independent Study and Senior Capstone Design. Training graduate
students at California State Polytechnic University-Pomona, a minority-serving
institution, and outreaching to local high schools will be carried out to
stimulate the interest of minority students in the field of energy
sustainability.