* 1333693
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Embedded Economy and National Income Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Christopher Chase-Dunn, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 08/31/2014
* USD 7,366.00

SES-1333693&lt;br/&gt;Christopher Chase-Dunn&lt;br/&gt;Anthony
Roberts&lt;br/&gt;University of California-Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ubiquitous growth of national income inequality in most areas of the world since
the 1980s has challenged established theories of income inequality.
Specifically, in the extant literature on income inequality, researchers have
identified processes of economic development, globalization, and labor market
institutions as the primary factors determining the distribution of national
income. However, few studies have considered how these processes are
interrelated and whether this interaction explains the recent growth in national
income inequality. The main purpose of this dissertation is to empirically test
a new integrative theory of income inequality based on the concept of the
'embedded economy' - the interaction of market and social forces. This
integrative theory posits that growing income inequality is the consequence of
changes to national labor regulations and norms, which are being reshaped by the
emergence of global manufacturing and international institutions. The
dissertation aims to assess three hypotheses using panel data on eighty
developing and developed countries observed over a twenty-five year period
(1985-2010) and structural equation models with random and fixed-effects. First,
using an internationally-comparable measure of labor market institutionalization
based on the coding of national labor legislation and country reports on labor
violations, the dissertation will test whether labor market institutionalization
reduces income inequality. Second, the dissertation will assess whether
integration in global production networks, participation in economic
intergovernmental organization, and the campaigning of international non-
governmental organizations hinders or promotes the formation of labor market
institutions in developing countries while inducing a neoliberal reform of labor
market institutions in developed countries. Finally, the dissertation will
assess whether these processes indirectly affects income inequality through
their effects on labor regulations and norms. The intellectual merit of the
dissertation is based on three theoretical and empirical contributions to the
broad literature on income equality. First, the dissertation will develop a new
theoretical approach for explaining income inequality which accounts for the
interaction between labor markets, institutions, and globalization. Second, the
dissertation will produce new longitudinal data on labor regulations and
practices for a large cross-section of countries. Finally, the dissertation
advances the methodological approach to studying cross-national variation in
income inequality by employing multi-level structural equation models for
estimating both proximate and distal effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact &lt;br/&gt;Over the last ten years, income inequality has become a major
social issue for governments in developing and developed countries. Findings
from the proposed research could have several important implications for policy-
making. First, by examining the effects of national labor legislation on income
inequality, the dissertation will provide specific evidence on the effectiveness
of labor market reforms and social insurance policies for reducing inequality.
Second, the findings could elucidate how economic and political globalization
have impacted the capabilities of national policy-makers in enacting economic
policy aimed creating social equity, which provides insight on how to implement
new social policies and reforms in an increasingly global world. Given the
growing concern over income inequality, the dissertation will equip policy-
makers with helpful information for addressing issues of social inequality.