* 1333141
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Glacier Recession and Implications for High-Elevation Peatlands
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Mary Polk, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2016
* USD 15,881.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the changing spatial
and temporal dynamics of tropical high-elevation peatlands. A unique type of
wetland, peatlands store large volumes of water and carbon. Because of these
ecosystem functions, understanding the role of peatlands in the context of
global environmental change is increasingly important. In the Andes Mountains of
South America, high-elevation peatlands are experiencing hydrological change
caused by climate-induced glacier recession. This doctoral dissertation research
project aims to address two research objectives in Peru's Cordillera Blanca.
First, the doctoral student will characterize the extent of temporal and spatial
peatland change from 1987 to 2011. Second, she will identify the environmental
variables that explain patterns of peatland vegetation composition. The project
will be accomplished by bridging in situ vegetation sampling with remote sensing
and geographical information science techniques. These methods will demonstrate
the relationship and impact of glacier recession on a tropical mountain
ecosystem. By describing the ecology and critical environmental variables that
explain peatland vegetation, the project will answer scientific calls to fill a
knowledge gap regarding an ecosystem type that is directly experiencing the
effects of global environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is that it will integrate mountain geography and wetland
science to investigate the ecology and spatio-temporal dynamics of tropical
high-elevation peatlands thereby advancing scientific knowledge about a unique
and important ecosystem. Using a mixed-methods approach not previously used to
study high-elevation peatlands, this project will produce findings relevant to
peatlands globally, and it will demonstrate how high mountain landscapes can be
impacted by global environmental change. The expected significant scientific
findings of this study will be relevant to many other wetland ecosystems that
are spatially and temporally linked to glaciers, such as peatlands in the
mountains of east Africa, the Himalayas, and in boreal latitudes. The project
will facilitate collaborations between U.S. and Peruvian researchers,
distribution of findings in English and Spanish, and workshops with
stakeholders. Wetland mapping results will be shared with Peru's environmental
ministry for inclusion in the national wetland inventory. Research products and
will be permanently stored and accessible to the public through the University
of Texas Library Digital Repository. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish an independent research career.