* 1333785
* Systematic Control Algorithms and Computational Tools for Complex Distributed Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Mazen Farhood, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 09/30/2016
* USD 275,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop rigorous control algorithms
and complexity reduction tools for high-performance systems interconnected over
general graph structures, where the controller sensing and actuation topology is
inherited from that of the plant. The research will provide a new operator
theoretic framework that can capture complex distributed systems composed of
heterogeneous, non-stationary linear parameter-varying (NSLPV) subsystem models
interconnected over potentially infinite graphs, with delays incorporated
between and within the subsystems. Using this framework, the state-space
equations of the distributed system can be represented in a compact operator
form which is reminiscent of standard state-space equations, and many
derivations and proofs of robust control results on single standard state-space
systems can be adapted to NSLPV systems interconnected over arbitrary graphs.
The results will include model reduction techniques for stable and
stabilizable/detectable distributed systems and convex methods for control
design, encompassing novel deterministic approaches to handling real-time
changes in the interconnection structure and uncertain initial conditions.
Simplified computational algorithms will also be devised for eventually periodic
distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will apply
to a broad class of complex distributed engineering systems. Specific
applications of interest are mobile sensor networks and cooperative control of
multi-vehicle systems, such as ground robots or uninhabited aerial vehicles
(UAVs), operating in hazardous environments or disaster zones. Undergraduate
students will be involved in the research program through numerous projects. In
collaboration with the Center for the Enhancement of Engineering Diversity at
Virginia Tech, age-appropriate modules based on this research, along with hands-
on experience with UAV flight control systems, will be provided in summer camps
for middle and high school students, including women and minorities. In
addition, a cross-listed graduate course on control software design will be
developed, which addresses explicitly the implementation issues of control
systems and related problems.