* 1333391
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land and Livelihood Implications of Multinational Plantation Investments
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Jacque (Jody) Emel, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2015
* USD 16,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine how the land access and
rural livelihood impacts of multinational forestry plantation investments in the
developing world are governed as a result of political relationships, struggles,
and negotiations among government agencies, plantation companies, and peasant
farming communities. The research project is situated within the theoretical
framework of environmental governance, which conceptualizes the institutional,
regulatory and the informal processes through which natural resources are used
and managed. Recent, large-scale plantation forestry investments across the
developing world have induced detrimental livelihood transformations,
dispossessing peasants of their land and resources with minimal compensation
while providing infrequent and low-wage employment. Some communities have been
able to retain autonomy over village territory in the face of such investments,
however, or they have successfully made demands for higher compensation and wage
rates. This doctoral dissertation research project seeks to assess how and why
some communities assert greater control over the governance of plantation
investments than others. The doctoral student will conduct an analysis of these
dynamics in Laos, a Southeast Asian socialist country with an increasingly
market-oriented economy. Over the past decade, the Lao government has opened the
economy to foreign plantation investors, who have acquired more than 20 percent
of the country's agricultural land. The student will conduct fieldwork in
southern Laos, examining plantation development practices of two firms in six
villages. He will collect spatial data (aerial photographs, plantation maps,
land use maps), collect archival documents (concession agreements, survey
reports), and conduct semi-structured interviews with government officials,
plantation managers, village chiefs, and village households.

This project will build on the environmental governance framework by examining
how the land access and livelihood impacts of large-scale plantation investments
are governed in socialist, post-socialist, authoritarian, and/or developing
country contexts where the state plays a dominant role in land and resource
management. The project will extend this theoretical approach by investigating
how social resistance shapes resource investment governance in authoritarian
contexts that do not have histories of outright social protest. The project will
have beneficial impacts by enhancing understanding of the policies and projects
that can be devised and implemented to improve the governance of large-scale
plantation investments in Laos and throughout the developing world in ways that
enable farming communities to gain maximum benefits by maintaining control over
village territory. Project results will be useful for government offices,
development agencies, and non-governmental organizations working on land issues
in Laos and in other developing nations. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish an independent research career.