* 1333818
* Enhancing Strain Transfer in Multiferroics through Pure Phase Functional Gradients
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2016
* Henry Sodano, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 01/31/2016
* USD 325,505.00

The research objective of this award is to study the structure property
relationships of functional&lt;br/&gt;gradients created through the use of
nanowires. The use of nanowires to create a functional&lt;br/&gt;gradient is a
novel approach that has not been explored, yet could provide significantly
improved&lt;br/&gt;performance while maintaining the composition of each phase.
A functional gradient is often&lt;br/&gt;created through the blending of ceramic
or precursor materials at the interface which is difficult&lt;br/&gt;to control
and can lead to inferior properties due to compositional changes resulting
from&lt;br/&gt;diffusion of the two phases. This issue is of principle concern
in electroceramics where the&lt;br/&gt;properties are strongly related to the
purity of the ceramic. While the research will seek to&lt;br/&gt;identify the
fundamental properties of strain transfer across a nanowire interface, our
efforts will&lt;br/&gt;be focused by the application of the graded interface to
multiferroic materials. The goal will be to&lt;br/&gt;produce the highest degree
of multiferroic coupling while developing a new methodology
for&lt;br/&gt;creating functional gradients that maintain the material's phase
and connectivity across the&lt;br/&gt;interface as well as producing direct
measurement of the strain gradient created such that&lt;br/&gt;modeling tools
can be developed for the nanoscale interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this this award will provide a new methodology to create a
nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;functional gradient across an interface. The efforts will be
directly applied to the growing field of&lt;br/&gt;multiferroic materials and
will focus on both basic and applied challenges to the application
of&lt;br/&gt;multiferroic materials and thus offers potential for a wide range
of future research efforts&lt;br/&gt;approaching more efficient design of ME
devices. The proposed techniques could be applied to a&lt;br/&gt;wide range of
application that involve an interface between dissimilar materials including
thermal&lt;br/&gt;interfaces, semiconductors and composites as well as many
emerging technologies that provide&lt;br/&gt;positive societal impact. Beyond
providing an increased understanding of the mechanics across
a&lt;br/&gt;functional gradient, the resear