* 1333174
* Collaborative Research:  Entrainment in Dense Currents Over a Rough Bottom
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2018
* Claudia Cenedese, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 477,409.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics controlling the entrainment in dense currents
are fundamental to the formation, movement, and distribution of the densest
water in the ocean; a cornerstone of the thermohaline circulation. However, the
entrainment and mixing in these currents occurs at such small scales, and the
flows are so rapid that full resolution of the dynamics is presently very
difficult, if not impossible, in global ocean circulation and climate models.
Consequently, the entrainment, and often the overflows themselves are not
resolved and need to be parameterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;The existing parameterizations for entrainment in dense currents
account primarily for the shear-induced entrainment at the interface between the
dense flow and the ambient fluid. However, the turbulence generated by roughness
elements at the bottom boundary, which produces an enhanced drag, is intense and
cannot be ignored. In this project, it is hypothesized that for dense currents
having a height much larger than the bottom boundary layer thickness, the
turbulent eddies generated by the bottom roughness will play a role in
homogenizing the dense current but will not contribute to entrainment of ambient
waters within the dense current (i.e. will not contribute to changes in the
water properties). Conversely, for dense currents having a height comparable to
or smaller than the bottom boundary layer thickness, the turbulent eddies near
the bottom should be large enough to entrain the ambient water lying above the
dense current and should significantly influence the dense water properties. The
effect of entrainment due to bottom roughness should therefore be included in
the entrainment parameterizations, and the parameter regime in which bottom
roughness is important be identified.&lt;br/&gt;This project will address this
shortcoming with a combined laboratory and numerical study focused on
entrainment and dense currents dynamics over a wide range of rough bottoms, in
which the shape (circular, square, and triangular cross section), vertical
extent, spacing (sparse vs. dense configuration), and spatial distribution
(regular vs. irregular) of the roughness elements will be varied. The
investigators will: (i) quantify the relationship between entrainment and the
ratio of the dense current height to the bottom boundary layer thickness; (ii)
determine the influence of the shape, vertical extent, spacing, and spatial
distribution of the roughness elements on the thickness of the bottom boundary
layer in which turbulent eddies are expected to develop; (iii) establish a new
universal entrainment parameterization which takes into account the bottom
roughness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;Overflows and dense
currents are important aspects of the deep ocean circulation. As such, improved
understanding of the dynamics of these currents when they flow over a rough
bottom bathymetry, and the development of relationships between the entrainment
and roughness parameters has the potential to change the way mixing is
parameterized in these flows. In practice, results from this project could lead
to advanced entrainment parameterizations, a more realistic location in the
water column of important water masses in climate models, and hence, an improved
prognostic power of these models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support
the Ph.D. thesis work of a graduate student at UT San Antonio. The student will
gain experience in collaborative research involving numerical models and
laboratory experiments. Both PIs are deeply involved in teaching and advising
and the results from this project will quickly find their way into graduate
education. Cenedese is also on the faculty of the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
(GFD) Summer Program at WHOI. Over the course of this grant, it is expected that
one or more GFD fellows will work on related projects under her guidance.
Finally, the investigators plan to attract graduate and undergraduate guest
students to work at WHOI on ~ 4 month projects in support of the proposed study.
The experimental work at WHOI will also utilize the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory, which has a long tradition of providing facilities, and assisting
students and scientists from around the US and world to conduct fluid dynamics
experiments in the areas of physical oceanography, geology, and bio-physical
interactions. Videos of experiments and related numerical models will be
presented on the web with associated explanations suitable for classroom use.