* 1333999
* DMREF: Design Knowledge Base of Low-Modulus Titanium Alloys for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Hamish Fraser, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,000,000.00

The research objective of this Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer
our Future (DMREF) project is to establish a fundamental knowledge base to
enable accelerated design of advanced low-modulus (20-30 GPa to match that of
bone) Ti alloys for biomedical prosthetic devices. The team will: 1) employ
first-principles calculations to predict elastic modulus and thermodynamic phase
stability of the Ti-Mo-Nb-Ta-Zr system; 2) use high-throughput diffusion
multiples and micron resolution materials property measurement tools to obtain
large amount of materials property data; 3) establish CALPHAD-type databases of
thermodynamics and elastic modulus for the 5-component system; and 4) employ
direct laser deposition to validate model predictions. Integration of these
computational and experimental tools will achieve a multifold increase in the
efficiency of establishing composition-structure-property relationships in
comparison with traditional methods based on individual alloys, and thus will
fundamentally change the way future materials databases are
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An aging population with an extended lifespan
is demanding more and more biomedical prosthetic devices, such as knee and hip
replacements, to sustain an active lifestyle. Biocompatible Ti alloys are
considered to be one of the best options for such implants. The ability to
tailor the composition and microstructure to design alloys to meet specific
property requirements is the goal of the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) in
general and the purpose of this study in particular. The approach developed here
will significantly speed up data generation for rapid establishment of digital
materials property databases for accelerated design of new materials. The timely
design of high-performance materials is critical to the global competitiveness
of US manufacturing. All digital data generated from this study will be
published and archived in the MGI informatics infrastructure. This project will
educate next-generation materials engineers who will master both advanced
computational and experimental approaches to better serve the society. The
research and education of this study will also help usher in a new paradigm of
materials innovation where materials design is conducted by up-front simulations
followed by key validation experiments in contrast to the current approach that
is based on experimental iterations followed by mechanistic characterization.