* 1333943
* Collaborative Research: Risk Informed Decision Making for Maintenance of Deteriorating Distribution Poles Under Extreme Wind Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Abdollah Shafieezadeh, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 179,987.00

Distribution of electricity in the United States relies on overhead lines
supported by wood poles. This distribution system suffers damage in high wind
events resulting in interruption in electrical power to businesses and
residencies. The wood poles suffer from the combined effect of aging and
increasing stress from wind hazards leading to an unreliable and potentially
unsafe distribution infrastructure. Over 100 million distribution poles, which
are part of the critical energy delivery infrastructure, suffer immensely during
wind storms. Current methods for predicting the distribution of times-to-failure
of a general set of power system components do not address simultaneous effects
of aging and hazards with a holistic view. Research on age-at-failure of poles
has been sparse, incomplete, and inconsistent. This results in increased
uncertainties in predictions of pole lifetimes, thus obstructing informed and
accurate decision-making on effective pole management
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes the development of
stochastic Finite Element models for distribution poles integrated with time-
dependent decay models to simulate the current and future state of the response
of distribution poles to various climate conditions. Epistemic uncertainties
will be reduced and various sources of aleatoric uncertainties in capacity and
demand modeling will be captured. A novel strategy utilizing n-dimensional
fragility surfaces integrated with regional hurricane hazard models will be
merged to estimate failure probabilities, develop predictive models for the
time-to-failure of distribution poles, and quantify the confidence levels in the
predictions. A priority-based diagnostics and risk-informed maintenance
framework will be developed on the basis of stochastic optimization for
distribution networks that takes into account both the geographic exposure of
the physical components to stressors and their importance for the reliability of
the networks. The success afforded by this approach does not guarantee failure
avoidance, but points to the regions in networks where use of well-maintained
infrastructure may lower the risk of failures during storms and also provides
guidance in selecting the poles for preventive replacement under normal
operating circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;