* 1333077
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Process Development across Alloy Systems for Powder Bed Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ola Harrysson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2017
* USD 130,001.00

This collaborative Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project will apply fundamental research to the problem of controlling
melt pool dimensions and microstructure for electron beam direct metal powder
bed additive manufacturing processes. Specifically, it will address how to
transfer control methods developed for one material system to another material
system in a way that reduces costly and time-consuming experimentation. To
accomplish this, this project will develop a first-of-its kind modeling-based
process mapping approach for application across different materials used in
direct metal powder bed additive manufacturing processes. Process mapping
methods will be applied to experiments performed on multiple metal alloys using
additive manufacturing equipment available to the investigators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct metal additive manufacturing is of great interest
to the aerospace, medical implant, and other industries. It offers the promise
of decreased manufacturing cost, substantial reductions in the amount of
material used to build a component, and the ability to fabricate structures not
realizable by conventional manufacturing methods. Two barriers to widespread use
of direct metal additive manufacturing in the aerospace and other industries are
(1) the lack of a platform for transferring process knowledge (e.g. how to build
shapes) from one metal alloy system to another; and (2) limited knowledge about
controlling microstructure and mechanical properties for any alloy system. These
barriers lead to expensive, costly experimentation in applying additive
manufacturing to new material systems and the inability to certify mechanical
strength in fabricated components. This project will overcome both of these
barriers through research accomplished by a team that includes academic
investigators from three universities (North Carolina State, Carnegie Mellon and
Wright State) and a collaborator from the aerospace industry currently working
to integrate direct metal additive manufacturing into component production
(Pratt &amp; Whitney).