* 1333489
* Experimental Investigation of Multiscalar Subgrid-Scale Mixing and Turbulence-Chemistry Interaction
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Chenning Tong, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 06/30/2017
* USD 180,000.00

1333489 Tong

The proposed research addresses issues in using large-eddy simulation (LES) to
predict turbulent combustion, focusing on multiscalar subgrid-scale (SGS) mixing
and turbulence-chemistry interaction. Mixing of multiple reactive scalars and
its interaction with chemistry in flames involve complex processes and are not
well understood. The proposed research will systematically investigate SGS
mixing of multiple scalars to provide the understanding necessary for improving
SGS mixing models. Turbulent coaxial jets are chosen for the multiscalar study
where each of the jet and coaxial streams have variable mixture of different
fuels and air issued into the background containing air to provide different
mixing configurations. This coaxial jet allows study of three-scalar SGS mixing,
mixture fraction, and temperature in piloted turbulent partially premixed
flames. This research uses novel experiments and analysis tools, producing for
the first time two-dimensional images of mixture fraction and temperature fields
in a turbulent flame. The results are expected to significantly advance the
understanding of the physics essential for a major model improvement in SGS
mixing models capable of predicting multiscalar SGS mixing and turbulence-
chemistry interaction. The understanding of the SGS physics gained will be
important for other research areas as well, including interactions between
turbulence and a range of nonlinear phenomena. The proposed research calls for
an integrated education and research program for graduate and undergraduate
students, with involvement in both planning and conducting experiments and
participating in technical conferences.