* 1333520
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical-Computational Network for Extracting Astrophysics and Fundamental Physics from Multi-Messenger Observations of Compact Objects
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Boboltz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 453,316.00

This project will create a Theoretical and Computational Astrophysics Network
with major nodes at the California Institute of Technology, Syracuse University,
Cornell University, and the University of Washington to advance the theory of
merging compact-object binaries and stellar collapse. Gravitational waves from
these types of events are expected to be detected by the Advanced Laser
Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory in coming years. The network
team's goals are to develop the theoretical and computational tools needed to
extract the equation of state of dense nuclear matter from gravitational wave
and electromagnetic observations, and to determine the impact of compact-object
mergers on the synthesis of light and heavy elements. The team will combine its
expertise in numerical relativity, nuclear astrophysics, and gravitational wave
detection to (1) develop an open-source, next-generation relativistic
astrophysics computation framework; (2) improve the theoretical understanding of
the nuclear equation of state and compute a large ensemble of equations of state
for different temperatures and compositions; (3) improve the computational
treatment of nuclear reactions in merger and collapse simulations; and (4)
develop parameter estimation techniques to extract information on the equation
of state from multi-messenger observations. The network will contribute to
scientific workforce development through the involvement of graduate students
and postdocs, who will receive cross-disciplinary training in modeling,
microphysics, and multi-messenger observations. Outreach videos with
visualizations and interviews with project scientists will be disseminated via
YouTube to enhance public understanding.