* 1333425
* Development and Testing of Major New Instrumentation for High Accuracy Measurement of Backscattering-bb and Total Scattering-b in Natural Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2019
* Michael Twardowski, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,369,807.00

The PIs request funding to develop a new instrumentation for the measurement of
the backscattering coefficient bb and the total scattering b. The proposed work
will lead to new instrumentation that will provide the first single direct
measurement of bb without any a priori assumptions about the phase function. The
combined bb and b meter will provide unparalleled accuracy in determining the
optical scattering and backscattering coefficients. These are very important
parameters for remote sensing and for in-water bio-optical applications. This
relatively simple instrument can be expected to have a transformative impact on
optical measurements in the ocean and will be able to shed new light on the
nature and distribution of scattering particulates.

Broader Impacts:

The activity stands an excellent chance of producing instrumentation that will
allow the discovery and exploration of new effects and increase our
understanding. This instrumentation has the potential of being sufficiently
compact reliable and low power to be used in autonomous underwater vehicles and
diving drifting buoys. Operating this new instrument from such platforms will
produce a flood of previously unavailable data whose analysis can be the subject
of both under-graduate and graduate research work. Working with information at
the edge of a field, such as the one that could be produced by this new system,
is the best of teaching tools, extremely rewarding and a real self-confidence
and self-esteem builder for students. In summary I fully concur with the impact
statement in the proposal. The proposal includes funds for a postdoc, graduate
student, and undergraduate student.