* 1333457
* Stochastic Comparison Approach to Parallel Server Queues
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* David Goldberg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 207,022.00

The objective of this award is the development of stochastic comparison
techniques for performance analysis of queueing models. The models considered
will include systems with many servers, abandonments, and heavy-tailed
processing and inter-arrival times. The research will focus on identifying
conditions on the parameters of two queueing models which ensure that the
performance metrics of the two models can be compared. Emphasis will be given to
models which exhibit certain non-monotonicities, for example systems with
abandonments, in which adding extra jobs can actually cause the number in system
to decrease. These conditions will then be used to transfer performance analysis
results between different queueing models. The research will combine these
conditions with tools from asymptotic analysis and probability theory to analyze
how the performance of these systems depends on the underlying model parameters,
with an emphasis on understanding both the behavior of these systems as the
number of servers grows large, and the probability of certain rare events
associated with exceptionally high levels of congestion. The research will also
lead to the formulation and analysis of novel scaling regimes for queueing
systems with heavy tails.

If successful, the results of this research will advance the state-of-the-art in
stochastic modeling and analysis in two ways. First, the research will yield new
bounds and insights into the performance of many-server queues with abandonments
and heavy tails, which arise in the modeling, design, and analysis of service
systems. Second, the research will lead to the development of novel stochastic
comparison and analysis methodologies, which may be more broadly applicable in
the study of probabilistic models.