* 1333402
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sporting Megaevents and Urban-Based Development Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2015
* Mark Davidson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,967.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the attempts of cities
to host sporting "megaevents" like the Olympics and football World Cups. In the
past 20 years, as megaevents have become larger and more cities have begun to
bid to host them, bidding has emerged as a significant component of global urban
policymaking. Bidding to host megaevents entails large commitments of public
funds (more than $570 billion total in 2011 and 2012) and sweeping policy
changes to accommodate event planning and build public-private governance
partnerships. Megaevent bidding now involves a host of "development" objectives
that stakeholders promise to deliver. Megaevents planners historically limited
their objectives to urban-scale development projects, but more recently they
have claimed that megaevents can deliver transnational development outcomes like
national poverty reduction, tourism development that will aid the poor, climate
change mitigation, or national sustainability planning. This doctoral
dissertation research project will examine why more ambitious bidding has become
both possible and necessary to win a contract to host a megaevent. The doctoral
student will pursue answers to the following questions: (1) Why have megaevent
bidding practices become more ambitious? (2) How do policymakers, non-
governmental organizations, and firms transfer and apply bidding practices
between different cities? (3) What is the effect of these evolving bidding
practices on the composition of stakeholders involved in development planning?
To answer these questions, he will use archival materials and expert interviews
to compare bids to host Olympics and football World Cups, which are the largest
megaevents. He will analyze 100 such bids dating from 1991 to 2013 that sought
to host events held between 2000 and 2020. The student will trace the
international and historical connections in the cities' bids, including changes
in the types of development and planning policy objectives pursued by bid
stakeholders; funding, contracting, and knowledge sharing between cities; and
the ways in which new types of bids build new types of urban-national-
transnational partnerships.

Despite the large body of scholarship on megaevents, public conversations about
their impacts often have been stymied by the contradictory research findings of
dueling experts and their respective backers. Potential megaevent host
communities need consistent, comparative information about the opportunities and
challenges that cities encounter when promising planning outcomes in a bid. This
project will generate comparative, transnational information and insights about
the stakeholders who participate in megaevent bidding, how their policies are
transferred between cities, and their role in promising "development" through
megaevent planning. This information will inform citizens, policymakers, and
scholars in potential megaevent hosting cities and in international event
planning organizations. The study will enhance infrastructure for research and
education by collaborating with megaevents research centers in the United States
and Switzerland. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
project will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.