* 1333424
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Measuring and Predicting Species Distribution Patterns Across Spatial Scales
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Walter Jetz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 08/31/2015
* USD 12,107.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate how highly mobile
vertebrate species respond to environmental conditions at different spatial
scales and will develop methods to integrate species responses across scales as
well as to increase the accuracy of species distribution models. Understanding
and predicting species distributions are longstanding goals in biogeography, and
accurate distribution information is critical for biodiversity conservation.
This project will address this objective by relating the geographic locations at
which a species is observed to the environmental conditions at those locations
across multiple scales. The doctoral student hypothesizes that a species will
respond to environmental conditions relatively consistently across a subset of
spatial scales that correspond to its physiological and behavioral traits and
will respond to the same environmental conditions more weakly at other scales.
She will measure these scales for select East African bird species by attaching
GPS tags to individuals of each species and by analyzing the recorded movement
paths. The student will produce gridded environmental data, such as land cover,
vegetation properties, landscape structure, and distance to critical resources,
from remotely sensed imagery. Movement data, occurrence data, and environmental
data at several resolutions will be combined in hierarchical models to predict
species distributions across multiple scales. To evaluate whether these methods
increase model accuracy, she will test models using additional occurrence data
and compare them to single-scale models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By measuring the
spatial scales at which vertebrate species respond to their environment and by
assessing how responses at multiple scales affect broader distribution patterns,
this project will increase understanding of fundamental ecological processes.
This project will facilitate further scientific investigation by contributing
species occurrence data; long-term movement data; and environmental data at
multiple resolutions to open-access data collections from a geographic region
that has not received significant scholarly attention in the past. Project
results will be distributed to local, regional, and national conservation
organizations as user-friendly databases and distribution maps that serve
immediate conservation needs. By engaging Kenyan students in data collection and
analysis, this project will enhance technical capabilities for biodiversity
assessment and conservation in East African institutions, and it will expand
collaborative relationships among U.S., Kenyan, and international research
communities. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project
will provide the support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.