* 1333335
* DMREF/Collaborative Research:   Computationally Driven Targeting of Advanced Thermoelectric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Scott Barnett, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Campo
* 02/28/2019
* USD 396,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of thermoelectric materials
is the critical bottleneck limiting the widespread use of thermoelectric
generators for energy harvesting. To date, the search for such materials has
been challenging due to the multitude of conflicting property requirements that
must be simultaneously satisfied. The proposed research addresses these
challenges through a high-throughput search for materials, enabled by the
continued improvements in large-scale computing and the development of a
thermoelectric performance metric suitable for high-throughput calculations.
High accuracy measurements of electronic structure and majority carrier
transport properties will be used to validate the calculated descriptors. In
support of these efforts, rapid experimental validation approaches for theory-
predicted thermoelectric materials will be developed. On-the-fly data mining of
the resulting experimental/theoretical property database will yield material-
property relationships pointing to new target materials. The resulting
techniques and software tools will be well-documented and open-access. The
resulting property database will serve as the seed for a long-term central, open
repository for thermoelectric materials. This research program lays the
groundwork for a new, computationally driven, paradigm in thermoelectric
material research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The development of advanced thermoelectric materials
could have a profound impact on the nation's energy portfolio. Solar
thermoelectric generators and waste heat recovery could provide a significant
fraction of our electricity needs. This program will lead to the development and
dissemination of a transformative methodology for the realization of new
thermoelectric materials, which can be extended to other materials sub-
disciplines. High throughput electronic structure calculations of known earth-
abundant compounds will provide the critical descriptors to identify new
materials. The veracity of these calculations will be continuously tested
through experimental measurements. Adaptive data mining will be used to extract
structure-property trends and organically grow the material database. In doing
so, a new generation of students (community college, undergraduate, graduate,
post-doc) will be trained, which are conversant with both theoretical and
experimental approaches to science by immersing them in a fully integrated
research program. This effort extends beyond the core students in the research
group through workshops focused on integrated theory/experiment approaches to
thermoelectric materials and working in a "big-data" environment. A suite of
K-12 and community college outreach programs targets the recruitment of
underrepresented groups in STEM. These innovative programs include teacher
training modules, after school programs, and summer research opportunities for
community college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the
Divisions of Materials Research (DMR), of Mathematical Sciences (DMS), and of
Computer and Network Systems (CNS).