* 1333701
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Active and Passive Remote Sensing for Predicting Tropical Tree Species Richness across Spatial Scales
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Thomas Gillespie, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 01/31/2015
* USD 8,820.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates how remotely sensed
biophysical variables can be used to predict and model tropical tree species
richness and forest structure across a range of spatial scales. Ecologists long
have sought to be able to use remote sensing to extend the spatial extent of
their analysis beyond the plot-level spatial scale at which tree species
richness and forest structure traditionally have been studied. The doctoral
student will test the hypothesis that environmental variability in the
biophysical environment contains explanatory power in determining how different
species of tropical trees are able to partition resources and co-exist in
limited forested space. He will use a range of remotely sensed explanatory
variables, including vertical vegetation structure, light availability,
topographic variation, and spectral reflectance, to explain the variance in
species richness, diversity, and forest structure (basal area and stem density)
calculated from existing forest census plot data. He will use generalized least-
squares regression modeling to determine the proportion of explained variance in
tree species richness from the remotely sensed variables. He anticipates
enhancing understanding of which remotely sensed variables explain the largest
proportion of variance in species richness and forest structure and at which
spatial scales these predictions are statistically significant and ecologically
relevant. Based on preliminary analysis, he has determined that prediction model
accuracy increases as spatial resolution gets coarser (1-ha plot size) and has
the highest predictive power when all stems in the census are included. The
student will include additional tree plots that focus solely on large trees (+20
cm DBH) to extend the predictions to large canopy trees that cover a larger
proportion of the landscape. The proposed research will provide a framework that
can be applied to any similar forested environment with field inventory plot
data and remote sensing data. The proposed research is site specific, but the
ecological and biogeographic principles being tested have much wider-ranging
significance. The proposed research will occur in the Barro Colorado Nature
Monument of Panama due to the availability of extensive ground forest census and
remote sensing data, but the methods developed during the project will have
utility at other Center for Tropical Forest Science (CTFS) sites that have
existing forest census data. Testing these new methods at other CTFS sites will
provide additional opportunities for forest researchers globally. By testing
these hypotheses on a global scale, ecologists and biogeographers can
investigate the potential causes of high-density tree species co-existence and
signals to detect richness remotely. The project will provide informative data
about predicted tree richness and forest structure to policy organizations
concerned with forest conservation, and it will inform scientists and policy
makers about the limitations and errors associated with such remote sensing
derived predictions. By using tree species richness prediction maps,
conversation groups can maximize available funding to target species rich
forests over large spatial scales. This proposed Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish an independent research career.