* 1333029
* Secondary Circulations on the Potential Vorticity Staircase: A Theory of Atmospheric Transport
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Richard Scott, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 12/31/2018
* USD 611,595.00

The goal of this project is to examine interactions between two fundamental and
distinct types of atmospheric circulation: primary circulations, consisting of
zonal, east-west directed jets together with their embedded Rossby waves and
Rossby-wave critical layers; and the slower but persistent secondary
circulations, which are driven to a large extent by the eddy mixing associated
with the jets and waves of the primary circulations, and which control long-term
meridional transport throughout the atmosphere. Although primary circulations
drive secondary ones, the latter also modify the former though the transport
both of momentum and of radiatively active chemical species, notably carbon
dioxide, water vapor, and ozone. The work builds extensively on previous NSF-
supported research on the "potential vorticity staircase" and the nature of
atmospheric zonal jets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key theme will involve a
consideration of the influence of inhomogeneous eddy mixing on the distribution
of secondary circulations in height and latitude; and, in turn, the steepening
of chemical tracer and potential vorticity gradients by the differential
vertical motions of the secondary circulations. Theoretical investigations into
the importance of non-trivial vertical structure and the role of eddy-driven
secondary circulations in the potential vorticity staircase will be complemented
by applications to topical issues in stratosphere-troposphere and tropical-polar
dynamical coupling and the transport of chemical tracers throughout the
atmosphere.