* 1333997
* A Spider Silk Like Fiber for Vibration Damping
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Guoqiang Li, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2017
* USD 366,992.00

The objective of this project is to design, synthesize, characterize, and model
a spider silk like fiber for vibration control. The high damping synthetic fiber
will mimic the microstructure of spider silk. In this project, the composition
of existing melt-spin polyurethane fiber will be modified by tailoring the hard
phase domain and soft phase domain, molecular chain rigidity, molecular weight
and distribution, hydrogen bond, and cross-link density. The synthetic fiber
will be strengthened and hardened by cold-stretching and by reducing fiber
diameter during the melt-spinning process. Once the fiber is fabricated, its
chemical, physical, and mechanical properties will be characterized and feed-
back will be given to further refine its composition and polymerization, as well
as cold-tension, until it is competitive with dragline spider silk. Its
vibration damping capability will then be evaluated. Physics based multi-scale
modeling of the synthetic fiber under dynamic loading will be developed. The
model will link the microstructure of the fiber with its damping properties over
a wide range of temperature and frequency. The result will provide guidance for
further improvement in fiber design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
project will create fundamental knowledge and provide basic understanding of a
novel synthetic fiber mimicking dragline spider silk. It may eventually make it
possible to manufacture a large amount of synthetic fibers that have mechanical
and damping properties comparable to those of spider silks. It is expected that
this project will open up new opportunities for application of polymeric fibers
in lightweight load-bearing structures. The derived knowledge can also be
extended to other materials such as fiber reinforced cement concrete for
vibration damping in bridges and buildings. This project will support advanced
training for undergraduate and graduate students, including minority students at
Southern University, and high school students through hands on laboratory work
and Science and Engineering Fair projects.