* 1333104
* Deciphering subsurface microbial activity on the Iberian Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Jennifer Biddle, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2015
* USD 104,999.00

This proposal seeks to characterize the microbes recovered from sub ocean floor
sediments cored during IODP leg 339 and compare them to the well-characterized
microbial suite found in similar sediments off the Peru margin.
Metatranscriptomic analysis enables the recognition of the active biome by
targeting the whole sample messenger RNA and relating the RNA to known gene
function. Thus the metabolic behavior and taxonomy of the entire microbial
community can be assessed and the relative proportion of active vs. inactive
biota (paleome vs. biome) determined. The samples for metatranscriptomic
analysis are selected from portions of the core taken from 1.) sulfate-rich
areas in the shallow subsurface; 2.) methane-rich samples from the deeper
subsurface, and 3.) samples taken from near the sulfate-methane transition. The
hypothesis to be tested is that these chemical variations are directly related
to sample biology. This work is needed in order for the objectives of expedition
339 to be fully met. Broader impacts include graduate and early career
investigator involvement, community outreach, and an IODP lectureship.
Scientific impacts include characterization of part of the world?s largest and
most poorly understood ecosystem, the sub-seafloor deep biosphere. The potential
for discovering new species and metabolic pathways is significant.