* 1333832
* 2013 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Radiation &amp; Climate GRC/Graduate Research Seminar (GRS); New London, New Hampshire; July 7-12, 2013
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2013,03/31/2014
* Robert Pincus, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 03/31/2014
* USD 23,000.00

The goal of the 2013 Radiation and Climate Gordon Research Conference (GRC) is
to bring together researchers working in the fields of in-situ and remote
sensing observational techniques, synthesis of observational datasets, and
numerical modeling across a wide range of scales, to address critical
outstanding issues of cloud-climate interactions. The conference will feature a
broad range of topics, including grand challenges in atmospheric radiation and
climate, climate responses to radiative forcing across timescales, interactions
of radiation and the surface, interactions of radiation with cloud-scale and
planetary-scale dynamics, novel observations for model evaluation, challenges in
remote sensing, and the challenges of understanding ice cloud formation and
optical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC will be held at Colby-Sawyer
Colleg in New Hampshire, July 7-12, 2013. This will be preceded by the second
associated Graduate Research Seminar (GRS) on July 6-7, 2013. Together, these
meetings will focus upon cutting-edge research on outstanding issues in climate
change, particularly those in which the interactions between radiation, clouds,
and the climate system play a major role. Understanding the role of clouds in
the climate system continues to be of great importance and scientific progress
in this area has significant broader impacts. One of the GRC's main goals is to
bridge the gap between established scientists and those just entering the field
and to encourage intensive discussion of key scientific topics. To facilitate
these interactions, GRCs are characterized by plenty of time for informal
discussions outside the lecture theatre. NSF funds will be used for participant
registration with preference to post docs and/or graduate students, with an eye
to increasing participation in the meeting by women and under-represented
minorities.