* 1333524
* Integrated Individualized Modeling towards Cognitive Control of Human-Machine Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yingzi Lin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 235,000.00

The research objective of this project is to integrate human factors and control
for modeling of collaborative human-machine systems. Specifically, in a driver-
vehicle system, the driver's cognitive state and behavior may become significant
factors to the overall system performance. This work is to study a driver
assistance system (DAS) that integrates the driver's cognitive state and
behavior, as well as the vehicle state and behavior, as inputs. Driver's
cognitive state includes emotion, mental workload and attention. The approach
has three main aspects: (1) investigate a method to model a driver's cognitive
state and behavior while controlling a vehicle in a dynamic human-machine
environment (HME); (2) incorporate the HME model into a DAS as a form of
feedback control; (3) test and validate the above theories through the DAS
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research makes significant contributions to
the areas of human state and behavior modeling, as well as cognitive control of
human-machine systems. Driver assistance systems have a strong relevance to
transportation safety, and one large deliverable from this research includes a
reduction in automobile accidents. This DAS is a specific test bed for a more
general Human Assistance System (HAS). The test bed results can be used to model
a more generic HAS, which can then be applied to human-machine systems in a
variety of domains such as medicine, manufacturing, and space applications. This
work will provide experience to students and teachers by providing educational
activities to support k-12 education. Graduate and undergraduate students will
benefit through research integration with curriculums and senior design
projects. This work expects to attract minorities and underrepresented groups,
especially women. The work will also reach out towards professional societies
and international collaboration for a wide dissemination of the research
outcome.