* 1333176
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Social Service Organizations and Community Dynamics in Neighborhoods with High Levels of Illegal Activity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2013,02/28/2015
* Melissa Wright, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 02/28/2015
* USD 9,623.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the role of social
service organizations within the broader dynamics of neighborhoods that have
experienced high levels of illegal activity, especially the sale and
distribution of illegal drugs. Whereas previous research on illicit activities
in urban neighborhoods often have been framed by the larger literature on the
global drug trade and the "War on Drugs" approach to policing, this project
adopts an approach that strives to understand the full range of individual and
organizational interactions and relationships in a community. The theoretical
foundations of this project seek to describe and understand the complex social
networks of support, reciprocity, power, and violence that include the drug
trade and a broad range of related activities. That work has explored how
individuals engage in informal economic activities as well as how they function
as community members in other ways. The research project supported by this award
will focus on the ways in which social service organizations function to offer
programming that works to quell the drug economy, often through a range of job
readiness programs that explicitly transition people from informal and illicit
work to formal employment. Working in a neighborhood in south Philadelphia that
has had high drug-related crime levels, the doctoral student will conduct
interviews with employees and volunteers associated with these organizations in
order to develop a deeper understanding of the external pressures on the illegal
economy that are situated immediately in the neighborhood. Interviews will
include questions about the programming, mission, goals, and measures of success
as well as the experiences of organizations in the community, the ways programs
are received by target populations, and perceptions of the drug trade and its
role in the community. Information gathered through these interviews will be
integrated with information previously gathered through ethnographic research
and oral histories in order to develop more comprehensive, multi-dimensional
knowledge about the complex interactions of social service organizations and
others interacting in the study site and similar communities.

This project will provide a range of new theoretical perspectives. It will
contribute to the growing body of scholarship that illustrates the connections
linking economy, community, and identity across scales. It will help refine
perspectives that consider the decision-making strategies of drug economy
participants at the level of household and community relationships by assessing
how they make meaningful decisions about themselves, their families, their
communities, and their cities. It also will provide new insights regarding how
social service programs are interpreted and used by those engaged in illicit
activities and those with whom they interact. Project results will assist
community organizations in addressing drug-related issues in their
neighborhoods, thereby contributing new information and insights that may
improve their outreach and educational efforts. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.