* 1333560
* Poroelastic Wave Propagation in Anisotropic Bone
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Stephen Cowin, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2017
* USD 364,999.00

The research objective of this award is to examine the cause-effect relationship
between changes in trabecular bone microarchitecture and measured poroelastic
ultrasound wave properties. The energy of an ultrasound wave propagating through
a fluid-saturated porous medium such as trabecular bone creates two distinct
poroelastic waves which travel with velocities and attenuations that depend on
the properties of solid and fluid constituents of bone. Studies conducted under
this award will use analytical, numerical and experimental approaches to
determine the effect of changes in pore microarchitecture, material properties
and wave frequency on the velocity and attenuation of these two waves. The
proposed parametric study will investigate wave propagation properties in both
experimental and finite-difference time-domain numerical simulations in 3D
printed porous medium models. An anisotropic poroelastic theoretical approach
will be used to distinguish the contribution of solid and fluid constituents on
measured ultrasound wave signals in both 3D printed models and human trabecular
bones. The long-term objective of this research is to change the technology used
for the assessment of osteoporosis from the current standard of ionizing and
expensive DEXA devices to lower cost, non-ionizing ultrasound systems that
access microarchitecture as well as material properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this architectural-based approach will reveal the main
microarchitectural determinants of ultrasound wave propagation in porous media,
and will improve the non-invasive characterization of changes in trabecular bone
during bone loss and osteoporosis. The educational component of this award
focuses on developing a multidisciplinary program on bone biomechanics and
biomedical imaging for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups at
the City College of New York, increasing the number of course modules with
numerical modeling, research design and imaging hands-on laboratory experience.
The program will provide closely mentored research opportunities for
undergraduate students to attract them to follow graduate studies in STEM.