* 1333682
* Collaborative Research:   Black Hole Accretion Theory and Computation Network
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Eliot Quataert, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* David Boboltz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 508,762.00

This project will create a Theoretical and Computational Astrophysics Network
with major nodes at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the
University of California at Berkeley, and Princeton University, to advance the
theory of black hole accretion and outflows. Accretion of matter onto black
holes is central to many astrophysical and gravitational phenomena, but current
theory lacks self-consistent models both for high accretion rate flows where
radiation forces are important, and for low accretion rate flows where
collisionless plasma effects are important. The network team brings together
expertise in high performance computing techniques, astrophysics, and plasma
physics in order to address this need. The team will develop a general
relativistic, radiation magnetohydrodynamics code to study luminous accreting
black holes, and a multi-fluid relativistic magnetohydrodynamics code with
anisotropic electron and ion pressures, conduction, viscosity, and radiative
heating and cooling to study slowly accreting systems. These new codes will be
used to address fundamental questions about the structure and observational
appearance of the inner accretion disk as well as the origin and maintenance of
the large-scale magnetic fields believed to power relativistic jets, and then
will be made publicly available to the research community. The network will
contribute to scientific workforce development by supporting the work of
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdocs; and a program of
visualizations, released on the internet, will help communicate the excitement
of black hole astrophysics to the scientific community and to the broader
public.