* 1333858
* Micro- to Nanoscale Granular Contact Dynamics and Nonlinear Granular-Elastic Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Nicholas Boechler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2017
* USD 297,378.00

Granular crystals are close-packed arrays of elastic particles, and are
effective at tailoring acoustic wave propagation. However, so far granular
crystals are typically constructed at macroscopic length scales and designed to
affect sonic frequency acoustic waves. This grant provides funding for the study
of the nonlinear contact-based dynamics of micro to nanoscale granular crystals.
Extending granular crystals to the microscale and nanoscale has the potential to
enable granular-based devices that operate at megahertz and gigahertz
frequencies. The size scale is also important, as effects which are negligible
at the macroscale, such as adhesion, become significant at microscales. Granular
crystal will be manufactured by self-assembly. Photoacoustic techniques will be
utilized to study the fundamental contact-based dynamics of micro- and
nanoparticles, as well as to study nonlinear wave propagation in more complex
microscale granular systems. The experimental findings will be modeled using a
combination of techniques drawn from the areas of nonlinear dynamical systems,
solid mechanics, and acoustic metamaterials. Nonlinearities in locally-resonant
granular-elastic metamaterial configurations will be explored.

This project has the potential for significant societal impact, as micro- to
nanoscale granular crystals and locally-resonant granular-elastic metamaterials
may have potential future applications to areas such as signal processing, non-
destructive evaluation and adhesion characterization, and biomedical ultrasound
imaging and therapy. It is also anticipated that this project will establish the
fundamental understanding of nonlinear wave propagation in microscale granular
media. The research efforts will be combined with a significant educational
component, and will provide a diverse student group with a unique
interdisciplinary educational opportunity in the classroom and the laboratory.
The proposed research will be incorporated into a newly developed course led by
the PI, and simplified versions of relevant experiments will be developed to
generate increased interest in science and engineering through outreach
activities.