* 1333787
* Defining the noble gas composition of highly depleted mantle domains
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,01/31/2015
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 01/31/2015
* USD 344,263.00

The noble gases play an important role in understanding mantle structure and in
quantifying mass and volatile fluxes in and out of the mantle. The isotopic
composition of non-radiogenic noble gases in the Earth's mantle can constrain
the sources of volatile sources on our planet and the mechanisms through which
volatiles are incorporated into the solid Earth. Furthermore, the isotopic
composition of the noble gases in Earth's mantle can provide important clues to
the origin and evolution of the atmosphere. For example, the modern atmosphere
was traditionally thought to be secondary, i.e, derived from mantle degassing
after the dissipation of a primary atmosphere that the Earth might have acquired
during the accretion process. Theories on the origin of the early atmosphere
through degassing of the mantle are now being challenged by new noble gas data
and neon isotopes. This research will use new developments in noble gas mass
spectrometry that allow much higher resolution and precision measurements than
previously available to examine a suite of heavy noble gases and their isotopic
ratios to determine the composition of the most depleted mantle domains and
understand how they relate to normal and enriched Mid Ocean Ridge Basalt
sources. Issues such as: (1) the noble gas elemental abundance ratios in
depleted, normal and enriched mantle domains, (2) whether isotopic anomalies in
argon and xenon in different mantle domains are related to ancient mantle
differentiation events or to the on going process of plate subduction and
recirculation that introduces atmospheric noble gases into the mantle; (3) the
proportion of Pu- to U-derived, fission generated Xe in depleted, normal, and
enriched mantle domains; (4) whether there time-constants associated with mantle
degassing can be determined; and (5) whether the non-radiogenic isotopic
compositions of Xe and Kr are solar, chondritic, or air-like, will be addressed.
Answers to these questions will allow determination of the flux of volatiles and
material from plumes in the mantle into the mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB) source
and the degree of mixing between MORB and plume sources. It will also provide
key insights on Earth structure and mantle flow. In addition, the research seeks
to constrain sources of Earth volatiles and the recycling of noble gases between
the crust and atmosphere and the mantle, and the formation of Earth's
atmosphere. Broader impacts of the work include new analytical method
development that will increase the infrastructure for science, use of a an NSF-
funded mass spectrometry facility, and student support, including support of a
student whose gender is under-represented in the sciences. Additional impacts
include incorporation of research results into graduate and undergraduate
courses.