* 1333186
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Gender, Authority and the Politics of Land Reform
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Thomas Bassett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 01/31/2015
* USD 12,509.00

This project investigates the changing role of women and leadership. Using land
access as the lens, the project will explore the social and economic status of
women in a country where many consider gender equality to be the norm. Men are
returning home from working in mines and a sweeping land reform process is
changing how land is held in Lesotho. The project centers on three research
questions: (1) How and why has access to land for men and women changed as men
have returned and since new laws were enacted in the last decade? (2) Is there a
geography of land that is allocated to women and how has that geography changed
over time? (3) Are leaders seeking to maintain their power over land allocation?
If so, how do their land control maneuvers affect both men's and women's access
to land?

These questions will be answered in a village setting in Lesotho with eight
months of qualitative fieldwork, including surveys, interviews and focus groups
with local residents and chiefs. Additional work will focus on interviews with
policymakers, bureaucrats and development experts in the capital, Maseru. This
study will explore multiple scales of gender politics in terms of land
committees in Lesotho. The project will enhance understanding of the social,
political, economic and cultural conditions that lead to increased or reduced
vulnerability of women's livelihoods. Gender is a key indicator of
vulnerability; understanding how women can obtain more secure land rights is a
powerful tool in mitigating vulnerability. The analysis will also make a
contribution to the literature of authority. It seeks to understand the role of
Lesotho's chieftaincy in a changing political-economic context. In terms of
authority, the study expands ideas of co-optation of chiefs by the state and
investigates what happens when elements of the chieftaincy are empowered at the
same time as an elected local body (in fact, within that very body). The project
seeks to help understand gender relations in a holistic way that may enhance
understanding of the feminization of the AIDS crisis. Additionally, there is a
clear policy implication to this work: land reform in Lesotho and throughout the
developing world is an ongoing process and this study will identify pathways
towards fairer distribution. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish an independent research career.