* 1333241
* GOALI: Laser Scribing of Multilayer Thin Films in Solar Cells: Defect Formation and Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Hongqiang Chen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2016
* USD 383,960.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) grant
provides funding for the investigation of defect formation mechanisms and the
development of a defect mitigation approach for the glass-side laser scribing
process of multilayer thin-film photovoltaic cells, aiming to better understand
the influence of defects on solar cell properties and increase solar cell
efficiency. Laser scribing from the glass (substrate) side, based on a micro-
explosion mechanism, has led to increased scribe quality. Defects formed during
scribing, however, are not entirely alleviated and keep solar panels from
reaching higher efficiencies. The goal of this project is to significantly
advance the state of knowledge in the glass-side laser scribing process of
multilayer thin film solar cells using a fundamental approach. Via experimental
and numerical investigations, defects will be systematically characterized,
their formation mechanisms will be elucidated and issues in defect mitigation
based on their influence on solar cell electrical properties will be better
understood. The developed predictive capabilities will facilitate both
exploration and optimization of scribing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
success of this project is expected to lead to substantial enhancement in solar
cell applications through reductions in defect formation resulting in reduced
production costs and greater competitiveness of solar panels with alternate
energy sources. The PI?s strong support from a key industrial partner could lead
to rapid implementation of the developed knowledge in commercial solar cell
panels with broad societal impact. The acquired fundamental understanding of the
laser scribing process will be widely applicable to other absorber and contact
layer materials in thin-film solar cells. Both experimental and numerical
investigations will also benefit other applications such as the fabrication of
LEDs and optical masks which utilize micro-explosion-based laser lift-off
processes.