* 1333978
* Metamaterial-Enhanced Electroelastoacoustic Energy Harvesting for Sensor Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Michael Leamy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2016
* USD 296,535.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate and leverage
electroelastoacoustically coupled linear and nonlinear metamaterial-inspired
energy harvesting concepts for self-powered sensor systems. The technical
approach of this computational and experimental research program combines
metamaterial-inspired structures and piezoelectric energy harvesting to extract
low-power electricity from structure-borne propagating waves. Wave focusing and
funneling, diode mechanisms, frequency bandgaps, and energy localization are
some of the unique metamaterial properties that will be explored for improving
the efficiency of linear and nonlinear piezoelectric energy harvesting. The
research program will achieve its objectives by establishing lumped- and
distributed-parameter modeling frameworks coupling the elastoacoustic dynamics
of metamaterials and propagating waves with the electroelastic dynamics of
piezoelectric energy harvesting, followed by experimental testing of specific
configurations to validate performance enhancement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will yield computational tools and
experimental concepts for the potential system-level applications of low-power
electricity generation from elastoacoustic waves propagating in the environment
of sensor networks. The economic and societal benefits of enabling self-powered
sensor nodes include reduction of maintenance costs and chemical waste of
conventional batteries in wireless monitoring applications. The multifunctional
nature of this class of energy harvesters results in the absorption of wave
energy (which would otherwise create undesired noise/vibration) while generating
usable electricity. In addition to constituting unprecedented platforms for both
resonant and broadband energy harvesting, the frequency range of operation of
the considered class of metamaterials can be highly compatible with
microelectromechanical system-based energy harvesting. Results from this
research will be disseminated through conference presentations, scholarly
publications, and academic courses. Educational laboratory activities and
classroom modules, developed in partnership with the Georgia Intern Fellowships
for Teachers program at Georgia Tech, will expose underrepresented high school
students to basic results of the research and to underlying wave mechanics and
electroelastoacoustic principles.