* 1333370
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstructing the Paleoenvironmental History of the Cuenca Oriental in Mexico's Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Roger Byrne, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2015
* USD 15,811.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine possible linkages
between climate change and prehistoric societies in the Cuenca Oriental, an area
of interior drainage in the eastern Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt. Drought has
been invoked to explain the abandonment of many areas of Mesoamerica, but direct
evidence is only available for a handful of sites, and non-climatic explanations
often have been proposed. This doctoral dissertation research project will focus
on development of a multi-proxy record of human occupation and Holocene climate
change from Aljojuca and Alchichica, two maar lakes located near Cantona, an
archaeological site in the northeastern part of the Cuenca Oriental. During the
late Classic period, Cantona was one of the largest cities in the Americas, but
the site was abandoned several hundred years later, possibly as a result of
drought. The doctoral student will develop a record of Holocene climate change
by analyzing the fossil pollen content, stable isotope composition, and sediment
chemistry of sediment cores from Aljojuca and Alchichica. Pollen slides will be
scanned for corn pollen as an index of agricultural activity in the area. These
data will help reconstruct the timing of past changes in climate as well as the
history of human settlement in the region. The Aljojuca core has already been
recovered by an international scientific team from the National Autonomous
University of Mexico and the GFZ German Research Center for Geosciences.
Radiocarbon dating reveals that the core spans approximately 6,200 years.

This dissertation project will produce two new high-resolution, well-dated
paleoenvironmental records from the eastern Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt. These
records will improve basic understanding of the timing of Holocene climate
change in the region, especially the history of Mexico's summer rainfall regime.
The project therefore will contribute to interdisciplinary debates in
archaeology and geography about the role of climate change as a factor
influencing human societies. The project will strengthen international
collaborations among scientists in Mexico, Germany, and the U.S. Results will be
disseminated through a variety of media for scholarly and public audiences, and
they will be used in educational activities and lesson plans for undergraduate
and K-12 students. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
project will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.