* 1333669
* DMREF:   Collaborative:  Computationally Driven Discovery and Engineering of Multiblock Polymer Nanostructures Using Genetic Algorithms
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Marc Hillmyer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 810,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This computationally driven discovery
program aims to disrupt the status quo for the design of multiblock materials.
The research centers on the marriage of pseudo-spectral self-consistent field
theory (SCFT) and real-space genetic algorithms (GAs), with a tight coupling to
experimental synthesis and characterization. While widely used in polymer
science and bioinformatics, respectively, SCFT and GAs have not been previously
integrated to tackle problems of block polymer discovery and design. The
approach adopted here addresses the challenges of large parameter spaces and
polymorphism. It also solves the "inverse problem" of identifying multiblock
sequences and compositions that can produce a desired nanoscale morphology,
without resorting to exhaustive, unguided searches through parameter space. The
computational effort is synergistically and iteratively combined with an
experimental program that includes state-of-the-art synthesis, processing, and
characterization tools. The experimental work will validate the computational
methodology, including parameterization of the models, and provide inspiration
for attractive and synthetically accessible design targets. This combined
approach will dramatically reduce the timescale for discovery, design, and
deployment of new multiblock polymers as advanced functional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative effort between researchers at the University of California, Santa
Barbara and the University of Minnesota will develop discovery tools that will
enable the rational, computationally-assisted design of multiblock polymers for
applications in medicine, microelectronics, separations, and energy production
and storage, among others. Complicating factors in this class of soft materials
are the myriad parameters that dictate molecular architecture, block sequence,
and interactions and the wide range of self-assembled nanostructures that are
possible. Through a concerted and iterative combination of theory, simulation,
and experiment, global optimization tools will be devised and validated to
predict the forward and reverse relationship between polymer architecture and
nanostructure. The discovery tools developed in this program will be made widely
available to the industrial and academic polymer materials community through a
web-based job submission program hosted at the Minnesota Supercomputer
Institute, and a searchable database will be constructed from the
structure/sequence/morphology maps that result over the course of the project.
Outreach to industry will be accomplished by leveraging the established and
highly successful industrial consortiums at UCSB (Complex Fluids Design
Consortium) and UMN (IPrime). Personnel on the project will be trained in and
enhance the rich multidisciplinary research environments afforded by the
existing MRSECs at UMN and UCSB.&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division
of Materials Research (DMR) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).