* 1333429
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Geomorphology and Sediment Dynamics of a Tropical Montane River
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2013,01/31/2015
* Patricia McDowell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2015
* USD 14,324.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine bedload sediment
transport of tropical montane rivers and estimate the potential impact of
predicted climate change and dam development scenarios on their geomorphology.
Tropical montane rivers are geomorphically dynamic and complex. They convey
large-magnitude floods with the capacity to mobilize coarse bedload (gravels to
large boulders) multiple times during a single rainy season. This doctoral
dissertation research project will examine bedload distribution and flux, which
play an important role in defining channel form in these systems and therefore
are a proxy of system sensitivity. The doctoral student will pursue answers to
the following research questions through an analysis of the Rio Pacuare, Costa
Rica: (1) How does channel geomorphology vary going downstream in relation to
local geology and sediment sources? (2) What are the sediment transport rates
and annual yields of each reach? (3) Does downstream flux of bedload express
local, reach, or system-wide geomorphic connectivity? (4) How will sediment flux
change in response to predicted future climate change and impoundment (dam)
scenarios? The Rio Pacuare is an appropriate stream for these kinds of analyses
because it is free-flowing, relatively accessible, and is representative of
other tropical montane rivers. The student will use innovative field techniques
to map and characterize sediment and to create reach-scale sediment budgets. In
addition to traditional survey methods, the Structure from Motion approach,
which derives topographic data from multiple photographs, will be adapted for
grain-size analysis and identification of grain mobilization to validate
sediment transport estimates. Hydraulic and sediment transport models will
quantify sediment flux to characterize system sensitivity to projected climate
change and impoundment scenarios.

Research on tropical rivers is particularly important because demands on their
resources (freshwater supply, hydroelectricity, ecology, and agriculture)
continue to increase steadily, but relatively little research has been done on
the geomorphology of these systems. The distinctive mix of field and remote
sensing techniques used in this research will overcome some of the noted
challenges of tropical river research, including difficult access, high sediment
flux, rapidly fluctuating flows, and large-grain mobilization. Beyond expanding
basic understanding of the dynamics of fluvial geomorphology, and especially the
dynamics of tropical river morphology, this project may assist in the
sustainable development, management, and conservation of tropical rivers by
offering fundamental information that is usable by the public, scientists,
resource managers, and policy makers. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish an independent research career.