* 1333476
* Quantitative Performance Assessment and Rational Design of Reducing Materials for Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2013,10/31/2016
* Paul Tratnyek, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 10/31/2016
* USD 357,210.00

CBET 1333476&lt;br/&gt;Paul G. Tratnyek&lt;br/&gt;Oregon Health &amp; Science
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many established and emerging water
treatment technologies based on granular materials that remove contaminants by
reduction. These technologies range from reactive barriers of iron metal that
degrade chlorinated solvents in groundwater to filters containing iron oxides
that remove arsenic from drinking water. Ongoing efforts are advancing these
technologies on all fronts, mostly through ad hoc testing of novel reducing
materials on common contaminants or testing of novel contaminants with common
reducing materials. However, there are not yet any general metrics or models
that can be used to advance these technologies by taking advantage of their
common characteristics. Such tools would facilitate process optimization and
enable quantitative performance assessment for comparison of competing
alternatives or rational design of novel reducing materials. This project aims
to fill this gap by developing a flexible, quantitative, and powerful diagnostic
approach to characterizing the reactivity of all types of granular reducing
materials used in water treatment systems. Part of the project will involve
measuring contaminant degradation in conventional bench-scale reactors using a
wide variety of potentially useful reducing particulate materials (granular
metals, metal oxides, metal sulfides, etc.). However, most of the experimental
work will focus on developing advanced electrochemical methods for
characterizing the materials based on a newly developed method for forming the
particles into electrodes. The results obtained by this electrochemical approach
will be applied to better understand the fundamental processes controlling the
performance of reducing materials for water treatment and to provide data for
quantitative models that can be used to predict the performance of new, as yet
untested, materials. Preliminary predictions made using these models will be
tested experimentally to validate the models and demonstrate their practical
utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to clean water requires methods to remove a
variety of contaminants, and this project aims to improve on the water treatment
methods that are currently available. The focus of this project is on chemical
contaminants, but the treatment methods under investigation can also serve to
control other types of contaminants, such as pathogenic bacteria, viruses, etc.
In addition to the identification of new/better reducing materials for water
treatment, and the development of systematic methods for identification and
optimization of materials for water treatment, this project also will initiate a
novel partnership with training programs for water treatment industry
professionals to maximize the impacts of this and future research and
development projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded by
NSF?s Office of International and Integrative Activities.