* 1333674
* CISE/CCF: 2013 Summer School on Formal Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Natarajan Shankar, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 03/31/2014
* USD 90,037.00

Formal modeling and verification technology has made&lt;br/&gt;significant
advances in the last two decades. Techniques like model&lt;br/&gt;checking and
theorem proving are now used in both the hardware and&lt;br/&gt;software
industries. Formal techniques are also increasingly being&lt;br/&gt;used in
scientific modeling, as for example in systems biology and in&lt;br/&gt;the
engineering of complex cyber-physical systems. The biggest&lt;br/&gt;challenge
facing this technology is the lack of trained users and&lt;br/&gt;developers of
this technology. &lt;br/&gt;To address this gap, we started the Summer School in
Formal Techniques. &lt;br/&gt;Two such schools have been organized, during the
summers of 2011 and 2012, &lt;br/&gt;at Menlo College in Atherton, California.
These schools attracted around 80&lt;br/&gt;participants with a diverse range of
interests and backgrounds. The&lt;br/&gt;lectures were supported by hands-on
laboratories. Both schools have&lt;br/&gt;been received enthusiastically by the
participants. The 2013&lt;br/&gt;Summer School on Formal Techniques continues
the work of developing a&lt;br/&gt;well-knit community of researchers who are
interested in learning&lt;br/&gt;cutting-edge techniques in formal modeling and
verification.&lt;br/&gt;Attendees at the school have the opportunity to present
their own&lt;br/&gt;research ideas and to interact closely with both the
lecturers and&lt;br/&gt;other students.