* 1333375
* Collaborative Proposal: Effect of thermal treatment on biomass structure and hydrocarbons production using catalytic pyrolysis process
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2014
* Arthur Ragauskas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 08/31/2014
* USD 125,000.00

PI: Adhikari, Sushil / Ragauskas, Arthur J Proposal Number: 1333372 / 1333375
Institution: Auburn University / Georgia Tech Research Corporation Title:
Collaborative Proposal: Effect of theral treatment on biomass structure and
hydrocarbons production using catalytic pyrolysis processm

The conversion of biomass to pyrolysis oil (i.e., bio-oil) and subsequent
upgradation to gasoline and diesel range compounds have a significant potential
in reducing the United States? dependence on imported petroleum products. Using
fast pyrolysis technology, a high yield of bio-oil can be achieved from various
biomass feedstocks. However, bio-oil is unstable and acidic, contains char
particles, and has about half the heating value of petroleum liquid fuels.
Acidity, high viscosity, high oxygen content, difficulties in removing char
particles, and immiscibility with petroleum liquids have restricted the use of
bio-oil. A catalytic pyrolysis process has been found to be effective in
alleviating some of the negative properties of the bio-oil. The catalytic
process-- that uses some shape selective zeolites-- involves the cleavage of C-C
bonds associated with dehydration, decarboxylation, and decarbonylation, and
produces aromatic compounds.

Torrefaction process has been used to pretreat biomass feedstocks in order to
reduce oxygen content with the assumption that as a result less oxygenated
compounds, that are more stable and have higher heating value, can be produced
using pyrolysis process. The central hypothesis of this study is that the
cleavage of weak ether and glycosidic bonds as a result of thermal treatment can
increase aromatics yield in biomass pyrolysis process. This project examines the
effects of thermal treatment on biomass properties and its structure. In
addition, the relationship between biomass structure and the hydrocarbon yields
in shape selective catalysts will be elucidated. Past studies on torrefied
biomass pyrolysis have investigated the effect of physicochemical properties on
bio-oil yield without developing detailed understanding of biomass structure and
its impact on liquid product. In addition, although the importance of Bronsted
acid sites on catalytic pyrolysis has been recognized for a long time, the
relationship among biomass properties, number of acid sites, spectrum of
hydrocarbon products after pyrolysis, and coke formation is not understood. The
role of acid (Bronsted) sites in H+ZSM-5 catalyst will be elucidated in
catalytic pyrolysis of torrefied biomass to maximize hydrocarbons production and
minimize coke formation. This research will provide a fundamental understanding
of the chemistry that occurs on the zeolite catalysts when thermally treated
--structurally damaged-- biomass is pyrolyzed.

Biomass-derived liquid fuels have a potential to provide a cost-effective and
sustainable supply of energy, while meeting greenhouse gas reduction targets.
The successful completion of this project will have an impact on the
profitability of farming, forest products, and pulp industries in the United
States. The project will train a new generation of graduates with its
multidisciplinary focus on bio-energy research, while providing a solid
fundamental background in their core areas, which will help transfer technology
to U.S. industry, thereby enhancing its competitiveness in the field of energy
technologies. As a part of the human development process, the PI will involve
K-12th grade teachers and students in this project using the existing
infrastructures at Auburn University.