* 1334130
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Sociology: Characteristics of Associational Life and the Development of Civic Society
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2014,07/31/2014
* Peter Evans, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1334130 Peter Evans Malgorzata Kurjanska University of California-Berkeley

This project is a continuation of dissertation fieldwork on how state policies
of political exclusion and cultural repression shaped civic society. The past
two decades have seen a resurgence of interest in associational life. Some
researchers place civil society at the heart of democratic consolidation. Others
cite examples of authoritarian states supported by dense yet uncivil society.
Few studies, however, analyze what forces shape the associational landscape?s
character. Thus, this research asks: Why do associations arise and what leads
them to become civil or uncivil in character? A survey of relevant scholarly
literature reveals two types of explanations: state-centered and economic
theories. This project tests and builds upon these theories through comparative
analysis of associational life in pre-WWI and interwar [1918-1939] Poland. The
project employs cross-regional and cross-time historical comparisons. It
utilizes historical narratives and descriptive statistics to examine the
development of associational life in pre-WWI and interwar Poland. In addition to
theoretical contributions, this research will contribute to knowledge on civic
society in Eastern Europe. Polish civic society has been researched extensively
in the post-communist context. Yet there are few studies of pre-WWII
associational life in the ethnically diverse societies of early twentieth
century Eastern Europe. This dissertation addresses this gap in existing
research.

Broader Impacts

The study incorporates research that is often overlooked as it is not readily
available to non-Polish speakers. Thus, it will bring to an English-speaking
audience studies that have been marginalized due to language barriers. A
historical analysis of factors that shaped the associational landscape in
interwar Poland will shed light on the implications of social and economic
policies pursued by modern, multi-ethnic states with growing civic societies and
uncertain paths to democratization. This project contributes to modern debates
by helping to identify the types of policies, social or economic, which support
the development of civil society.