* 1334719
* Synchrotron Studies and Computational Modeling of Flow-Induced Polymer Crystallization in Shear and Extensional Flow
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Wesley Burghardt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 303,879.00

This grant provides funding to support an experimental and computational study
of the phenomenon of ?flow-induced polymer crystallization?, referring to the
profound impact of processing flows on the rate of solidification. The
experimental portion of this work utilizes new capabilities for x-ray scattering
studies of polymer structure in well-defined uniaxial extensional flows which
involve pure stretching deformations with no superimposed shear. X-ray
scattering experiments will be performed at the Advanced Photon Source at
Argonne National Laboratory, taking advantage of high brilliance radiation and
fast detectors to monitor development of crystallinity and the degree of
crystallite orientation as a function of temperature and flow conditions
(deformation rate and total applied strain) in several semi-crystalline
polyolefins, such as polyethylene, polypropylene and poly(1-butene). The
experimental program will also include exploratory studies of polymer
crystallization during injection molding. In the computational portion of the
work, these data will be used to test and guide refinements of existing models
of flow-enhanced nucleation and crystallization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will lead to improved ability to
rationally predict the processing of semi-crystalline polymers in flows where
extensional (stretching) deformations play an important role. These include high
volume processes such as fiber spinning, film blowing and blow molding. By
comparing the nature of flow-induced crystallization in both extensional and
shearing flows, this work will also provide insights into the fundamental
molecular processes that underlie accelerated polymer crystallization during
flow. For instance, one class of models is built upon the assumption that flow-
induced chain stretch, predicted by molecular rheological models, is the crucial
variable governing accelerated nucleation. This hypothesis will be tested
directly by designing shear and extensional flow protocols to produce similar
molecular stretch using very dissimilar flow types. Finally, this work serves as
a prototype for how powerful in situ experimental studies of materials
processing may be closely coordinated with process modeling.