* 1334269
* Engineering Surface Stability of Porous Silicon in Electrochemical Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Cary Pint, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 436,866.00

Research Objective and Approach, This research effort focuses on the application
of thin, passive surface coatings to engineer the stability of nanoporous
silicon materials and activate them as stable electrodes for electrochemical
energy storage and conversion devices. Silicon combines earth abundance, low
mass density, high achievable bulk conductivity, and easily manufactured
nanoporous architectures making it ideal for such applications despite
reactivity in electrochemical environments that renders it unusable for stable
electrochemical devices. The approach of this research will be to apply gas-
phase deposition techniques to coat thin films of stable materials including
graphene, metal oxides, and metal nitrides, onto three-dimensional nanoporous
silicon. This allows the silicon-electrolyte interface stability to be
engineered while still preserving the controllable structure and surface area
achieved with nanoporous silicon. Electrochemical stability and energy storage
capability of these materials will be assessed using the development and testing
of porous silicon-based high power electric double-layer capacitor devices. This
research approach will then adopt a plants-to-power storage theme where silicon
materials derived directly from plant matter or agricultural waste will be
transformed into materials exhibiting stable electrochemical performance due to
the application of controlled thin-film surface coatings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits to Society, If successful, the benefit of this
research program will be the design of new materials with direct impact on grid-
scale and portable energy systems. Transformation of abundant silicon-containing
resources into energy devices enables low-cost, grid scale systems imperative to
future energy sustainability. The use of processed natural resources to develop
electrochemical solar cells, capacitors, and desalination systems collectively
represent a sustained route toward basic resources of water and energy that will
be transformative for low-income or third-world countries. Direct integration of
silicon energy devices into excess silicon in photovoltaics, sensors, or
electronics will enable more efficient electronics and portable technology in
addition to the broader crosscutting societal impact of innovation in the
surface engineering of silicon nanomaterials. Furthermore, the PI and Co-PI will
participate and lead local and national outreach programs including the
Vanderbilt Summer Academy, Vanderbilt students volunteering for science, and the
Boy Scouts of America Engineering Explorers to engage K-12 students in order to
strengthen and diversify a future STEM workforce.