* 1334610
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Class and Undergraduate Academic Achievement
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Camille Charles, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2014
* USD 9,248.00

SES-1334610 Camille Charles April Yee University of Pennsylvania

Higher education is a critical pathway for social mobility in American society,
yet significant social class disparities in access to and outcomes from higher
education raise questions about the promise of this opportunity. Extant research
fails to explain what actually happens in college to promote or hinder social
mobility. Drawing upon more than 200 in-depth interviews and 800 hours of
participant observation at a large, urban, public university, this dissertation
research investigates how students from different social class backgrounds
attempt to achieve academic success during the first two years of college. Early
findings reveal that students from all social class backgrounds shared similar
beliefs about college success, and that these beliefs changed over time.
However, important differences emerged between their strategies for success,
which resulted in unequal educational outcomes. This research offers a unique
portrait of undergraduate daily life, as well as potential new explanations for
the college achievement gap by social class and the reproduction of inequality
through education.

Broader Impact

Research findings have potential practical implications for higher education
policymakers and administrators who are increasingly focusing their attention
beyond college access to college completion. By revealing the academic
experiences of students from lower social class backgrounds, this study can
inform the creation of retention policies and programs to help support the
students who are most likely to leave college before graduating. In the United
States today, a college degree has replaced a high school diploma as the
requirement for entry into the middle class. What happens in college- whether
students academically succeed or fail- points them towards divergent
trajectories to adulthood, constrains opportunities to pursue various
professional paths, and ultimately prepares them for a host of different life
outcomes related to earnings, marriage, and health. Understanding inequality in
academic achievement in college is therefore vital for understanding inequality
in American society.