* 1334838
* Advanced Interpenetrating Networks for Structural Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Mina Dawood, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 309,989.00

The implementation of structural polymers and fiber reinforced polymer
composites in civil infrastructure, energy, aerospace, and automotive industries
has been steadily gaining prominence. Epoxy resins are dominant materials used
in structural applications due to their strength and stiffness. However, epoxy
resins are also brittle and essentially elastic up to failure with little
capacity for redistribution of stresses and dissipation of energy. The objective
of this project is to develop tough epoxy resins through the synthesis and
characterization of novel interpenetrating networks of traditional epoxy resins
with polydicyclopentadiene, a commercially available polymer that is well-known
to be ductile and tough. The hypothesis of this project is that an
interpenetrating network will combine the advantageous properties of both of its
constituents thereby exhibiting superior cracking and debonding behavior as
compared to traditional structural epoxy resins. The knowledge gained in the
development of these materials will provide a greater understanding of critical
parameters governing interpenetrating network formation, structural evolution
during the material preparation, and relationships between the material
structure and macroscopic physical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
engineers become more comfortable with the use of composites in structural
applications, they are adopting thicker and larger structural components to meet
the load requirements of more demanding applications. For example, some modern
commercial airliners implement fiber reinforced polymer composites; similarly,
glass fiber composites are commonly used to fabricate wind turbine blades. In
civil infrastructure, thick, high modulus carbon fiber reinforced polymers have
been investigated to repair and strengthen deteriorated steel structures.
Despite their higher costs, epoxy resin adhesives are most commonly used to bond
composite materials for structural applications. This research project will
result in development of a new class of materials that maintain the advantageous
properties of epoxy resins (high strength and stiffness), yet are also tough and
resistant to fracturing. Educational programs will be closely integrated into
the research objectives, including the development of a hands-on outreach
program for K-12 students and participation of undergraduate and graduate
students in the research, emphasizing retaining students in engineering and
educating students on the impact of polymers on society.&lt;br/&gt;