* 1334283
* DMREF: Real Time Control  of Grain Growth in Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Robert Hull, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,285,243.00

This project is developing a new methodology to control adaptively the evolution
of materials microstructure during thermal processing, through integration of
simulation, real-time measurement, control algorithms, and simulated and
experimental data sets. The specific implementation focuses on the spatial
control of grain microstructure during thermal processing of polycrystalline
metals. Monte Carlo and phase field simulations are used to predict the
trajectory of microstructure evolution, and real-time measurements of local
microstructure, crystallography and temperature using scanning electron
microscopy methods are used to track these trajectories experimentally. When
measurement shows significant deviation from the planned trajectory, a new
trajectory is simulated and implemented through control algorithms. The
experimental implementation comprises a multi-zone resistive heating array that
enables controlled temperature distributions to be programmed across a
macroscopic polycrystalline metal sample in-situ to a scanning electron
microscope. Secondary electron imaging and electron backscattered diffraction
(EBSD) are employed to monitor the evolution of grain structure and
crystallography, while a new method, based upon quantification of diffuse
scattering in the EBSD patterns, is employed to measure local temperature
distributions using the same electron beam. The resulting real time data streams
are compared to the predictions from simulation, and as deviations emerge, the
temperature distribution across the sample is adjusted to steer micro-structural
evolution back towards the desired state. The control algorithms employed to
achieve this are developed based on the linearized phase field models. When the
deviations between measurement and simulation become excessive, re-optimization
using full Monte-Carlo simulation between intermediate and final states is
required. As these methods develop, implementation of feedback control without
excessive use of such re-optimization is expected as the libraries of correlated
experimental and simulated data sets develop. While these methods inherently
measure two-dimensional distributions of grain parameters at the surface,
integrated focused ion beam tomography is used to correlate the surface grain
microstructure to three dimensional distributions within the bulk, and also to
compare to two dimensional ? three dimensional correlations from the
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing a major new
capability for control of materials processing: the ability to monitor, evaluate
and control the local materials structure of a system as it evolves during
thermal processing in order to obtain optimal properties. This is enabled
through new methodologies for integrating experiment, simulation, and data
management. The specific project implementation comprises control of grain
growth during annealing of polycrystalline metals. However, the methodologies
developed should be extendible to acceleration of a wide range of process
development cycles where specific internal materials structures are known to
correlate to optimal materials properties and performance. The research project
is integrated with a broad set of educational and outreach activities. High
school, undergraduate and graduate students are involved throughout the project.
In particular, multiple graduate students who are trained through this research
are becoming expert in the integrated application of experimental, simulation
and data sciences to the acceleration of materials processing technologies. This
is preparing them for future leadership in the development of new materials
manufacturing technologies.