* 1334788
* Collaborative Research: Trajectories and spatial distributions of diatoms at dissipation scales of turbulence
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Evan Variano, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2017
* USD 315,869.00

Turbulence is ubiquitous and important in the upper mixed layer where
phytoplankton reside. On scales relevant to individual cells and colonies,
dissipating turbulence erodes molecular diffusive boundary layers around cells
and affects probabilities of encounter critical for processes such as predator-
prey interactions and aggregation. Superimposed on ambient fluid motion are
local motions of cells due to tumbling and sinking. How these motions interact
with ambient turbulence is not well understood, particularly for the
morphologically diverse, non-motile diatoms that dominate primary productivity.
Recent studies show that still-water sinking velocities of particles and
turbulent diffusive motions of fluids cannot simply be added together to solve
for particle motions; for negatively and nearly neutrally buoyant particles,
high turbulence intensity produces several times faster sinking and rising
velocities than seen in still water. Atmospheric studies of water droplets in
clouds have focused on inertial mechanisms of acceleration, but the review in
this proposal suggests that--in the parameter space defined by the particle
characteristics of diatoms--shape may be much more important than inertia in
determining plankton-turbulence interactions. The investigators propose to study
effects of turbulence on settling trajectories and resultant spatial
distributions of diatoms. Employing a novel volumetric particle imager, they
will obtain 3D Lagrangian trajectories of individual cells and chains of
selected strains of diatoms under controlled turbulence. By targeting species of
different morphologies and mechanical properties as well as cultures at
different growth stages, new insights will be gained on how physical,
morphological and physiological properties affect sinking speeds and
trajectories of non-motile phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Sinking is an important life strategy of phytoplankton, and its
interaction with ambient flows holds significant implications for the residence
time of phytoplankton in the mixed layer and ultimately for phytoplankton
productivity in the photic zone and fluxes of elements to the deeper ocean. This
study challenges common views on mechanisms that cause phytoplankton sinking in
the ocean and offers a mechanistic dissection of departures in turbulent sinking
from Stokes settling. By targeting species of varied morphologies and mechanical
properties, as well as cultures at different growth stages, new insights will be
gained into how physical, morphological and physiological properties interact to
determine sinking speeds and trajectories of non-motile phytoplankton,
particularly in and near the vortices that dominate turbulent flows. Results
from this study will also advance understanding of underlying spatial
distributions of phytoplankton in the poorly resolved decimeter to millimeter
domain, with abundant implications for the foraging fields of grazers and
formation of particle aggregates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;Wide arrays of problems involve particle motions in turbulence.
Results from this study will apply to many aquatic environments and advance
understanding of the behavior of non-spherical, low-inertia particles in
turbulent flows, with applications to other fields such as atmospheric sciences
and chemical engineering. This proposal will also advance the laboratory
simulation of turbulence with a novel compromise among existing approaches that
promises efficient simulation of dissipation-scale turbulence. The VoPI also
provides more rapid and efficient identification and tracking of particles in
turbulent flows than has been feasible with computer-intensive holography or
particle-imaging velocimetry. The investigators propose a week-long workshop
that will bring together biological oceanography and engineering graduate
students and postdocs to explore the rich set of questions associated with
microscale interactions of planktonic organisms with ambient flows, and
approaches to address them. Two graduate students and two undergraduate students
will be supported by the collaborative grant. Results from this study will be
presented at national meetings, published in peer-reviewed journals and
incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses taught by the PIs.