* 1334272
* Resilient Steel Frame Systems through the Use of Non-Traditional Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jason McCormick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 289,259.00

This project aims to enhance the performance of steel frame systems under
seismic loads by incorporating non-traditional civil engineering materials into
steel structural systems. Current design approaches for steel frame systems rely
on damage to steel members in specific locations to dissipate energy. The use of
non-traditional civil engineering materials, such as steel foam and honeycomb
materials as fill-in, in steel systems is an important means to significantly
reduce the impact of an earthquake on a structure. The use of these non-
traditional materials provides an opportunity to better control structural
response and the amount and location of damage. As a result, the need to repair
both structural and non-structural damage after an extreme event is minimized
and the economic integrity of the community is maintained. Such solutions are
plausible for both new construction and retrofit of older steel frame systems.
This work will provide a road map for more extensive use and integration of
innovative materials in the design of
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, steel frame systems dissipate
earthquake input energy through inelastic behavior at 'fuses' or 'plastic
hinges' in specified members limiting the sections that can be used for these
members and leading to significant damage and downtime for repairs. The specific
goal of this project is to enhance the resilience and robustness of seismic
steel frame systems by employing non-traditional materials (high damping rubber,
metal and polymer foams, and honeycomb materials) between the flanges of wide
flange sections and the interior of hollow structural sections to increase
energy dissipation and restrain local buckling. To achieve this goal, the
behavior of the high damping materials will be characterized under large dynamic
cyclic loads. Mechanical behavior tests will be conducted on the non-traditional
civil engineering materials and small-scale member tests will consider their
behavior in a confined fill application. Finite element models will be used to
evaluate the effect of different properties and configurations on the behavior
and energy dissipation capacity of the void-filled members. Large-scale sub-
assemblies of beam-column connections and bracing members utilizing the fill
materials will be experimentally tested to determine detailing requirements and
verify buckling mitigation. The confluence of non-traditional civil engineering
materials, structural engineering, and earthquakes also provides an opportunity
to motivate the next generation of students towards engineering; impress upon
university students the need to think creatively; and educate structural
engineering practitioners about non-traditional materials and their possible
impact in structures.