* 1334538
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Multiscale Modeling and Experimental Approach to High Cycle Fatigue Life Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Vijay Vasudevan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2017
* USD 246,000.00

The research objective of this collaborative project is to investigate high
cycle fatigue failure in representative engineering alloys (304 austenitic
stainless steel, Inconel 718+ Ni-based superalloy and Ti-6Al-4V alloy) with a
tightly integrated modeling/experimental approach. A computational framework
will be established based on the integration of an enriched space-time finite
element method and a multiscale fatigue damage model. With this approach, new
knowledge will be gained through studies on key factors such as load cycles,
stress history and triaxiality, nonlinear coupling among the loads, and complex
geometry, which are known to critically influence the fatigue failure and
generally not fully accounted for in the empirical design approaches that are
being practiced today. The fundamental mechanisms revealed through the
computational efforts will be verified and validated through existing
experimental data as well as proposed high cycle fatigue tests featuring in-situ
monitoring of fatigue crack initiation and propagation. Additionally,
microstructural characterization will be performed to establish a map between
the observed microstructural deformation mechanism and the proposed multiscale
material model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will shed new
night on the fundamental mechanisms that govern the high cycle fatigue failure
in many critical engineering applications. Examples include turbines used for
energy and power applications, aerospace structural components, and high-
performance electronics. The multiscale simulation models and experimental
techniques developed from this project will also be of interest to other
researchers who are studying high cycle fatigue mechanism for a broader range of
materials and devices. The acquired research results on the topic of high cycle
fatigue will be fully incorporated into the undergraduate/graduate curricula.
With a cyber-enabled approach, the knowledge will be disseminated through a
variety of channels towards a wide range of audiences, including graduates,
undergraduates, K-12 and underrepresented groups.