* 1334998
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Design and Optimization of Powder Processed Ni-Base Superalloys via Grain Boundary Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Sammy Tin, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 246,130.00

This research is about design of microstructures in superalloy structures that
exhibit superior mechanical properties through grain boundary engineering. The
approach of this research will be to develop and link process models, capable of
producing microstructures with distinct grain boundary characteristics, with
behavior models, capable of determining the fatigue life based on the
microstructure. Through physics-based approaches, a process map will relate the
hot deformation parameters for Nickel-based superalloys to the formation of
distinct grain boundaries and microstructures. Microstructures that produce
superior properties will be identified through inverse fatigue modeling and
fabricated in bulk components. The validation of desired mechanical properties
and mechanisms for achieving strengthening at distinct boundaries will be
identified through novel in situ loading experiments coupled with strain field
measurements and orientation mapping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
benefits of this research will include the design of microstructures in bulk
engineering materials that exhibit superior and tailorable mechanical
properties, thus producing an increase in safety, performance, and energy
efficiency of components for gas turbine engine applications. More generally,
the fundamental science will enable: (a) an identification of the types of
microstructures that produce advances in fatigue life, (b) an understanding of
the strengthening mechanisms of these distinct grain boundaries, and (c) process
maps to achieve such structures. Each of the aforementioned items will enable
designs of microstructures in a wide class of materials and components that
exhibit superior mechanical behavior. The broader impact of this research is
four-fold: (i.) a materials camp for high school science teachers, (ii.)
inclusion of women and underrepresented groups, (iii.) open and wide-spread
dissemination through HUB technology, and (iv.) industrial interaction including
technology transfer.