* 1334686
* Calibrating Diatom Oxygen Isotopes for Paleoceanographic Applications Using a Novel Technique
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Howard Spero, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2017
* USD 399,604.00

The oxygen isotopic composition (delta18O) of silicate in diatom tests has the
potential to deliver key paleoceanographic information, but is underutilized
because of the difficulty associated with isolating it for geochemical analysis.
This work will refine and apply a new technique ("microfluorination") that has
the potential to make d18O in diatoms a more routine measurement. A suite of
experiments will be conducted to improve the efficiency of the technique and
reduce the sample size required for analysis. The technique will then be applied
to cultured marine and freshwater diatoms in order to calibrate the proxy
relationship between diatom delta18O and temperature. Finally, diatoms from a
sediment trap and boxcore collected in the Guaymas Basin will be analyzed to a)
constrain biomineralization depth, b) compare oxygen isotope data between
diatoms and foraminifera, and c) assess diagenetic effects on diatom delta18O
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing the microfluorination technique and the
diatom delta18O-temperature proxy relationship will enable scientists to tap an
important, underexploited source of information about ocean-climate dynamics.
The project will support a PhD student and provide training opportunities in a
state-of-the-art technique for undergraduate students and future post-doctoral
researchers in the PI's lab. Project results will be incorporated into graduate
coursework. This research will strengthen international ties via collaboration
with investigators in the UK and Germany.