* 1334375
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Labor Offshoring in Knowledge Intensive Agriculture
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2014
* Annabel Ipsen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 12/31/2014
* USD 11,995.00

SES-134375 Jane Collins Annabel Ipsen University of Wisconsin-Madison

This dissertation uses the case of the global seed industry to address questions
about knowledge-intensive agriculture and its relationship to skill, labor
offshoring and employment conditions. It explores a case where U.S.-based firms
have moved some of their knowledge-intensive production offshore to take
advantage of a low-waged labor market, while maintaining some jobs in the U.S.
This study investigates the dilemma that global seed companies face when
selecting their workforce: should they recruit skilled workers in high-quality
production jobs or should they retain a workforce whose wages and working
conditions reflect an older set of norms in the agricultural sector? To address
these issues, this dissertation asks: 1) How do seed companies achieve high-
skilled output while relying on an inexperienced workforce? 2) How are firms'
labor market strategies shaped by the nature of the commodity and the
competitive pressures they face? And 3) How do place-specific socioeconomic and
political relations shape labor markets and opportunities for workers' agency?
In order to answer these questions, the investigator will perform a labor-
focused commodity chain analysis of the global seed industry through interviews
and data collection and conduct a multi-sited ethnography in two (Arica, Chile
and Des Moines, Iowa) locations along the commodity chain of a U.S.-based
transnational seed company. This work will expand the theoretical base used to
study labor in global manufacturing to include agriculture-specific factors and
fills gaps in the agricultural literature on: skill, global-local linkages and
knowledge-intensive agriculture. It will refine current labor and development
theories and examine what type of effects commodity-specific imperatives
(technology, labor, capital) have on the configuration of the local labor
market. Identifying the factors that influence firms' labor offshoring decisions
is instructive for understanding the seed industry, but also in providing
insight into how other globalized labor markets function.

Broader Impacts: This dissertation will advance our understanding of the
relationship between skill, work conditions and labor offshoring in knowledge-
intensive agricultural work. To enhance research infrastructure, the
investigators will present the work in diverse venues to develop networks to
support students? interest in creating local research initiatives and to broaden
the participation of underrepresented students in my project as research
assistants. The research activities will promote applied learning opportunities
for students. In addition, the investigators will work with international policy
and research institutions on agricultural labor. Findings will be shared with
affiliated organizations, universities, NGOs and research and policy
institutions to enhance our understanding of how new forms of labor force
segmentation reinforce vulnerability and to leverage additional research and
program support for agricultural labor.