* 1334585
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Demographics, Migration, and the IT Workforce
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Enobong Branch, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 8,271.00

SES-1334585 PI: Enobong Branch Co-PI: Sharla Alegria University of Massachusetts
Amherst

This dissertation project asks how and why gender remains salient in the
Information Technology (IT) workforce where both individual, private firms and
government agencies are taking steps to broaden participation and increase the
number of women in the field as a matter of global economic security.
Scholarship on the demographic composition of the Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math workforce (STEM) tends to focus only on gender, asking why
women are underrepresented in STEM fields. Women's low participation in these
fields is often conceptualized as a failure of the fields to attract women,
either due to the subject matter or difficulty in balancing work and family
life. Using only a gendered lens obscures the complicated racial and global
demographic dynamics of the STEM workforce, particularly in IT. This research
uses an intersectional framework to analyze gender, race, and migration
together, shedding new light not just on women's representation but more broadly
on how gender, race and migration operate in a high-tech field with global
markets for both labor and goods. Using a mixed-method approach, this study
examines the consequences of race, gender and migration status for IT workers'
workplace experiences and wages. It asks the following questions: 1) What is the
magnitude of unequal representation in IT when considering the intersections of
gender, race, and migration? 2) Is the unequal representation by demographic
group accompanied by unequal wages? 3) What differences exist in the experiences
of workers across race, gender, and migration status? Descriptive demographic
analysis shows the magnitude of unequal representation by gender, race, and
migration status. Wage decomposition provides a quantitative analysis of
differences in earnings across demographic groups and shows how much of those
differences results from unequal treatment. Qualitative analysis of single
gender, race, and migration status focus groups and interviews examines
differences in workers? experiences to understand the causes and consequences of
wage and representational inequalities.

Broader Impacts: This project makes significant contributions in three important
areas: 1) It advances sociological understandings of how inequality persists and
operates when discrimination has been disavowed and creating opportunities for
historically underrepresented groups is a spoken goal 2) It corrects
misunderstandings about the demographics of the IT workforce that have resulted
from a nearly exclusive focus on gender 3) It offers a new approach to
understanding the challenges of broadening participation initiatives in STEM,
which will generate new strategies for recruiting a diverse STEM workforce.