* 1334611
* Collaborative Research: Utilization of Smart Materials and Predictive Modeling to Integrate Intracellular Dynamics with Cell Biomechanics and Collective Tissue Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* James Henderson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,978.00

The goal of this research project is to employ programmable materials from the
field of biomaterials science, particle-tracking algorithms from the fields of
biomechanics and biophysics, and molecular probes from the fields of cell and
molecular biology to track and model the interaction of multiple intracellular
components and the resultant large-scale cellular behaviors. A grand challenge
in biomechanics and mechanobiology is that of understanding the complex
interactions that occur between intracellular structures and how those
interactions produce function at the cell and tissue levels. Through three
objectives, this project will yield a method for quantitatively characterizing
interactions between intracellular components and linking those patterns with
large-scale behaviors such as cell polarization. First, the biomechanical
sequence of cell polarization at the intracellular level will be elucidated via
automated, synchronized tracking of multiple components in single cells in
highly constrained environments. Second, cell polarization will be induced in
individual cells using smart substrates and patterns in intracellular components
will be linked to this large-scale cell behavior. Third, cell polarization will
be studied and modeled, from the intracellular to multicellular levels, in a
model of contact inhibition release/localized epithelial-mesenchymal transition
with high cell densities. Coordinated cell movements are critical to biological
processes such as embryonic development, cancer progression, and wound healing.
Although cell movement is generated by structures inside cells, it is not known
how interactions of those structures produce cell movement and resulting
organization within groups of cells. This project will answer that question. A
new computational approach will quantify the simultaneously interactions of
several different important structures inside cells. New smart material will be
used to trigger changes to cell movement, and the computational approach will
determine how interactions of structures inside cells also change. Both low cell
densities, where cells interact rarely, and high cell densities, where cells are
always touching as happens in living organisms, will be studied. A model for
collective movement of large groups of cells that can make predictions about
tissues formation and disease will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society
will benefit from the technical and professional development of the individuals
involved, important advances in the fields of biomechanics, biophysics, and
biology, and breakthroughs that can be anticipated in healthcare fields.
Research, education, and diversity at both collaborating institutions will be
further integrated through a yearly summer research program that will recruit
exceptional Hampton University students as undergraduate researchers.