* 1334707
* Understanding Causes of Climate Model Biases in the Southeastern Tropical Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ping Chang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 796,305.00

Recent studies have revealed that among all the tropical oceans, the Atlantic
has experienced the most pronounced warming trend over the 20th century. Many
extreme climate events are influenced by oceanic conditions over the Atlantic.
It is therefore imperative to have accurate simulations of the Atlantic Ocean
climate to be able to make credible projections of future climate in the
surrounding continental regions. Unfortunately, current-generation models,
including those used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
exhibit severe biases in their simulations of tropical Atlantic climate. An
infamous example is a persistent warm sea surface temperature bias of at least
6°C off the coast of Namibia and Angola. This research aims at investigating the
causes of this bias which will ultimately lead to major improvements in the
simulation and projection of future climate changes within the Atlantic
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will explore
oceanic and atmospheric biases, as well as amplification of biases from the
coupled ocean-atmosphere system. The sources of oceanic biases will be analyzed
and identified from oceanic observations, ocean reanalysis products, IPCC model
simulations, and eddy resolving regional ocean simulations. Similarly,
atmospheric biases will be evaluated using atmospheric reanalysis data and
convection-resolving regional atmospheric model simulations. The role of ocean-
atmosphere interactions in amplifying the oceanic or atmospheric biases will be
examined from high-resolution coupled regional climate model (CRCM) simulations.
The use of high-resolution (up to 3 km) regional climate models will allow
processes such as oceanic mesoscale eddies, fronts and upwelling dynamics off
the west coast of southern Africa, as well as atmospheric convection and steep
orography effects, and thus will minimize model systematic errors due to
uncertainties associated with parameterizations of subgrid-scale processes. This
modeling approach will isolate sources of the biases from other ocean basins and
will help to pinpoint the causes of the biases within the Atlantic basin. The
study will utilize an array of fine temporal and spatial resolution data sets
produced by recent intense observational programs within the Atlantic sector.
Furthermore, the project will coincide with the launch of two major European
research projects in the study region: a German project "Southwest African
Coastal Upwelling System and Benguela Niño" (SACUS) led by Brandt, and an EU
project "Enhancing prediction of tropical Atlantic climate and its impacts"
(PREFACE) led by Keenlyside. Both of these projects will generate new arrays of
observations along the southern Africa coast. Close collaboration with the
European colleagues will allow their new observations to be combined with US-
based detailed modeling that will likely lead to new breakthroughs in solving
tropical Atlantic bias problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research will enhance our understanding of the uncertainties in projecting
impacts of global climate change in the Atlantic region, which has enormous
socio-economic implications for countries in the region. The CRCM is being
developed within the framework of the Coupler (CPL7) software that is part of
the National Center for Atmospheric Research Community Earth System Model
(CESM). This framework allows easy transfer of parameterizations between CESM
and the CRCM, and potential partial coupling between the CESM and the CRCM. We
envision that the CRCM will become a community-modeling tool and be made
available to the broader climate research community. Findings from this study on
reducing climate model biases will feedback to community model development
activities. The project will support one graduate student and one postdoc at
Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) and provide valuable professional development
for all young scientists involved, including Co-PI Patricola.