* 1334908
* Anticipating Bifurcations for Identifying Dynamic Characteristics of Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mercedes Pascual, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 325,251.00

The main goal of this research project is to create a novel method to
quantitatively forecast bifurcations as well as the pre- and post-bifurcation
dynamics of large dimensional nonlinear systems with a low dimensional inertial
manifold. Dramatic changes in the dynamics of complex systems, from ecosystems
to engineered systems, occur. Forecasting such events using advanced nonlinear
techniques is of major importance. The behavior of such complex systems is
commonly characterized by nonlinearities that can lead to regime shifts or
bifurcations from a stable to an unstable dynamics. A method that can
quantitatively predict bifurcations as well as the pre- and post-bifurcation
dynamics for large dimensional nonlinear systems would have a significant impact
in a variety of fields, from the analysis of nano-systems to the design of
disease eradication campaigns. The three key tasks are to: (1) develop novel
techniques to differentiate the dynamics along the inertial manifold from the
overall dynamics and to handle noise using a robust signal processing
methodology, (2) develop innovative methods to forecast stable/unstable branches
of bifurcation diagrams, and (3) refine the general methods for application to
complex nonlinear systems including population dynamics and aeroelastic systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has broader impacts on the society at large.
This effort will answer important scientific questions, and will impact
applications spanning from computational dynamics to population dynamics. For
example, there is an acute need for reliable methods to predict catastrophic
events in populations of plants and/or animals because such events can lead to
irreversible consequences such as extinction of species. The potential impact of
this method is even higher when applied to disease eradication (populations of
infectious diseases). While the dynamics of diseases is a very complex system
and the method may not be perfect, it can prove to outperform most other methods
because of its ability to filter out noise and the ability to provide forecasts
without the need for an accurate model.