* 1334322
* Collaborative Research:  Imaging plate boundary processes within the Cascadia subduction zone offshore central Washington with open-access marine seismic data
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Harold Tobin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2016
* USD 149,907.00

Analysis of the recently-acquired multi-channel seismic (MCS) data will address
a series of topics that relate to the structure of the lithosphere and the
margin evolution along the central WA portion of Cascadia subduction zone, and
how these relate to current seismicity patterns. Advanced processing of the MCS
data is expected to identify the depth and character of the plate boundary and
the amount of sediment currently being subducted will be assessed. Deformation
of strata within the accretionary wedge will be mapped to track longer-term
evolution of the plate interactions. Estimates of crustal hydration will be
obtained from assumed seismic velocity-porosity relationships and, along
interfaces, reflectivity. Maps showing the distribution of methane hydrates in
the region will be produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results will provide a
framework within which other Cascadia geoscientific studies are conducted, both
for seismic processes and tectonic evolution, and are likely to have
implications for hazard assessment. While this subduction zone currently has
less earthquake activity than other zones around the world, onshore evidence of
repeated megathrust events is clear, so it is important to understand the
history of of stress buildup (strata deformation) and the extent to which fluids
along faults might enable periods of 'lubricated', slow release.