* 1334428
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: High-Throughput Mapping of Functional Dielectric/Metallic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,02/28/2019
* Karin Rabe, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 02/28/2019
* USD 525,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL: In this DMREF project, the rich physics of three large families
of artificially structured oxide materials are being studied using a synergistic
combination of theoretical and experimental methods. These artificially
structured materials, obtained by stacking atomically-thin layers of two or more
different compounds, offer enormous flexibility in the choice of constituents,
layer thickness, stacking sequence and choice of substrate, which can strongly
influence their structure and properties. The approach being developed and
applied in this project, integrating computational data-driven search and
modeling methods with sophisticated first-principles analysis and state-of-the-
art experimental synthesis and characterization of selected materials, allows
the design and discovery of novel materials with specified functional properties
enhanced and/or distinct from those possible in naturally occurring compounds,
thus having the potential to enable transformative technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: In this DMREF project, the rich physics of
metallic-dielectric perovskite oxide superlattices are being explored through an
integrated theoretical-experimental investigation. The principal objective is to
map the structure and properties of three selected broad families of
superlattices (superlattices of SrMO3 where M=V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Mo or Ru
combined with SrTiO3, PbTiO3 or LaMO3) spanning an enormous configuration space.
Specifically, the researchers are building on recent advances in high-throughput
first-principles infrastructure to develop and demonstrate a guided-sampling
high-throughput first-principles approach that uses physically-motivated models
to interpret and interpolate first-principles results. Furthermore, their
approach compares approximate quantities (that are computed in high-throughput
calculations) to those obtained through both high-accuracy computational methods
and state-of-the-art experimental synthesis and characterization. This approach
is enabling them to identify individual systems with desired functionalities,
particularly those related to metal-insulator transitions. In insulating
materials the properties of interest are those related to polarization,
including piezoresponse and dielectric constant and the size and position of
band gaps and band edges. For metallic materials, the thermoelectric properties
of these layered systems are especially promising. Intensive theoretical and
experimental investigation is validating the theoretically generated structure-
property maps, revealing any novel physical phenomena, and pointing the way to
potential technological applications. Beyond the systems being studied in this
project, the guided-sampling high-throughput approach being developed for this
investigation can be applied to other materials design challenges as well. The
tight integration of theory and experiment in this project provides a unique
opportunity for participants, including graduate, undergraduate and high school
students, to develop a broad skill set while participating in cutting edge
materials development.