* 1334847
* Regulation of Focal Adhesion Initiation by Lipids and Membrane Bending
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Peter Butler, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2017
* USD 380,000.00

The research objective of this award is to understand the very early parts of
how cells adhere to surfaces such as natural extracellular matrices and
artificial surfaces used in biomaterials. Specifically, this research will
investigate how the membrane controls the transport of lipids and the
recruitment of important adhesion molecules to adhesion plaques. These
experiments will use advanced microscopes capable of measuring dynamics of
cellular adhesions and molecular dynamics in these structures. If successful,
these measurements would lead to a better understanding of cellular adhesion
dynamics and why atherosclerotic lesions form in areas of low and oscillating
fluid shear stress such as at blood vessel bifurcations and near stents. It may
also be important for shear-induced vasodilation, which is known to counteract
pressure-induced myogenic constriction in small arteries and thus is an
important component of blood pressure control and hypertension.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these studies would add significantly to
the field's understanding of mechanosensing in particular and molecular scale
functional organization of plasma membranes in general. This understanding may
assist in future testing of mechanosensation theories and in the development of
new biomechanical mimetics, such as unilamellar vesicles with proteins,
proteoglycans, and cytoskeleton. Since almost all cells need to sense and apply
force, these studies may have broad implications for many mechanobiological
processes including bone remodeling, stem cell differentiation, and
developmental biology. The proposed research on membrane mechanobiology will be
integrated into graduate training and in undergraduate honors thesis
preparation. This training will form the basis of outreach to young scientists
(grades 6-12) in which molecular scale mechanobiology is made more accessible
through modern 3-D visualization. Such outreach will provide opportunities to
reach underrepresented groups such as women and minorities and students in rural
Pennsylvania, who visit Penn State frequently as they consider their higher
education options.