* 1334551
* Prediction of Hydrodynamic Vulnerability of Coastal Bridges to Extreme Storm Surges
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Anil Agrawal, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Several critical bridges were damaged severely because of wave surges during
Hurricane Ivan in 2004 and Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Damage to the built
infrastructure during Hurricanes Irene in 2011 and Sandy in 2012 in the New York
City Metropolitan area shows the potential risk to critical coastal bridges.
This risk could be higher in the future hurricanes because of sea level rise and
climate change effects. This project?s broader significance and importance are
the development of a computational framework for the prediction of vulnerability
of bridges to extreme storm surges during future hurricanes and the development
of design guidelines for reducing these vulnerabilities. Successful application
of outcome of this project will help improve the adaptability and resilience of
bridge infrastructure with respect to extreme storm surges. Educational and
outreach impacts of the project are opportunities for underrepresented and women
students to participate in multidisciplinary research on mathematical and
computer modeling of emerging problems and knowledge for engineers on effects of
climate change on built infrastructure.

The objective of the proposed research is to investigate hydrodynamic impacts on
bridges due to extreme storm surges during future hurricanes. The scope of this
project includes computational modeling of storm surges including large-scale
estuary flows and computational fluid dynamics simulation of impact of storm
surge on bridges. Vulnerable bridges in the New York City harbor will be
selected for demonstration because of the availability of storm surge data
during Hurricane Sandy and complex coastlines and bathymetry. Reliability of the
computational framework will be demonstrated through comparison with (i) storm
surges observed during the Hurricane Sandy and (ii) storm surges simulated in
small scale experiments using tsunami generator. The proposed research involves
simulation of multi-scale and multi-physics processes related to the evolution
of storm surge in the open sea at scales of 100 km and propagation of the surge
to the coastal harbor and transfer of forces to bridge components at scales less
than 1 m.