* 1334165
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gentrification and Change in Neighborhood Crime
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2014
* Stacy De Coster, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2014
* USD 11,857.00

SES-1334165 Stacy De Coster Kristin Williams North Carolina State University

Social scientists long have recognized a relationship between community
structure and crime rates. Research on communities and crime has informed
understanding of how changes within neighborhoods affect criminal activity and
the exercise of social controls, particularly communities' transition during
times of disinvestment, deterioration, and disorganization. Little is known,
however, about what happens to local crime rates as these areas undergo the
process of gentrification or the influx of middle-class residents and marked
transformation of the neighborhood physical and social milieus. The existing
literature that does exist provides inconsistent findings. Such empirical
ambiguity is likely the result of several methodological shortcomings in the
current scholarship, including a lack of consistency in the way that
gentrification is defined and measured and the failure to consider that the
effects of the gentrification process reverberate to surrounding areas. This
doctoral research employs a definition of gentrification informed by urban
sociology to explore quantitatively how reinvestment activity shapes crime
levels within the neighborhood as well as in peripheral communities. The
attention then shifts to identifying key mechanisms that explain the crime-
related consequences of urban reinvestment. Relying on narratives offered by
residents and community leaders in a gentrifying area, this study focuses on the
interplay among community relationships, policing practices, and crime reporting
patterns to elucidate the ways in which gentrification translates into crime
fluctuations.

Broader Impacts

The paucity of research regarding the relationship between urban reinvestment
and crime renders cities and neighborhoods unable to address the effects of
gentrification within and around their boundaries. By assessing the degree to
which gentrification affects community crime, this research will highlight the
potential threat of reinvestment to communities and areas around their
peripheries. Likewise, by affording attention to the mechanisms linking
gentrification to crime outcomes, this research will underscore the reasons why
gentrification translates into crime changes and, thus, will shed light on the
neighborhood dynamics most in need of attention in transitioning communities.
This research offers insights regarding such issues in ways that can be
beneficial to local police departments, community organizations, city planners,
long-term residents, and residents who are gentrifying the neighborhoods.
Specifically, the findings of this study will allow these groups to anticipate,
prepare for, and respond to potential crime problems in neighborhoods that have
been gentrified, are currently