* 1334340
* Robust Design and Control of Multi-Axis Thin-film Piezoelectric Scanning Actuators for Deep-Tissue Endoscopic Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kenn Oldham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 249,990.00

The focus of this project is to model and control piezoelectric thin-film
actuators for miniature imaging instruments. Certain high-resolution imaging
techniques can penetrate relatively deeply into biological tissue. Use of this
ability with living organisms through small handheld and/or endoscopic tools
requires precise control of novel micro-scale actuators, such as those based on
the piezoelectric material lead-zirconate-titanate (PZT), deposited as thin-film
on silicon wafers. Compact mathematical models will be developed to describe
thin-film PZT behavior at varying operating frequencies and amplitudes. This
will be incorporated into dynamic models of actuator structural motion subject
to variation in actuator manufacturing, and techniques from the field of robust
control will be used to design actuators that are comparatively insensitive to
fabrication errors and piezoelectric material variability. Finally, feedback
controllers based on the preceding models will be designed to regulate actuator
motion using on-board sensing measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will have broad impact by supporting miniaturization of deep-tissue optical
microscopy systems to an endoscope-compatible form factor. These instruments
would enable a variety of scientific and clinical activities regarding topics
such as systems biology, cancer, and allergic disease. Better understanding of
thin-film PZT behavior could also improve a variety of micro-scale actuators
based on piezoelectric materials, such as nanopositioners, micro-robots, and
optical scanning mirrors. Design for robustness could help reduce susceptibility
of microtechnologies to poor yield or limited performance due to processing and
environmental variability. Educationally, undergraduate researchers will be
heavily involved in experimental testing of prototype devices and control system
implementation, through engineering internship programs targeting women and
underrepresented minorities. Support would also be used to develop and implement
engineering design and experimentation activities in the University of Michigan
Detroit Area Pre-College Engineering Program.