* 1334227
* Active Dynamic Continuum Tails for Maneuvering and Stabilizing Legged Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 10/31/2015
* USD 307,672.00

The research objective of this award is to study how biomimetic continuum tails
can dynamically stabilize and maneuver legged mobile robots moving at high
speeds. Field robots are limited in how they may respond to unforeseen dynamic
disturbances in unstructured hazardous environments and how they may change
their direction without modifying gait and slowing down. With a continuum tail,
the required forces and moments to stabilize and maneuver the robot can be
applied by dynamic tail motions instead of using the legs, torso or arms. This
research will study algorithms to map the required forces and moments into
continuum tail control inputs to stabilize and maneuver a legged robot, and
derive dynamic models to predict the tail's dynamic forces and moments to enable
task planning. Deliverables include dynamic modeling, task planning algorithms
and design paradigms of intelligent robotic tails, an experimental validation
with a test platform of the tail mechanism and simulations of legged locomotion,
dissemination of research results, engineering student education, engineering
research experiences for students and science teachers, and new engineering
curriculum development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research will
provide an opportunity to create robotic tails that are capable of augmenting a
legged robot's ability for agile and robust terrain traversal in unstructured
hazardous environments. The research will impact applications from search and
rescue to reconnaissance to exploring hazardous and dangerous environments, in
which robots must move effectively in unstructured terrains. Legged robots can
better traverse these unstructured environments compared to wheeled or tracked
systems due to the legs' use of discrete ground contact points. This project's
primary impact stems from the tail's improvements to a legged robot's stability
and maneuverability. This will lead to faster search and rescue or exploration
of dangerous environments, allowing these legged robots to augment and exceed
human capabilities. In terms of educational impact, this research will: (1)
provide support for engineering graduate and undergraduate students, (2) be
developed into case studies for university-level courses, and (3) be used in
demonstrations for K-12 students. Minorities and underrepresented groups will be
targeted for outreach and participation.