* 1334094
* Stochastic Diffusion, Adaptive Estimation, and Prediction Models for Wireless Networked Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Seddik Djouadi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop methods for modeling, estimation,
and prediction of wireless networks in real time. The modeling approach
generalizes to diverse propagation environments including "urban canyons", and
directly addresses issues such as the random and ever changing interference
effects and noise sources caused by the transmitter population. The research
will result in general methods that will improve communication channel
utilization and thereby performance of various wireless networked system
applications. Deliverable includes fundamental algorithms, modeling and analysis
tools, demonstration and validation via simulation and hardware implementation,
documentation of research results, and engineering student
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, particular benefits of this
research will accrue to networked control systems, such as mobile sensor
networks, unmanned vehicles, remote surgery, haptics collaboration, health
monitoring, agricultural areas/farms, home networking, and wireless networks
multimedia applications. For example, the economically efficient delivery of
highly reliable electric power is increasingly dependent on networked SCADA
(Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System) and distributed control
systems operating over commercially available, and frequently internet protocol
(IP) based communication technologies. The results will be disseminated using
different platforms to allow the creation of commercial software and hardware
(transceivers) with increased performance, reliability, and reduced wiring
costs. The educational plan places a particular emphasis upon the cultivation of
a diverse student population and inclusion of under-represented minorities, by
utilizing student and mentor teams, incorporating graduate and undergraduate
students, and focusing upon project-oriented integrated systems design. A
partnership with Oak Ridge National Laboratory will provide realistic data sets
and applications, and opportunities for direct feedback from practitioners to
the students.