* 1334402
* Prediction of Dynamics at the Micro-Tool Tip for Micromachining when using Ultra-High-Speed Spindles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Burak Ozdoganlar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2017
* USD 299,998.00

This award supports research on mechanical micromachining by providing a new
framework for accurate prediction of three-dimensional dynamic response at the
tool tip. The research objective is to gain fundamental understanding on tool-
tip dynamics by combining experimentally-determined spindle dynamics, accurate
models of rotating micro-tool dynamics, and the non-ideal motions arising from
the spindle and tool-attachment errors. The specific research approach involves
(1) the use of specialized dynamic testing methods for experimental modeling of
spindle dynamics, (2) the use of three-dimensional linear elasticity techniques
to model dynamics of rotating micro-tools, and (3) the use of laser
interferometry to measure error motions of ultra-high-speed spindles.
Subsequently, the models for spindle and tool dynamics and error motions are
integrated to obtain tool-tip dynamics. The research will also involve
experimental validation of the combined tool-tip dynamics predictions for
different micro-tools and under different operating conditions. The educational
objectives include enhancing the existing manufacturing curricula, and
attracting students to manufacturing through pre-college outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will offer a comprehensive
modeling capability for predicting dynamic behavior at the tool tip when using
ultra-high-speed spindles, and will thereby facilitate fabrication of parts with
precise micro-scale features in a predictable and efficient fashion from metals,
polymers, and composites. Such parts are in high demand from many industries,
such as medical and energy-conversion devices. Although micromachining
technology has come a long way in the last few years, a wide-range industrial
adoption has not yet been realized. One of the main reasons is the lack of
thorough understanding on process characteristics, specifically process
mechanics and dynamics. This project will provide an effective approach for
characterization and predictable utilization of micromachining processes. The
industrial relevance of the project will be ensured through our collaboration
with two leading spindle companies, which will enable rapid transfer of research
findings to industry, and thus, will positively impact advanced manufacturing
efforts in the United States.