* 1334962
* The Role of Interface Shape on Drag Reduction and Filtration using Superhydrophobic Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Jonathan Rothstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 275,000.00

1334962&lt;br/&gt;Rothstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the research outlined within
this proposal, a new superhydrophobic surface design will be developed that is
capable of actively controlling both the slip length and overall drag reduction
under environmental conditions inaccessible to current superhydrophobic
surfaces. Superhydrophobic surfaces are engineered by taking materials with
micron or nanoscale surfaces roughness and chemically treating them to make them
hydrophobic. Because of the hydrophobicity of these microscale and nanoscale
protrusions, when water is brought in contact with a superhydrophobic surface,
it does not fully wet the surface. Instead, it remains in contact with only the
peaks of the surface topology resulting in a shear-free air-water interface. In
this proposal, the focus will be on how the interface shape and deformation
affects drag reduction, slip length and the potential of these surfaces to be
used as novel filters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;One
of the challenges of implementation of superhydrophobic surfaces in real-world
applications is that the air-water interface is not robust. Under even modest
static or dynamic pressures, the air-water interface can collapse, fully wetting
the superhydrophobic surface and eliminating the desired drag reduction. In this
proposal, a new microfluidic design is presented that will allow to extend the
range and lifetime of superhydrophobic surface. This is achieved through an
active back pressurization scheme that will stabilize the air-water interface
even under large static pressures. The proposed microfluidic design will allow
the investigation of the role of interface curvature on drag reduction, slip
velocity and slip length. Access to the air trapped within the superhydrophobic
surface will allow the probing of the stability and dynamics of the air water
interface under unsteady flow conditions akin to those experienced in turbulent
flows through the imposition of a periodic pressure pulse of variable amplitude
and frequency. The design will also make it possible to replace the air with
incompressible oil that is immiscible in water. With this liquid infused
superhydrophobic surfaces the importance of the viscosity ratio between the two
liquid phases can be studied on drag reduction while simultaneously maintaining
the desired interface shape at arbitrary pressures without the need for back
pressurization. Finally, the principles and strategy of back pressurization will
be used to develop a series of low-porosity, high-permeability microfluidic
filters from a regular array of posts, where the posts are uniquely designed
such that their sides are superhydrophobic and support a shear-free air-water
interface. The effect of post design and air interface shape will be studied on
the permeability of the filter and its effectiveness at removing large and small
contaminants from the flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research program bridges fundamental experimental wetting phenomena and
fluid dynamics with commercial and industrial applications where drag reduction
could significantly reduce costs. Investigating paths towards back pressurized
superhydrophobic surfaces will allow them to be adapted for high-pressure
applications such as pumping and commercial shipping where the large static
pressures make implementation a significant challenge. Finally, the proposal
will develop a new class of high permeability, low porosity filters that can be
quickly and broadly implemented in a number of commercial, biomedical and
academic applications. The project has several educational components including
involvement of undergraduates in the research through the hiring of three REU
students who will work closely with the PI and graduate students on the grant.
Additionally, we propose the continuation and further development of an ongoing
multifaceted K-12 outreach program. This program will include the development of
instructional modules, presentations and videos on fluid dynamics, surface
tension and superhydrophobicity that will be presented and distributed to both
middle and high school teachers and students through a series of weekend and
weeklong outreach activities organized through the UMASS STEM program.