* 1334361
* Collaborative Research: TheDesignExchange, an Interactive Portal for the Design Community of Practice
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Sara Beckman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2018
* USD 487,091.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to develop and maintain
an interactive web portal, TheDesignExchange, to facilitate the capture,
analysis and widespread use of methods for conducting design research. The study
of design has been shown to have high impact on the quality and success of
engineered products. However, design research does not fall into a single
disciplinary body of knowledge, and TheDesignExchange fills a need to organize
disparate design research methods, develop a community of design educators and
practitioners to evaluate those methods, and educate the next generation of
design innovators. TheDesignExchange provides a structure to collect the many
design methods in use today, their origins, and use. It also will match design
methods to design problems and help designers make informed decisions about when
to apply these methods. The portal supports the entire design process, providing
educators and practitioners alike with a versatile library of proven tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TheDesignExchange aims to be the largest public library of
design research methods. The methods cover a wide range of communities and
applications, including, for example, methods most effective for design for
under-served communities. Faculty, undergraduates and graduate students of
diverse backgrounds and heritage participate in this research, as well as
practitioners and leaders from industry, non-profit and government design
groups. The researchers leverage knowledge gained from TheDesignExchange to
identify and teach the underlying skills associated with the various methods,
providing recent graduates a more fluid understanding of how, why, and when to
apply specific design research methods.