* 1334928
* DMREF:  Simulation-Driven Design of Highly Efficient MOF/Nanoparticle Hybrid Catalyst Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Joseph Hupp, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,200,000.00

****Technical Abstract***&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to exploit recent
advances in synthesizing nanoporous materials via a building-block approach to
conceive, synthesize, characterize, and test new heterogeneous catalysts that
exhibit enzyme-like control in demanding chemical transformations. Catalytically
active metal nanoparticles will be encapsulated within metal-organic framework
(MOF) crystals. MOFs are nanoporous materials synthesized in a building-block
approach from metal nodes and organic linkers. Enshrouding metal nanoparticles
within MOFs prevents their agglomeration and allows control over reactant access
to their surfaces. Molecular-level modeling will guide the selection and
synthesis of appropriate metal surfaces and MOF channels for an important class
of reactions. The objectives of this project are 1) to develop new ways of
synthesizing heterogeneous catalyst materials with structural control ranging
from the atomic level to the particle level and 2) to demonstrate how new levels
of synthetic control, combined with predictive molecular-level modeling, can
drastically decrease the development time of new catalytic materials. Through
this combination of modeling and experiment, the project aims to develop a
fundamental understanding of the role that the MOF layer plays in defining and
modulating the catalytic behavior of nanoparticles. The result should be a class
of catalysts that are both highly active and selective. The proposed research
will serve as an excellent training platform for undergraduates, graduate
students and a postdoctoral fellow in the critical frontier of structure-based
catalyst design. Web-based education and outreach activities will reach a wider
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Catalysis is the science and engineering of making
chemical reactions go faster and more selectively toward the desired products.
Catalysis is a fundamental technology for our country's manufacturing base, and
recent advances in nanotechnology, computational power, and our theoretical
understanding of catalytic reactions create tremendous opportunities to improve
catalysis, producing both economic and environmental benefits. This project aims
to design new catalysts for an important class of chemical reactions known as
selective oxidation. Catalytically active metal nanoparticles will be
encapsulated within metal-organic framework (MOF) crystals. Enshrouding metal
nanoparticles within MOFs prevents their agglomeration and allows control over
reactant access to their surfaces. However, there are an enormous number of
metal nanoparticle and MOF types that could be chosen. Molecular-level modeling
will, therefore, guide the selection and synthesis of appropriate metal surfaces
and MOF channels so that the resulting materials have the desired properties.
The objectives of this project are 1) to develop new ways of synthesizing
heterogeneous catalyst materials with structural control ranging from the atomic
level to the particle level and 2) to demonstrate how new levels of synthetic
control, combined with predictive molecular-level modeling, can drastically
decrease the development time of new catalytic materials.