* 1334848
* Collaborative Research: Robust optode-based eddy correlation systems for oxygen flux measurements in aquatic environments
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2014,02/28/2019
* Peter Berg, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2019
* USD 490,899.00

The PIs request funding to build and test robust eddy correlation instruments
for unidirectional and oscillating flow environments based on sturdy fiber- and
planar-optical sensors and novel signal-processing electronics. The new hardware
will be supported by software development to correct potential flux
underestimations caused by inadequate oxygen sensor response time and spatial
offsets between oxygen and flow sensors. The fragility of the thin glass
microelectrode used in aquatic eddy correlation instruments severely limits the
use of this powerful technique for flux measurements in benthic environments.
This problem represents the major bottleneck preventing the widespread use of
this approach.

Broader Impacts:

The PIs have very strong records both in spreading the use of EC technology
through the community and in graduate and undergraduate education. They outline
clearly the ways in which they will continue their ongoing endeavors in both
areas. In addition, the application of this technology to the geochemistry and
ecology of shallow-water regions has broad implications for carbon cycling and
ocean acidification studies, both of which have important societal
ramifications. Better quantify oxygen fluxes in the aquatic environment is
important for society. It can e.g. help predict when and if the health of an
aquatic system is being weakened, and when e.g. hypoxia or anoxia is
approaching. Anoxia leads to death of all higher life