* 1334067
* Tuning Ion Conducting Pathways Using Holographic Polymerization
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 375,184.00

Lithium-ion batteries are the systems of choice for portable electronic devices
because they offer high-energy density, flexible and lightweight design and long
lifespan. If lithium metal is used to form lithium-metal battery, even higher
power densities can be achieved. However, the system proved to be not viable,
because the liquid electrolytes currently used can lead to explosion hazards. In
order to achieve safe operation for lithium-metal battery, mechanically strong
polymer electrolyte membranes or PEMs with good room temperature ionic
conductivity are needed. This grant provides funding for development of a novel
nanomanufacturing process, i.e. holographic polymerization, to fabricate such
membranes. Holographic polymerization employs multiple light beams and
photosensitive material mixtures to create functional nanostructures. Under this
grant, a series of polymer electrolyte membranes with precise structural control
will be fabricated using this technique. Specifically, electrolytes will form
tiny channels with the size of approximately a millionth of the diameter of a
human hair. Such channels will significantly improve the efficiency of ion
conduction in these membranes, while they retain their strength.

The project will lead to a library of unprecedented polymer electrolyte
membranes that enable safe operation of lithium-metal batteries. The proposed
system is advantageous because extremely regular, tiny ion conducting channels
can be formed in a controllable fashion in these membranes. Therefore, the
proposed approach provides a promising solution to achieving both enhanced
mechanical and ionic conducting properties of PEMs, a major challenge for using
such materials in lithium batteries. There are also numerous material choices in
the proposed system to meet different battery needs. Furthermore, the
fabrication process takes approximately 30 seconds, and it can potentially be
combined with continuous, roll-to-roll nanomanufacturing for scale-up purposes.