* 1334630
* Achieving Theoretical Property Limits in Polymer Nanofibers: Stiffness, Strength and Thermal Conductivity
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Sheng Shen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 05/31/2017
* USD 410,527.00

The objective of this award is to determine the degree to which the thermal and
mechanical properties of nanoscale polymer fiber specimens can attain
theoretical limits. Polymer materials are used in millions of consumer products
even though their mechanical properties are relatively poor and their thermal
conductivity is low. This is because long molecular chains tend to be
disordered. However, the intrinsic stiffness, strength and thermal conductivity
of polymers are high due to their carbon-carbon backbone. Using an ultra-high
draw ratio technique, it now is possible to fabricate polyethylene nanofibers
with a high degree of order. The approach in this work will be to employ a
micromachined stepper motor to test ultra-drawn polymer mechanical properties.
For the thermal conductivity measurements, a recently-developed six wire
platform will be used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefit of this work is that it
will enable assessment of polymer nanofiber for many applications. It is
possible that properties near theoretical limits will be attained because the
ultra-drawn fibers are highly ordered. Simultaneous high stiffness, strength and
thermal conductivity values will in turn stimulate broad research. This will be
in manufacturing techniques such as large scale nanofiber production, and in
applications such as heat sinks, heat exchangers, body armor and composites.
With regard to education, the investigators will expand two courses at Carnegie
Mellon University. One will focus on mechanics and test methods of nanoscale
specimens. The second will focus on thermal properties and develop metamaterial
approaches to control them. Students in the investigators undergraduate course
will be introduced to micromachined devices through a lecture and a portable
"Class on a Chip" system. Grade 6-9 students will learn to program a
micromachined device through an icon-driven interface. A Ph.D. student and two
Master's Thesis students will gain expertise in both mechanical and thermal
measurement techniques.