* 1334048
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Sensitivity X-Detect NMR Instrument
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Gregory Tochtrop, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2016
* USD 464,341.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program that is co-
funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor Gregory Tochtrop from Case Western Reserve and colleague Blanton
Tolbert will acquire a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a liquid-nitrogen
cooled broadband X-detect probe and an automated sampling system. The proposal
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas
such as (a) studies of the catabolic fate of lipid peroxidation products; (b)
NMR detection of RNA structures and protein-RNA contacts involved in viral
replication; (c) studies of mechanically enhanced polymers; (d) advanced
functional materials based upon organic conjugated polymers and molecules; (d)
protein stability, structure, and dynamics; (e) interlocked polymeric
architectures; (f) mechanisms by which enzymes are activated during signal
transduction pathways; (g) characterization of conjugated molecules and
polymers; and (h) design and characterization of fluoro-aromatic analogues of
human insulin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument will be an integral part of teaching as well as research of
students in the departments of Chemistry, Biology, Polymer Science &amp;
Engineering, Chemical Engineering and Biomedical Engineering. The instrument
will enhance the research and teaching capabilities of the greater Cleveland
scientific community with web-based scheduling and cyber-enabled data
delivery/processing for off-site users.