* 1334122
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Enabling Advanced Wind Turbine Tower Manufacturing with Reliability-Based Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Andrew Myers, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,880.00

Renewable energy is important to the long-term sustainability of the nation. In
particular, wind energy, a vast domestic resource, has the potential to
transform the energy economy of the U.S. The U.S. Department of Energy lists the
development of renewable energy sources as an immediate national need, and has
set a target for the U.S. to generate 20% of its electricity from renewable
energy by 2030. To obtain this goal, it is clear that transformative advances in
wind generated energy technology are crucial. Specifically, wind turbine towers
must be manufactured taller and cheaper. A start-up company in Boston has
developed an innovative manufacturing technology, based on automated spiral
welding that enables conical, slender towers to be produced on-site in an
efficient process. The benefits to this are two-fold: first, the automation
reduces production costs dramatically compared to traditional practices and,
second, the on-site fabrication precludes transport limits that currently
inhibit tower height. A critical barrier to the deployment of this technology is
a lack of fundamental understanding of the buckling failure for this particular
structure and, generally, for slender shells.&lt;br/&gt;Existing methods to
predict capacity of slender tower shells are unsatisfactory, relying on overly
conservative, empirically derived factors, not having a firm probabilistic
basis, and never having been applied to spiral welded pipe loaded in flexure.
New reliability-based analysis approaches are needed to take full advantage of
innovative technology of welding and manufacturing. This project aims to
probabilistically characterize the controlling limit states of slender tubes
and, based on this characterization, develop a rigorous reliability-based
analysis and design approach. The project assesses the strength, imperfection
sensitivity, and variability of slender shell structures and includes both
analytical and experimental investigations of poorly understood phenomena of (1)
the probabilistic nature of local buckling and its dependence on random
imperfections and (2) the variability in fracture/fatigue performance of welded
connections and its dependence on plate misalignment, weld microstructure and
spatial correlation of toughness. The developed analysis and design method will
be coupled with manufacturing tolerances, thus allowing manufacturers to
explicitly explore the cost-benefit tradeoff between manufacturing methods and
tolerances and the final capacities utilized in practice.