* 1334694
* Collaborative Research: Optimizing Direct-Marketing Strategies in Non-Profit Fundraising: An Integrated Framework for Segmentation, Estimation and Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Elizabeth Durango-Cohen, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2016
* USD 154,999.00

The objective of this collaborative award is to provide insights into links
between direct-marketing strategies and their impact on the performance (revenue
generation, member retention) of nonprofit organizations, through the linkage of
a general class of sophisticated optimization tools (stochastic optimal control)
with state-of-the-art estimation methods (finite mixture models). This
integration allows the proposed framework to serve as a practical tool to
segment alumni/donor populations into homogeneous groups, based on their
contribution sequences, which can be targeted with specific marketing actions.
The framework's capability to process contribution sequences, i.e., longitudinal
data, provides fundamental new insights into how direct-marketing strategies
affect donor contribution behavior, and informs data acquisition strategies (via
surveys and field experiments) aimed at model calibration and validation.

If successful, the results of this research will provide a rigorous mechanism to
infer and segment the population based on unobserved heterogeneities, e.g.,
personality traits that influence the propensity of an individual to donate in
response to solicitations. While there is ample empirical evidence that such
differences can be statistically significant, existing models to support direct
marketing activities are only capable of explaining these differences as random
variations within the population. In contrast, the methodology provides a basis
to tailor direct-marketing policies to optimize specific performance criteria.
Moreover, the research will develop methodological tools that can guide
decision-making for a broad set of segmentation, estimation and control problems
in other areas. For example, in the management of transportation systems, the
problem is to segment facilities that share similar characteristics, and to find
optimal resource allocation policies for each of the groups.