* 1334691
* Deep Ocean Sensitivity to, and Role in the Transition from mid-Pliocene Warmth to Northern Hemisphere Glaciation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Yair Rosenthal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2016
* USD 356,151.00

The warm mid-Pliocene, when on average global temperature was 2-3 degrees C
warmer than at present, is within the range of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) projections of global warming for the 21st century, and
hence offers a good analog for future climate change. This work, conducted by a
team of scientists from Rutgers University, will generate new geochemical proxy
records (Mg/Ca, B/Ca, and Neodymium isotope composition) from deep sea sediment
cores that will provide key constraints on spatial and temporal variations in
the deep ocean hydrography in the Atlantic, Pacific, and Southern Oceans during
the transition from the mid-Pliocene warm period to the onset of Northern
Hemisphere glaciation (~2.5 to 3.5 million years before present). The new
records will improve our understanding of the response of the deep ocean to the
mid-Pliocene warmth and provide valuable insights into the ocean sensitivity to
warmer/higher pCO2 conditions and during the subsequent transition to overall
cooler climates in the Northern Hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
better understanding links between the oceans and climate in a past analog to
modern conditions, broader impacts include education and training of a female
post-doctoral fellow and research opportunities for undergraduate students. The
results will be presented in seminars, at national professional meetings, and
incorporated into teaching curricula at undergraduate and graduate levels. The
datasets generated in this research will be made available through the NOAA-NCDC
web site.