* 1334703
* DMREF: Analysis and Optimization of Polymer Networks for Emerging Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Jeremiah Johnson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2016
* USD 776,696.00

In this project funded by the Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer
our Future program of the Chemistry Division, Jeremiah Johnson and Bradley Olsen
from Massachusetts Institute of Technology will develop methods for the
synthesis and characterization of dynamic polymer networks. The research project
involves a closely integrated collaboration between experimental work and
computational studies to develop a technique for the quantitative analysis of
defects in polymer networks. Novel polymer network materials with dynamic
crosslinks and isotopic labeling will be synthesized and their defect contents
will be characterized as a function of the synthetic conditions. New theoretical
and computational methods will be developed for the analysis of network
structure and correlated with the experimental results. The broader impacts of
the project involve the potential technological benefits of better understanding
the structure of polymer network materials, training graduate and undergraduate
students in interdisciplinary science, enhancing research infrastructure through
the establishment of strong collaborations between experiment and theory groups,
and developing hands-on teaching modules on polymer gels aimed at middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogels are networks of long chain molecules
that can absorb up to 99% of their weight in water, and they are important
materials for a number of consumer products and biomedical technologies.
Structural defects in the network are key contributors to limitations on the
performance of hydrogel materials. This research project seeks to develop
experimental and theoretical strategies for identifying and counting the number
of defects in the networks. Such information will permit the preparation of
hydrogels with fewer defects and superior properties and could lead to novel
materials for biomedical technologies and water purification membranes, amongst
many applications.