* 1334987
* Mean-field Oscillator Games with Application to Thalamocortical Network Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Prashant Mehta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2017
* USD 340,000.00

The research objective of this award is to explore phase transition and self-
organization in large population dynamic systems. The thrust of the
methodological work is at the intersection of the dynamical systems theory and
game theory. The application focus is on investigating plasticity in the
thalamocortical neuronal network in brain. The research will develop methods
that are general enough to apply for mean-field games and that can be exploited
in diverse applications. The research approach progresses from development of
theoretical tools to their specialized application to thalamocortical network
modeling. Deliverables include methods and computational tools to investigate
phase transitions and stability in coupled oscillator models; algorithms for
adaptation in such models; and applications of these tools to reduced order
modeling of thalamocortical networks; and to development of specialized network
adaptation schemes for plasticity therein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results of this research can lead to fundamental advances in our
understanding of the emergence of complex behavior in a large population of
dynamically interacting agents. For biological systems, this methodology offers
new organizing principles to address longstanding questions concerning
collective emergent behavior in terms of generalizations of game theoretic
concepts. A specific research outcome concerns mechanisms for plasticity
(learning) in neuronal networks. This project has put together several
educational initiatives to help disseminate the methods, outcomes, and the
interdisciplinary synergies. This project seeks to develop and maintain strong
undergraduate involvement in research, interdisciplinary outreach activities,
exposure of the engineering undergraduates to the central role of dynamics and
control in applications, and foster symbiotic relationship between neuroscience
and engineering.