* 1334426
* Granular Materials Design and Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

1334426&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jaeger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The handling and processing of
particulate matter is important to the economy and technology base of the
nation. For applications where either the performance of the granular material
is critical or the fabrication cost is substantial, optimization of the
constituent particles becomes a key task. Yet the understanding and control of
the complex behavior exhibited by granular material poses formidable challenges,
in particular for non-spherical shapes. The state-of-the-art approach is to
predict the aggregate properties for given particle type or shape. What is
needed for proper design, but so far has been lacking, is a general approach to
the inverse problem: a methodology that identifies those particle attributes
that will optimize given aggregate properties. The objective of the project is
to develop and implement such methodology. The project integrates evolutionary
optimization strategies, numerical simulations, three-dimensional (3d) rapid
prototyping, experiments testing the mechanical load response, and non-invasive
x-ray imaging into a comprehensive, tightly coupled approach capable of
providing solutions to this inverse problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
directly addresses questions that so far have been difficult to answer,
including how to optimize particle shape for given performance goals or design
granular materials with unique aggregate characteristics that fall outside the
typical performance regions. A focus of the project will be on designing the
mechanical load response of random granular aggregate systems, an aspect much
less studied than the static packing properties. Going beyond simple convex
particles, the project will explore a wide class of compound particles composed
from smaller building blocks. Arbitrary particle shapes will be represented by
granular molecules, whose configuration can be mutated and evolved to optimize
performance. This evolution is performed by an optimization algorithm that calls
up DEM simulations. The project will explore a range of different particle-level
variables besides shape, such as size, bulk modulus, and bending rigidity (for
more complex, granular-polymer-type particles). Among the specific goals will be
to design granular materials not only with respect to characteristics like the
effective modulus or the yield stress of the aggregate, but to design the whole
stress strain curve. 3d-printing will make it possible to fabricate large
numbers of optimized particles for direct experimental validation. X-rays will
provide microstructural information in cases where particles cannot be simulated
and to check whether design rules obtained from model particles, such as
3d-printed ones, remain valid when the particle material is
changed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of optimized designed particles
would make it possible to overcome a number of bottlenecks currently limiting
the use of granular materials and open up a wide range of new uses. This might
include lightweight jammable and shape-conforming materials for soft robotics;
high-toughness high-porosity materials for medical implants; or shock absorbing
materials that have designed stress-strain characteristics and can be poured
around sensitive equipment. The project will train graduate and undergraduate
students in forefront research at the interface of science and engineering. The
research will be integrated with a multi-faceted set of education and outreach
activities, including activities with the nearby Chicago Museum of Science and
Industry.