* 1334012
* Understanding and Monitoring Nanoparticle Self-Assembly Processes with Online Transmission Electron Microscopic Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Chiwoo Park, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2017
* USD 284,993.00

The objective of this award is to develop a statistical methodology for
understanding the dynamic aspects of nanoparticle production processes by using
online measurements of the processes, and to study quality technology for
achieving high-quality production of nanoparticles based on understanding the
processes. Due to its potential for large-scale production, the main interest is
in nanoparticle self-assembly, which assembles nanoparticles via their dynamic
interactions. The developed methodology characterizes and uses the dynamic
interactions for quality monitoring of the self-assembly. An optimization
problem is formulated for automatically tracking individual nanoparticles and
their interactions from the noisy online measurements of their self-assembly
processes, and a computationally efficient sub-optimal algorithm is developed to
solve the problem. The tracked particle interactions are fit to the proposed
statistical-physical model for estimating unknown process parameters in an
underlying physics-based model. Several empirical models are also developed for
filling the void in the physics-based model. The PI will develop a new process
monitoring method, which uses the values of the estimated process parameters, to
test whether a nanoparticle self-assembly process is in normal condition and to
locate special causes of process anomalies if available. A silver nanoparticle
self-assembly is used as a prototypical process to validate the developed
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this work will advance online
process characterization and monitoring for nanoparticle production processes,
thereby leading to high quality production of nanoparticles. In addition, the
developed statistical-physical model will lead to a fundamental understanding of
dynamic nanoscale phenomena in nanoparticles, which will help to expand the
current research into nanoparticle physics and chemistry. The results of this
work will be disseminated via publications and presentations, and will be used
to provide education opportunities for closing the workforce deficit with
skilled nano-process engineers through new courses, student mentoring, and
workshop programs for K-12 students.