* 1334758
* Organic Carbon in Altered Submarine Basalts:  Tracing the Subsurface Biosphere and Role in the Global Carbon Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Jeffrey Alt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 118,087.00

Recent analyses show that submarine basalts contain organic carbon at the level
of a few hundred parts per million. The distribution and extent of this carbon
in the subsurface, however, is presently not known. Because seafloor basalts
cover two-thirds of Earth's surface, the carbon that is held within them may be
important for the global carbon cycle; and it is possible that this carbon and
its characteristics can be utilized as a tracer of the subsurface biosphere.
Preliminary work shows that elevated sulfur and organic carbon contents and
isotopic signatures in seafloor basalts are consistent with functional genes
that indicate the presence of sulfate reducing microbes and methanogens in these
rocks, as well as changes in the organic carbon in basement fluids. Although,
sulfur isotopes have been measured in many different subsurface environments,
the microbial impacts on carbon in these different settings is not known. This
research will measure carbon contents and the isotopic signature of carbon in
seafloor basalts to trace the distribution and extent of microbial effects in
the subsurface. Work will include analyzing total carbon contents and the
organic carbon content of bulk rocks and the 13C/12C isotopic ratios of both the
total carbon and the organic carbon. These data will be combined with sulfur
isotope and microbiological data from related studies by the investigator and
his collaborators, with the the new carbon data providing a better understanding
of the subsurface biosphere in oceanic basement. Samples will be analyzed from
three deep basement sites that represent different thermal and fluid flow
regimes: (1) the North Atlantic, (2) the southwest Pacific Ocean, and (3) the
northeast Pacific Ocean. The distribution of carbon and biological effects in
the samples will be examined from the mineral (centimeter scale) to the rock
(tens to hundreds of meters) scale. Goals are to understand how these element
and isotopic indicators are related to ocean crust fluid flow pathways
(alteration halos, breccias), lithology (massive vs pillow basalt), and
inorganic alteration effects. This will enable a better understanding of the
controls on microbial activity in ocean basement. The data for carbon contents
of different rock types and flow regimes will be used to calculate local and
global mass balances, targeting the role and quantification of organic carbon in
submarine basalts. Broader impacts of the work inclde undergraduate student
support and incorportating them into the full scientific process. Additional
impacts include support of an NSF-funded stable isotope facility, incorporation
of reserch results into university level course work, and outreach and
interactions with middle school teachers and students in Ann Arbor, Michigan.