* 1334896
* RUI-The solar thermal decoupled electrolysis process for H2 Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Shahin Nudehi, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,962.00

PI: Palumbo, Robert&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1334896&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Valparaiso University&lt;br/&gt;Title: RUI-The solar thermal decoupled
electrolysis process for H2 Production&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate a process for producing H2 from water for the purpose of storing
solar energy as chemical energy. In the process, concentrated solar-thermal
energy reduces Fe2O3 or CoO2 or Mn2O3 to a metal oxide with a lower oxidation
state, which, in turn acts as a solute or anode in an electrolysis cell,
enabling the production of H2 from water at ideal voltages as low as 0.21V. The
low voltage is due to the anodic re-oxidation of the metal oxide. This produced
oxide is then recycled in the solar step. The work required for the electrolysis
is a fraction of the work that is available in a H2-air fuel cell. Thus the only
energy entering the cycle is sunlight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Valparaiso
University?s partners in the project are Sandia National Laboratories, Diver
Solar LLC, an industrial partner, and Professor Peter Kissinger, an
electrochemist from Purdue University?s Chemistry Department. With support from
the partners, undergraduate engineering and natural science students guided by
faculty will conduct fundamental studies involving thermodynamics and
electrochemistry. The project?s scientific objective is to obtain the requisite
knowledge to assess the industrial viability of the process based on realistic
estimates of the sunlight to H2 efficiency and how they compare to those from
other processes reported in the solar chemistry literature. Achieving this goal
requires a quantitative mechanistic understanding of the electrochemical
reactions from voltammetry studies and a quantitative kinetic understanding of
the solar decomposition and re-oxidation reactions from thermogravimetric
analysis studies. The PIs will use our new 10kW solar furnace to conduct
experiments that lead to the development of a solar thermal reactor that
minimizes the irreversibilities associated with matching the incoming
concentrated solar radiation to the kinetics of the decomposition reaction and
the kinetics of re-oxidation to the product cool-down
step.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process resolves four major problems that have
kept solar thermal chemistry from being industrially viable. (1) The process
allows for the production of a solar fuel with a windowless reactor. Thus, it
addresses the problem that windows must remain clean of reaction products or
side products, a goal the solar chemistry research community has not yet reached
with at least some of the reactions being investigated, and it improves process
economics by avoiding the need to separate solar gaseous products from inert or
unreacted gas. (2) It allows for a quasi-continuous process, addressing the
industrial culture?s desire for nearly continuous operation. (3) The process
operates at a temperature similar to those in industry. Many solar chemistry
processes under investigation operate at temperatures approaching 2000 K, making
the design for reliability challenging due to materials degradation,
volatilization, and thermal energy management at extreme temperatures. (4)
Although industry would do the solar step in the desert, the electrolysis
involving water can be done wherever water is available, avoiding the need to
bring water to the desert. The research will lead to a quantitative
understanding of reaction kinetics for high temperature reduction and oxidation
reactions of select metal oxides. The research will lead to a quantitative
understanding of electrochemical reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of the research program advances goal to have
undergraduates aspire to be scientific leaders. The students will have the
opportunity to experience the pleasure of discovery. They will synthesize
concepts learned in thermal science and measurement courses in order to build up
experiments and to analyze data. They will experience the process of teasing out
of data new knowledge that allows us to see better the industrial potential of
solar thermal electrochemistry. The students will learn rhetorical skills for
communicating complex scientific ideas to the general public without
compromising the science. Through the project?s outreach program, we will
inspire young people in Northwest Indiana coming from underrepresented groups to
consider a life in science.