* 1334935
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating the Ecological Importance of Iron Storage in Diatoms
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Adrian Marchetti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2017
* USD 434,625.00

Diatoms are responsible for a significant fraction of primary production in the
ocean. They are associated with enhanced carbon export and usually dominate the
response of phytoplankton to additions of the micronutrient iron in high-
nutrient, low-chlorophyll (HNLC) regions. Diatoms, particularly those isolated
from the open ocean, appear to have a significant capacity to store iron for
later use, and in some groups of diatoms this ability is enabled by the iron
storage protein ferritin. Such luxury uptake of iron has long been observed in
laboratory cultures and hypothesized to provide diatoms with an ecological
benefit in the low-iron waters that cover 40% of the global ocean. However iron
storage has been difficult to observe in natural systems due to the
methodological challenges of working with mixed plankton assemblages, and a
physiological understanding of the impacts of iron on ocean diatoms is lacking.
This project combines state-of-the-art high-throughput transcriptomic sequencing
and single-cell element analysis with novel laboratory and field incubation
experiments to quantify iron storage abilities of cultured and natural diatoms
that either contain or lack ferritin and determine the ecological impacts of
this process. The overall objective of this project is to examine the ecological
importance of iron storage as a selective mechanism controlling the
distributions of diatoms along iron gradients in marine ecosystems. The proposed
research includes three specific objectives:&lt;br/&gt;A. Determine if there is
a consistent physiological difference in the ability of pennate versus centric
diatoms to store iron.&lt;br/&gt;B. Examine whether iron storage capacities
across diverse diatom taxa consistently provide a mechanistic explanation for
continued growth in the absence of iron.&lt;br/&gt;C. Determine whether enhanced
iron storage provides diatoms with a competitive within natural phytoplankton
assemblages in both coastal and oceanic regions.&lt;br/&gt;Transcriptomic
sequencing on a variety of ecologically important pennate and centric diatoms
will be used to survey for the presence of ferritin-like genes in order to
establish biogeographical and/or phylogenetic patterns of occurrence of diatom
ferritin. Laboratory culture experiments will be used to quantify the iron
storage abilities of these diatoms, as well as the number of cell divisions that
can be supported by the stored iron, providing valuable physiological data to
inform the understanding of plankton ecology in iron-limited coastal and HNLC
systems. The laboratory experiments will be complemented by measurements of
ferritin expression and iron storage in coastal and ocean diatoms sampled across
gradients of iron availability on two cruises-of-opportunity to the northeast
Pacific Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: By characterizing the
diversity in potential iron storage capacities of diatoms and elucidating the
role ferritins play in enhancing iron storage and the iron-limitation response,
this project will provide new insights into how this important group of primary
producers has adapted to their environment, thus contributing to our knowledge
of what factors influence their abundance and distributions. This knowledge is
especially important in relation to predicting the future effects of climate
change on these organisms that are responsible for significant primary
production in marine ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project incorporates several activities that will directly contribute to
education and training. The training of a graduate student, post-doctoral
researcher and multiple undergraduates will be directly supported. Additionally,
a broader impact goal of this project is to facilitate teaching and learning on
marine science-related topics through translating our research objectives into
widely distributed educational materials that can be used in the classroom. To
accomplish this, a high-school teacher will participate in one of the cruises
and convey her experiences at sea to her students as well as develop curricular
materials for her class. These will be used for high-school earth and
environmental science courses and also distributed to teachers in Maine as part
of Bigelow Laboratories teacher training program, thus broadening the scope of
the outreach activities.