* 1334615
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Establishing contexts of encounters: Radiocarbon dating of archaeological assemblages with implications for Neanderthal-modern human interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Bridget Alex, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 25,200.00

Supervised by Dr. David Pilbeam, doctoral candidate Bridget Alex will produce
improved radiocarbon-based chronologies of modern human and Neanderthal
distributions in three regions of potential contact between the populations. The
revised chronologies will help to constrain where and when they overlapped. In
such a context the archaeological records of both groups can be compared in
order to identify meaningful differences and possibly, adaptations unique to
modern humans. This comparison is one approach to a fundamental question of
anthropology: what is unique about modern humans and why did other human
populations go extinct?

Mapping the distribution of Neanderthals and modern humans in time and space is
problematic. The underlying issue is how to demonstrate that dateable material
(mainly organic carbon) relates to the presence of a particular human
population. A number of theoretical and methodological innovations have been
developed to support the links between radiocarbon dates and population
occurrences. First, due to the paucity of taxonomically unambiguous, directly
dated human fossils, most population occurrences are inferred from
archaeological proxies. To classify archaeological populations, scholars have
shifted from artifact-based typologies to broad behavioral packages, or
culturally specific suites of idiosyncratic choices in the production of
material culture. Next, the production of reliable radiocarbon dates requires
rigorous evaluation of the context, taphonomic history, and preservation of
potential samples. Essential to this process is an integration of fieldwork and
laboratory analyses, so that the same investigator can document the full post-
excavation history of samples, and better explain anomalies. Lastly, radiocarbon
samples should be prepared by state of the art pretreatment procedures designed
to remove contaminants.

Alex will synthesize these innovations to produce reliable radiocarbon dates for
active excavations in three regions of potential overlap: Manot Cave in the
Levant, Pe'turina Cave in the Balkans, and Ciemna Cave in Northeast Europe. The
new dates will be combined with critically reviewed published dates to produce
secure regional chronologies, which can be used to evaluate the likelihood of
Neanderthal-modern human interactions in each region. The project will provide a
research framework and critical data pertinent to one of the most debated topics
in anthropology: the relations between modern human dispersals, Neanderthal
extinctions, and cultural changes between 50-30 ka.

The project aims to impart broad, desired societal impacts. It requires and will
facilitate international collaboration between scholars in different fields,
including archaeology, biological anthropology, earth sciences, and chemistry.
Alex will be mentored by scientists from diverse perspectives, and will
disseminate this training to students at home and abroad. The methods and
results will be shared with the public through a variety of outreach
organizations, with which Alex is actively involved. The organizations include
the Harvard Museum of Natural History and Peabody Museum, as well as Science
Club for Girls, a program that provides science experiences to girls and
minorities. Lastly, the topic of Neanderthal-modern human interactions enjoys
widespread public interest. Alex regularly offers public lectures on the topic,
which are excellent opportunities to educate the public on the scientific
method, evolution, and climate change.