* 1334870
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Emergence of Local Environmental Governance
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2014
* Yifei Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2014
* USD 11,768.00

SES-1334870) Gary Paul Green Yifei Li University of Wisconsin-Madison

Environmental protection has become a core area of policy intervention for
governments across the world. Sociological research in the past few decades
articulated the process by which increasing public awareness of environmental
issues led to environmental policy-making. The rise of environmental movements,
as well as many other forms of democratic expression of environmental attitudes,
shaped the extent to which governments commit resources to protect the natural
environment. Existing research emphasizes the relationship between the power of
popular environmentalism and the capacity of state agencies to protect the
environment. These existing theories presume the existence of democratic
institutional arrangements. In the absence of democracy, how is the emergence of
environmental governance explained? What motivation does an authoritarian
governmental structure offer for the local state to engage in environmental
protection? Sociological theories provide two hypotheses. First, past research
found that in the authoritarian context, the local state tends to be highly
responsive to mandates from the central regime. It seems likely that some cities
have strong environmental protection programs because of tighter bureaucratic
connection to the central state. Second, scholars have noted the unique
mechanism of government accountability in the absence of voting power. They
point to informal channels of public expression as a bridge between the public
and the state. It therefore also seems plausible that cities commit to
environmental protection because of strong local expression of environmentalism
through informal means. To answer these questions, this dissertation research
will collect archival data from four Chinese cities. Structured comparisons
between the historical evolutions of local state intervention in environmental
protection in these cities to identify the political mechanisms that gave rise
to local environmental governance. Research findings will contribute to an
explanatory theory of the local environmental state that is sensitive to
political structuring from above, as well as public sentiments from below.

Broader Impacts

Environmental protection is a central problem in international development.
Global efforts to combat climate change will not succeed without effectively
engaging the most populated country in the world. The hundreds of international
environmental organizations currently operating in the country testify to the
importance of China in the global enterprise of sustainability. This
dissertation will supply important knowledge about the working of the Chinese
state and its propensity to commit to, and act in accordance with, environmental
protection goals. The co-PI will provide summaries of best practices of
environmental protection policies for educators, environmental advocacy groups,
and policy-makers. Public data obtained during fieldwork will also be shared
with interested parties to contribute to future studies into environmental
protection in China and elsewhere.