* 1334553
* Collaborative Research:   Field test of larval behavior on transport and connectivity in an upwelling regime
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Donna Wolcott, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2017
* USD 224,657.00

Background: The majority of larvae of coastal marine species are planktonic and
generally weak swimmers. Thus, they are thought to be dispersed widely by
coastal currents. However, there is accumulating evidence that their behavior
can strongly influence their transport: some remain within estuaries, while
others make true migrations between adult and larval habitats, even out to the
edge of the continental shelf and back. Rates and directions of larval transport
are thought to be determined largely by the timing, duration, and amplitude of
vertical migrations and the mean depth that larvae occupy in stratified flows.
The PIs propose to provide one of the first direct tests of how behavior affects
across-shelf and alongshore transport using biomimetic drifters. The study will
be conducted in a region of persistent upwelling, where strong currents are
widely believed to overwhelm larval swimming and limit recruitment to adult
populations.

Intellectual merit: Knowledge of underlying mechanisms regulating larval
transport is central to understanding ecology and evolution in the sea and
anticipating the impacts of climate change on marine populations and
communities. The project will provide the first experimental field-test of how
larval behavior affects the rates, directions and distances of transport and
population connectivity in an upwelling regime. The PIs will test three
hypotheses:

1. Residence below the wind-driven surface layer and vertical migrations below
that layer keep larvae closer to shore compared to residence in the surface
layer or larvae without depth preferences and vertical migration.

2. Residence at depth enhances northward transport near shore, and vertical
migration leads to decreased alongshore mean displacement but increased variance
for a group.

3. Depth preferences and vertical migrations have pronounced effects on
retention and transport of plankton in upwelling regions.

The study will compare direct measurements from mimetic drifters with observed
and modeled cross-shelf larval distributions, and with modeled alongshore
transport. Results will be broadly applicable to upwelling regimes along the
western margins of continents, and the approach can be applied to non-upwelling
systems throughout the world.

Broader impacts: The proposed research will support a graduate student and six
undergraduates at two institutions. It will also provide volunteer research
opportunities for college and high school students with diverse backgrounds and
for members of the public. The research will be included in college courses
taught by the PIs, and will be added to websites and visitor displays at the
PIs' two institutions. Results will be disseminated to science teams managing
and designing Marine Protected Area networks through the PIs' advisory
associations.