* 1334170
* DMREF: Theory-Guided Experimental Search of Designed Topological Insulators and Band-Inverted Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Daniel Dessau, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,200,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** "Topological Insulation" represents a new
functionality whereby a specific inversion in the order of the energy bands in a
3D bulk insulator necessitates that the corresponding 2D surface would be
metallic, with linearly dispersed crossing surface bands. Most remarkably, the
ensuing surface states are spin-polarized and resilient to any passivation that
respects the underlying symmetry. Unfortunately, in the absence of predictive
"design principles", it has proven difficult to guide synthesis towards those
materials in which this remarkable functionality would live. Indeed, the handful
of known TI materials tend to be high-atomic number materials, thus not only
being narrow-gap semiconductors, but also prone to structural defects that
produce free carriers which obscure the TI-ness. We find that in addition to the
band inversion necessitated for these, "Type1 TI's", there are other patterns of
band inversion leading to different degrees of resilience to surface
passivation. Such yet undiscovered cases, called here TI-2, as well as Band-
Inversion (BI) of types 1 and 2 (BI-1, BI-2) could exist in a far wider range of
materials, including wide gap insulators and semiconductors. We have developed
theoretically calculable "Design Principles" (metrics of TI-ness) which we will
apply, via first-principles electronic structure theory, to a wide range of both
existing, and "designed" materials, screening for the specific patterns that
would lead to TI-1, TI-2, BI-1 and BI-2 behaviors. Close integration with
synthesis and ARPES experiments would lead to next-generation wide gap, light
element TI's and BI's that would dramatically broaden the scope and
understanding of surface electronic structure of new types of topological and
band-inverted materials, providing a new paradigm for the design of conductive
surfaces controlled by bulk properties.

***Non-Technical Abstract**** Most high technologies are based on unique
functionalities (conductivity, magnetism) that "live" in certain, specific
materials and no others. Identifying, (out of an astronomic number of
possibilities) those materials likely to have a specific functionality is a
generally unsolved problem in material research. This work offers a general
strategy around this problem. It focuses on a newly discovered functionality- a
single material having a conducting surface but an insulating interior, a
property called "Topological Insulation" (TI). By combining a calculable
"metric" (based on quantum theory of matter) that guesses if a material is
likely to be a TI or not, with laboratory synthesis and synchrotron measurement,
we offer to identify hitherto unknown new materials that have such prescribed
properties. Graduate students and post-doctoral researchers will be supported
under this grant, and will receive training in broad aspects of materials
theory, synthesis, and characterization, as well as communication and leadership
skills.

This award is funded by the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).