* 1334394
* Collaborative Research: Control of Reconfigurable Microgrids with Significant Renewable Power Sources
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Huei Peng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,968.00

The objective of this research project is to develop a modeling and control
framework to support a reconfigurable topology for electrical power microgrids
that includes distributed sources or loads such as wind turbines, micro
generators, and plug-in electric vehicles. The system ensures stable and
efficient operation. The topology uses a decentralized optimal control framework
to maximize efficiency with minimal communication among the microgrid
components; a a way to assess stability of the microgrid as components such as
wind turbines switch on and off; and a scalable, low-order modeling approach for
the model-based control framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will support the adoption of reconfigurable microgrids
as one way to increase plug-in vehicles and renewable resources in the energy
portfolio of the future. Also, this research is developing fundamental knowledge
on decentralized optimal control, stability in mode-switching systems, and
modeling and identification have wide application beyond electrical grids, such
as autonomous robotic swarms and large scale computer networks. The research
results will be disseminated widely to the scientific community through
publications; to graduate and undergraduate students through new courses and
course modules; to over 40 industry partners through workshops, seminars, and
short courses; to high school students and teachers through summer camps; and to
K-12 students through two museum exhibits. The activities of this award will
also provide underrepresented minorities with opportunities to participate in
engineering research in both graduate and undergraduate level.