* 1334083
* Seeking Synergy Between Technological and Ecological Systems for Sustainable Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Michael Lepech, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 66,769.00

1336872 (Bakshi) and 1334083 (Daily). Even though all human activities depend on
goods and services obtained from nature, modern technological advances and
prosperity have resulted in increasing ignorance of this dependence, leading to
severe degradation in the ability of ecosystems to provide services for
sustaining human activities and well-being. This research is a step toward
restoring this connection, and is based on the premise that understanding and
accounting for the interaction and interdependence between technological and
ecological systems can result in new insights about the sustainability of human
activities, and the discovery of innovative designs based on synergies between
technological and ecological systems. This work will develop the new framework
of techno-ecological synergy (TES) that integrates data and models of
technological and ecological systems at multiple spatial scales. Relevant
information will be obtained from engineering models, life cycle inventories,
input-output models, and ecological data and models. Such information will be
used to develop TES models at spatial scales such as local, regional, and
national. Design of synergies will be enabled by a multiobjective optimization
framework that will combine process and input-output models of technological and
ecological systems. As a way of developing this framework, these methods will be
applied to assessing the sustainability of The Ohio State University campus
based on its demand and supply for ecosystem services. Strategies will be
suggested for enhancing campus sustainability and for meeting the University
President?s commitment of carbon neutrality. The proposed activities will bring
together the expertise of leaders in Sustainable Engineering and Ecosystem
Services. Understanding the synergy between existing systems is expected to
result in a novel approach for assessing system sustainability. TES models at a
spatial scale will indicate the extent of overshoot between the demand and
supply for individual ecosystem services. This will provide insight into the
options and appropriate scale for closing material cycles, and encourage the
development of "islands of sustainability." Such models across scales will be
used to develop hybrid models that consider the entire life cycle, supporting
ecosystems, and their capacity. Designing techno-ecological synergy will expand
the design space to include innovative solutions that are beneficial to the
economy and the environment. These solutions cannot be found by traditional
engineering design since it ignores the role of ecosystems. A unique feature of
the optimization framework will be its ability to utilize process models from
existing software and input-output models built from economic and environmental
data. Through this work, methods for ecosystem services modeling will expand
their reach into industrial supply chains, life cycles, and technology design
and assessment. Application to campus sustainability will advance methods for
developing green buildings and sustainable habitats. Application of the proposed
framework to the OSU campus will provide unique opportunities for education and
outreach to students, staff and faculty, and to enhance public engagement with
science and technology. This will be enabled by working with the campus Office
of Energy Services and Sustainability, and two student groups: the local chapter
of Engineers for a Sustainable World, and the Ecological Engineering Society.
The results of this work will be disseminated by means of on-campus exhibits
organized by these groups; web-based tools to explore campus sustainability
options; short courses to policy makers and engineers, organized by the Natural
Capital Project and the MIT Summer Program, respectively; elective courses and
graduate student training; and through academic publications and presentations.
Involvement of underrepresented minorities and women will be ensured not just
through graduate student recruitment, but also via the student groups associated
with this work. The proposed framework will open many new avenues for further
work such as the effect of techno-ecological synergies on the resilience of
spatial regions, integration with social and behavioral aspects, etc. This work
will contribute to reestablishing a mutually beneficial connection between
technology and ecology, which is needed for keeping engineering and other human
activities within ecological constraints, and to ensure human well-being and
sustainability.