* 1334757
* Complex Emergent Behaviors Arising from Simple Mechanically-Mediated Cell-Matrix Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Keith Gooch, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2017
* USD 280,304.00

The research objective of this award is to develop, validate, and utilize a
computer model of cell-matrix interactions. The cell-matrix interactions are an
important component a number of important biological processes including growth,
development, cell migration, tumor metastasis, wound healing and tissue
regeneration. Previous models of cell-matrix interactions have failed to capture
the dynamic nature of these interactions and have only given static snapshots of
what experiments reveal to be a constantly changing process. Agent-based models,
a simulation technique well suited for dynamic processes, will be employed. The
model will be validated against experimental data consisting of the shape and
position of cells and extracellular matrix fibers. Once validated, the model can
be used to gain insight into processes that cannot be explored directly using
experiments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful, these studies would add
significantly to the field's understanding of cell-matrix interactions,
including the basic underlying biomechanical rules that work together to give
rise to the observed biological behaviors. The work directed towards the
completion of the scientific aims will provide the basis for extensive
laboratory, project and lecture-based learning opportunities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students. An important component of such work will be
incorporating agent-based modeling ongoing work with the Ohio Supercomputing
Centers summer program for high school students and initiating a new
collaboration with the Math and Science Program at The Ohio State University's
African American and African Studies Community Extension Center.