* 1334746
* Development and Testing of Pressure Gradient Sensors to Improve Shallow Seafloor Seismic Observations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Spahr Webb, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 297,733.00

The PIs request funding to develop and test on current shielded OBSs orthogonal
pairs of horizontal pressure gradient (OPG) sensors. These sensors will be based
on the sensor technology originally developed by one of us (Webb) for the
differential pressure gauge (DPG) systems currently used on the majority of the
US OBS fleet. Theory suggests that these pressure gradient observations should
be proportional to the wave deformation loading noise and thus can be used to
predict and remove the wave loading noise from the horizontal components.
Combining data from a current shielded OBS with data from APG and OPGs sensors
may enable broadband seismic observations on the shallow seafloor with noise
levels comparable to many land sites greatly improving OBS data for studying the
Earth. This project should greatly enhance the capabilities of ocean bottom
seismometers deployed in shallow water for studying the seismicity and structure
of continental margins crucial to understanding the Earth and the Earth?s
seismic hazard.

Broader Impacts:

This instrument development will be a tremendous asset for future relatively
shallow water deployments of broadband instruments as it will improve the
quality of the data significantly and will make the horizontal component data
really useable for a wide range of structural studies. A significant reduction
of noise due to waves would benefit a host of OBS programs planned or
anticipated in Cascadia, Alaska, New Zealand and elsewhere. Because all of these
regions are potential sites of great earthquakes and tsunamis, there are also
high societal benefits in improved OBS data.