* 1334641
* Collaborative Research: The interactions of waves, tidal currents and river outflows and their effects on the delivery and resuspension of sediments in the near field
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gangfeng Ma, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 116,289.00

This study will focus on the mechanisms for sediment resuspension and removal in
the near field of a river mouth plume characterized by a combination of strong
freshwater discharge, significant vertical shear resulting from stratification,
and strong surface wave conditions. It is hypothesized that the dispersal
pathway of river-borne sediment is possibly more often governed by resuspension
events in the region of sediment trapping, as opposed to only being an a priori
property of the riverine discharge. Further, surface waves are hypothesized to
be an important component of the overall physical mechanism of bottom stress and
sediment resuspension in river mouths and coastal inlets, leading to greatly
enhanced potential for sediment transport. In order to address these hypotheses,
the researchers will further develop and utilize a nonhydrostatic model (NHWAVE)
with capabilities to handle salinity stratification and suspended sediment in
both wave-resolving and wave-averaged forms, using, in particular, results from
ongoing NSF-funded work on river plume dynamics. The model will be validated
against a high-resolution data set for instabilities in sheared buoyant plume
flow in order to establish the accuracy of the formulation at high resolution,
and against a larger scale transect of data from the Mouth of the Columbia River
(MCR) to verify basic wave and circulation processes in the model. The model
will be applied to the MCR in order to study the interplay of tidally pulsed
river plume and waves and the resulting removal and resuspension of sediments in
the vicinity of ebb-tidal plume liftoff, and will be further used in
interpreting results from the ONR-sponsored RIVET-II experiment, conducted in
June 2013.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estuaries and river mouths provide the pathway
for riverine supply of sediments to the coast and the distribution of sediments
to the shelf and deep ocean. This project will study the influence and coupling
of tidal currents, river discharges and surface waves in determining the
sediment transport regime in coastal inlets. The first task will be to develop
and test both wave-resolving and wave averaged versions of a flexible,
parallelized nonhydrostatic model NHWAVE, which has recently been extended to
incorporate density stratification and the presence of a suspended sediment
load, thus providing the basic tools needed for high resolution process studies.
The further development of the model is important for several reasons. First,
the strong vertical components of motion associated with the tidal genesis of
fronts in surface advected plumes, and the occurrence of strong resuspension
events near regions of plume liftoff, require the application of fully
nonhydrostatic models. In addition, wave processes in strongly sheared flows
associated with surface-advected plumes are not adequately described by either
existing wave resolving models or by theory for wave-averaged flows in weakly
sheared environments as presently used in standard coastal ocean models, thus
requiring improved model formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
advance the understanding of sedimentation processes at the intersection of
river and coastal environments. The model development effort will further the
recent trend towards use of nonhydrostatic formulations in coastal ocean models
by incorporating wave-resolving capabilities, leading to the ability to
represent a full range of wave, current, stratification, turbulence and sediment
processes in a common computational framework utilized at realistic scales. The
resulting model will greatly enhance the community's ability to assess the
effect of complex, irregular wave processes on bottom stress and sediment
resuspension, leading to a better understanding of the pathways for sediment
motion from river to shelf. The resources from the grant will partially support
three doctoral graduate researchers, and undergraduate summer fellows through an
existing REU program. The PIs will continue their efforts to promote science and
research to a K-12 population through continued and expanded participation in
University of Delaware programs such as Coast Day, Engineering Cool Stuff Camp
and Young Engineers Camp.