* 1334572
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: High-Throughput Discovery, Development, and Demonstration of Material Systems to Enable Low-Power NEMS-Based Computation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Maarten P de Boer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 750,001.00

Although they have fueled a global technology revolution, the electronic
transistors that lie at the heart of digital logic in computers are very energy-
inefficient. To enable lower power computation, sever-al radically different
designs to replace or complement transistors are under consideration. One of
them is the nanoelectromechanical switch an extremely small device that
physically opens and closes to turn signals on and off. These have potential to
be up to one million times more energy efficient than transis-tors. However,
they suffer from insufficient reliability. Specifically, the electrically
conducting contacting surfaces need to be able to open and close up to a
quadrillion times without wearing out or becoming con-taminated, and materials
that can do this have not yet been developed. This project's objectives are: (1)
to understand the failure mechanisms that occur in these switches; and (2) to
discover and develop new ma-terials and operating conditions with sufficient
reliability. The approach will involve performing compu-tational modeling of
failure mechanisms at atomistic scales, and performing nanoscale microscopy
exper-iments. Models and experiments will be integrated for high-throughput
screening of materials. A large array of candidate materials will be canvassed,
selecting those that possess required characteristics includ-ing electrical
conductivity, wear resistance, and resistance to oxidation and buildup of
contamination. The most promising ones will be tested in prototype nanoscale
devices to ultimately identify materials and conditions that enable this new
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will discover new
materials and operating conditions that make nanoelec-tromechanical switches a
viable technology for future-generation low-power computers and portable de-
vices. This has potential to save large amounts of energy, thus helping to
address the environmental, eco-nomic, and security challenges arising from high
energy consumption. Furthermore, this work will help maintain U.S.
competitiveness in information technology by continuing technological progress
in a key economic sector. Students conducting research in the team's multiple
labs will develop strong skills to lead future research in energy-efficient
nanodevices, materials science, and tribology. Undergraduate stu-dents will
benefit from a unique dual-institution summer internship exchange that will be
implemented, and team-taught short-courses at conferences will broadly
disseminate insights from these innovations.