* 1334930
* Incentives in Government Provision of Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Relief
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jun Zhuang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2017
* USD 386,000.00

The goal of this award is to help provide a solid foundation for motivating more
comprehensive ways to assess the risk tradeoffs in multi-stakeholder disaster
management and resource allocation. This will be accomplished by taking
advantage of theoretical decision frameworks such as game theory and prospect
theory, and will use robust optimization techniques to address the uncertainty
that surrounds disasters. This project will address under-studied questions such
as: (a) How should governments and private sectors balance between the funding
for emergency preparedness and the funding for disaster relief, when they are
uncertain about the disaster location and consequences? (b) How should
governments distribute incentives to reduce vulnerability to disasters? and (c)
How should decision makers balance equity, efficiency, and effectiveness when
preparing for and responding to disasters? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a 2012
National Research Council report states, "there is currently no comprehensive
framework to guide private-public collaboration focused on disaster
preparedness, response, and recovery." If successful, this project will help to
address this issue by providing insights, practical guidelines, and decision
support tools to help save lives and property in the face of disasters. This
research will engage many graduate, undergraduate, and high school students,
including those from under-represented groups. The models, results, and insight
gained will be shared with international, federal, and local representatives
through seminars, conferences, publication, media coverage, and websites.