* 1334609
* Collaborative Research: Ergodic Trajectories in Discrete Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 234,995.00

The objective of this research project is to develop efficient and robust
numerical methods for searching and exploring an environment using a mechanical
system, while ensuring that the average temporal coverage reproduces a
prescribed spatial distribution. This is achieved by developing methods for
controlling mechanical systems so that they are ergodic with respect to the
given spatial distribution, and combining them with geometric structure-
preserving numerical integrators which have good backward error properties, and
preserve geometric invariants like the symplectic structure, energy, and
momentum. Furthermore, these methods preserve the nonlinear structure of the
configuration manifold, such as the Lie group or homogeneous space structure.
The key technical goals include: (i) the development and analysis of structured
integrators to accurately predict ergodic properties of a given system; (ii) the
development of simulation-based optimization of system parameters, and controls
to maximize efficiency of ergodic search; (iii) the generalization of these
techniques to Lie groups and homogeneous spaces, enabling ergodic search for a
rich class of robotic systems; (iv) experimental validation on realistic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These techniques will directly be applicable to a
broad range of real-world industrial applications, including joint space
exploration for robotic systems, fault detection in manufacturing, and optimal
search, coverage, and information extraction for autonomous sensor networks.
This industrial outreach will be facilitated by the release of public-domain
software that will lower the barrier to adapting geometric numerical integration
techniques in a variety of applications. Furthermore, we will engage in public
outreach activities by teaming up with the Museum of Science and Industry in
Chicago to develop an interactive exhibit demonstrating search algorithms for
mechanical systems. These concrete applications serve to inspire high-school
students (in particular, underrepresented minorities and women) to pursue STEM
degrees, and this in turn will help to secure the long-term economic innovation
and competitiveness of American industry.