* 1334652
* Collaborative Research:   Recovery of Seamount Precious Coral Beds From Heavy Trawling Disturbance
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2019
* Amy Baco-Taylor, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2019
* USD 566,608.00

Resilience, and the related concept of recovery, provides insights into
ecosystem function, connectivity, and succession. In the marine realm, most
resilience studies have focused on shallow-water ecosystems but increasing
anthropogenic impacts in the deep-sea are making studies of resilience and
recovery in the deep-sea time-critical, with deep-sea hard-substrate habitats
and large-scale disturbances having received the least attention. Ironically one
of the key anthropogenic impacts to the seafloor, fish trawling, provides an
experimental design to understand processes of recovery from large-scale
disturbance. Seamounts, with a high proportion of hard-substrate habitat,
discreet locations for sampling, and extensive disturbance from fish trawling,
provide an excellent natural laboratory to study the recovery aspect of
resilience. Additionally, the abundance, numerical dominance, high biomass, and
diversity of deep-sea corals on seamounts make them ideal model organisms for
these studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to examine a
series of locations in the far Northwestern Hawaiian Islands (NWHI) and the
Emperor Seamount Chain (ESC) to address the hypothesis, based on predictions of
low resilience and decadal recovery times for disturbed seamounts, that deep-sea
coral beds in the NWHI have not recovered despite the end of trawling 30+ years
ago. To test this hypothesis, the PIs will survey a series of replicate
seamounts at three levels of fish trawling intensity using autonomous and remote
underwater vehicles to conduct surveys and targeted sampling of the seamount
fauna and especially deep-sea corals. The PIs will focus on three specific
aspects of the seamount communities: community structure, age structure of
precious corals using a verified size-age curve, and genetic structure of
precious corals using DNA microsatellites. Using these methods the PIs will be
able to predict the time since coral colonization on any particular seamount as
well as source populations of the recent colonizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
seamounts represent a natural experiment with the added factor of time since the
establishment of the exclusive economic zone, and provide an unparalleled
opportunity to address seamount recovery on decadal time scales. The powerful
combination of aging tools and microsatellites will allow the PIs not only to
constrain time scales of deep sea coral colonization, but also rates of
recruitment and source of the colonizers. The results will provide significant
insights into key ecological processes on seamounts, thus serving to inform
further science as well as management. This proposal will support two STEM
scientists in the early stages of their careers. It will also contribute to
developing a competitive STEM workforce through training of two graduate
students as well as undergraduate students as research internships. Besides the
primary science, the PIs will also obtain samples and genetic data that will be
made accessible to other researchers through museums and public databases,
respectively.