* 1334389
* Cooperative Adaptation and Shaping of Human Motor Control through Unstable Physical Human-Robot Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jingang Yi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 338,000.00

The research objective of this project is to establish a learning, modeling and
tuning framework of human motor control through unstable physical human-robot
interactions (upHRI). Rider-bikebot interactions will be used as an upHRI
paradigm to examine a sensorimotor theory for modeling and shaping human motor
control relevant to balancing and other functional whole-body motor activities.
Bikebot is an actively controlled bicycle-based robot. By perturbing rider's
sensorimotor mechanism through controlled steering, velocity, and balancing,
bikebot offer a new platform for studying physical human-robot interactions.
This project will develop new learning, modeling and control schemes for human
motor strategies through rider-bikebot interactions, including (1) the
development of the in-situ sensing and actuation design to enable perturbing,
extracting and evaluation of human motor skills in upHRI; (2) the novel control-
theoretic physical/statistical modeling framework of extracting and
characterizing human motor control strategies on reduced-dimensionality
embedding manifolds; and (3) the control methodologies to cooperatively adapt
and tune the human motor strategies in upHRI. The new knowledge and tools
developed in this project will serve as a cornerstone to further advance
understanding of general physical HRI and to design new human-inspired control
and coordination with other complex robotic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the research outcomes of this project will generate new knowledge,
methodologies and enabling tools for designing a broader class of human-in-the-
loop control systems. A direct outcome of the proposed research will potentially
lead to develop a new bikebot-assisted diagnosis and rehabilitation tool for
neurological disorder patients. In a long term, the outcomes of this project
will provide potential approaches to engineer the tools for biological
discovery. The PIs will distribute systems schematics and design, source code,
experimental data, and documentation via the project website so that other
groups can learn from this project's outcomes. The PIs will also develop a
number of integrated research and education programs to attract students from
underrepresented groups into engineering and involve undergraduate students into
research.