* 1334204
* High Fidelity Additive Manufacturing at the Micro-scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kira Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,964.00

This research award supports fundamental research on additive manufacturing at
the micro-scale that will improve the flexibility, cost and performance of high-
resolution electronic device fabrication. Specifically, the research will
exploit the unique drop-on-demand capabilities of jet-based micro-additive
manufacturing processes to reduce fabrication costs and improve part fidelity of
printed electronics. The research will develop a unique sensing strategy for
monitoring critical process parameters in jet-based printing; establish a
fundamental scientific understanding of the impact of environmental conditions
on the physics that governs jet-based processes; derive systematic methodologies
for modeling complex micro-additive manufacturing processes; and evaluate a new
paradigm in process control that utilizes robust learning schemes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A globally competitive manufacturing industry will
contribute to the nation's economy, sustainability, and position within a global
market. To this end, additive manufacturing, in particular micro-additive
manufacturing, has the potential to revolutionize the way the US manufactures
goods. The research results from this award will provide an improved fundamental
scientific understanding of the physics that govern jet-based micro-additive
manufacturing processes and new tools at the intersection of process modeling,
additive manufacturing, and learning control. This research will lead to the
ability to fabricate smaller, faster, and cheaper devices with less material
waste while encouraging the consumer market and driving product demand; leading
to additional technological breakthroughs in engineering, computer science, and
material science. A key enabler for advanced manufacturing is public awareness.
To achieve awareness and inspire the next generation of engineers, this research
project will work with local science and technology museums to reach thousands
of students and parents each year. It will also positively influence engineering
education for undergraduate and graduate students through hands-on research
projects, and broaden participation of underrepresented groups in engineering
through university-based programs.