* 1335405
* Nonlinear Flow and Flight Tracking Control Methods for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Using Microjet Actuators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* William MacKunis, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2016
* USD 128,800.00

The primary science objective of this award is to develop new methods of
simultaneous flow and flight control for microjet actuator-based unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) in the presence of uncertain operating conditions and uncertain
nonlinear actuator dynamics. Microjet actuators transfer linear momentum to a
flow system by using a vibrating diaphragm, which creates trains of vortices
through the alternating ejection and suction of fluid through a small orifice.
Microjets can be utilized to modify the boundary layer flow field near the
surface of an aircraft wing, which can improve UAV aerodynamic performance and
maneuverability. Benefits of the use of microjet actuators include small size,
ease of operation, low cost, and no requirement for a separate fuel supply. The
study will investigate new methods of nonlinear control, which incorporate the
complete nonlinear UAV dynamics in addition to the boundary-layer flow field
dynamics in the design. A focus of the proposed research will be the development
of practical control designs that require minimal computational complexity.
Deliverables include new theoretical control design techniques, demonstrations
via numerical simulations, performance validation via wind-tunnel experiments,
engineering student education and research experiences, and hands-on student
projects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the results of this research
will reduce implementation cost and improve performance of UAV control systems.
Moreover, the research will create practical microjet-based control methods that
can be applied over a wide range of operating conditions. This will enable the
development of cost-effective UAV systems that are capable for real-life
implementation. The result of the research will be document in research papers
that will be disseminated in conference proceedings and high-impact academic
journals. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit through involvement
in research and hands-on projects, which they will draw on throughout their
academic or industrial careers.