* 1335082
* DMREF: Combinatorial Methods to Enable Rapid Prototyping of Pervaporation Membranes for Bio-Alcohol Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Ronald Hedden, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2017
* USD 639,929.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) grant
provides funding for a synergistic program of combinatorial experiments,
molecular simulations, and theoretical modeling aimed at making advances in the
design of pervaporation membrane materials. Pervaporation is an energy-friendly
process for separation of liquid mixtures that works by preferentially
transporting one of the liquid components across a selective membrane into the
vapor phase on the other side. Molecular insights regarding structure-function
relationships in membrane materials will be obtained by studying water-alcohol
separation as the model application. The work will focus on crosslinked
polyacrylate copolymer membranes that offer a high degree of tunability in
chemical composition compared to traditional silicone-based membranes. High-
throughput experimental screening methods consisting of matrix-based sample
preparation and testing of membrane properties will be combined with molecular
simulations of water and alcohol diffusion rates to quantify membrane
performance. Through data-driven validation, a novel theoretical framework for
membrane performance will be developed, providing predictive capabilities for
rapid design of pervaporation membranes for separation applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pervaporation provides a cost effective alternative to the
traditional energy-intensive, multi-stage distillation processes that are used
for the purification of biofuels and fuel additives. This research could
significantly reduce the production costs of fuels derived from renewable
resources. The rapid prototyping methods to be developed will also be applicable
to the design of materials for other important pervaporation applications such
as desalination of water, dehydration of fuels, and removal of organics from
wastewater streams. In addition to these societal benefits, the project will
also have broad educational benefits through K-12 outreach activities, training
of undergraduate and graduate researchers from diverse backgrounds, as well as
database development for public dissemination of research findings.