* 1335049
* Exploiting Liquid-State Transduction Materials in Vibratory Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Gang Li, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

This award aims to build the fundamentals necessary to evaluate and maximize the
transduction efficiency of vibratory energy harvesters that utilize liquid-state
materials, namely ferrofluids, as the transduction element. To achieve this
goal, a systematic three-level framework, which combines theories in fluid
dynamics and electromagnetics with computational tools, is used to model and
analyze the electro-magnetohydrodynamic behavior of liquid-state energy
harvesters. At the first level, non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations
are implemented to determine the relationship between the microscopic behavior
of the ferrofluid nanoparticles and the associated bulk material properties of
the fluid under non-equilibrium/dynamic conditions. At the second level, a
reduced-order analytical model of the harvesting system is developed. The model,
which invokes several justifiable assumptions on the dynamics, is used to
provide a qualitative insight into the influence of the design parameters on the
output power for simple device geometries. At the third level, a comprehensive
computational model is developed and used to quantify the output power of the
harvester for complex device geometries and at different scales. If successful,
the results of this award will lay the foundation and provide the necessary
tools to build scalable, sensitive, and conformable energy harvesters with
complex geometries and shapes, which, in turn, will open new, and, previously
considered impractical avenues for vibratory energy harvesting. This will
benefit many critical technologies including remote wireless sensors and
implantable medical devices whose autonomous operation has been hindered by the
lack of scalable and renewable power sources. Results from this research
endeavor will bring us closer to the concept of "Autonomous Electronics" which
will enhance the quality of life for patients with medical implants and will
help avoid catastrophic failures of machines and structures similar to the
infamous Saint-Anthony Falls bridge collapse.