* 1335571
* Reliability-based Analysis and Design Loads for Slender Cable-Supported Bridges Subjected to Cable Loss
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* Suren Chen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 07/31/2019
* USD 270,921.00

Abrupt cable loss is a critical extreme event for cable-supported bridges, which
can happen under intentional attack scenario or deterioration of cables. Slender
long-span bridges may have simultaneous presence of a large number of vehicles
or significant wind along with sudden breakage of cables. Most cable-loss events
occur suddenly without much warning when service loads like traffic and wind may
be present. Such combined extreme and service loads have not been considered in
the existing cable-loss analyses. The current load resistant factor design
(LRFD) specification do not consider simultaneous loading. The proposed research
is to develop a reliability-based dynamic analysis method for slender long-span
cable-supported bridges under combined extreme (cable breakage) and service
loads such as traffic and/or wind. Analytical method development along with
validation with wind tunnel testing is part of the project.

The project will pursue research in response, safety and reliability of cable
supported long-span bridges in case of a sudden loss of one or more cables. The
cable loss causes dynamic loads on the bridge which can have catastrophic
consequences since cable-stayed bridges depend on cables as the main supporting
element. A variety of scenario of cable failure and moving traffic on the bridge
will be developed to encompass realistic situations. Non-linear analytical
simulation will be developed for limit state situation which will be validated
with scale model experiment in wind tunnel (normal moving traffic and wind are
part of scenario loading). The ultimate goal of the project is to provide
consistent reliability to long-span cable supported bridges under various
realistic load and accident conditions. Results of the project will be
disseminated through publications as well as will be made available to standard
writing bodies.