* 1335163
* Optical Carrier Based Microwave Interferometry for Spatially Continuous Distributed Monitoring of Structural Health
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2013
* Hai Xiao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 10/31/2013
* USD 335,000.00

The objective of this award is to develop robust, embeddable, distributed
sensors for structural health monitoring (SHM) to ensure continuing safe
operations of the nation's critical infrastructures. Based on the novel concept
of optical carrier based microwave interferometry (OCMI), the developed sensors
have the long-desired high measurement resolution for studying structural
behaviors under normal loads, the large strain capability for diagnosing the
structural integrity under extreme loads, and the spatial continuity (no dark
zones) over a large span for comprehensive evaluation of the health status of
the structure as a whole. The fundamental physics of OCMI will be studied to
understand its full capabilities for sensing applications. The various
engineering options will be explored to formulate an optimal design for
maximized distributed sensing capability. Polymer optical fiber (POF) based OCMI
sensors will be designed, developed and characterized for distributed
measurement of large strain and crack detection to demonstrate the effectiveness
of the new OCMI concept for SHM.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to an enabling SHM
technology to ensure the safe operation of the nation's deteriorating
infrastructures, and facilitate mission-critical services during disaster
responses and emergency evacuations. The research will establish an insight
understanding to design integrated microwave-optics systems for various sensing
needs. Distributed crack detection and quantification will be implemented using
flexible and robust POF based OCMI sensors with enhanced deployability,
embeddability, reliability and large strain capability. The fundamental
knowledge and methodologies developed in this research are also transferrable to
other critical applications in SHM such as distributed monitoring of force,
load, fatigue and corrosion.