* 1335640
* Collaborative Research: Prioritizing Cooling Infrastructure Investments for Vulnerable Southwest Populations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Eisenman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2017
* USD 296,122.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to develop methods for
joining social and built environment vulnerability into a single framework, and
will create a prioritization framework for selecting investments in cooling
infrastructure that maximize the reduction in vulnerability. The vulnerability
of the United States Southwest populations to heat is a result of both a city's
socio-demographic profile and the built environment, yet little is known about
the latter. Prior research has largely focused on socio-demographic
characteristics of population sub-groups. Emerging evidence suggests that the
way in which we design our infrastructure systems may significantly affect an
individual's access to cooling resources. A neighborhood that is considered
socially vulnerable to heat events may be at an even greater risk if they live
in buildings that warm more quickly, are in regions that may lose electricity
more frequently due to generation and transmission impacts, or are not near to a
community cooling center. The research team will develop novel methods for
coupling socio-demographic characteristics with new infrastructure vulnerability
measures to assess the nexus of coupled socio-technical risk, using Los Angeles
and Phoenix as case studies. The infrastructure vulnerability indices will
assess a neighborhood's access to cooling resources whether that be air
conditioning, building passive cooling, access to community refuge and hydration
centers, as well as disruptions of electricity supply. With the coupled socio-
technical vulnerability framework, the team will develop strategies for
prioritizing infrastructure upgrades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated social
and infrastructure vulnerability framework will result in new methods for
estimating the additional risk to heat that result from built environment
characteristics, and will identify efficient cooling infrastructure investment
strategies for cities to reduce this risk. The research team will convene expert
panels and through their feedback will develop a guidebook that shows how cities
can assess their vulnerability and which infrastructure strategies are likely to
lead to the most cost-effective benefits, given particular built environment
characteristics. The project will provide a guiding framework for cities to join
large and complex socio-demographic and infrastructure datasets to understand
which populations are most at-risk to future heat impacts and why. It will
enable cities in high-risk heat regions with information and methods for
understanding how to identify and mitigate future vulnerability.