* 1335883
* Collaboration in the 21st Century (C2C): Measuring Essential Skills for the STEM Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2018
* Frances Lawrenz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,931.00

The C2C award addresses the lack of validated instruments to measure teamwork
and collaboration in middle and high school students in out of school time (OST)
settings by implementing a rigorous four-phase process to develop new
assessments. Phase 1 focuses on defining the construct of teamwork and
collaboration skills so it aligns with the research literature and is relevant
to outcomes in a variety of STEM OST programs. Construct maps are developed
during Phase 2 to guide item development. The instruments are piloted in Phase 3
through think-aloud interviews and survey administration with a diverse set of
youth and programs. Through an iterative process, items are revised or removed
based on their psychometric properties. The final phase is a national field test
with a cross-section of STEM OST programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C2C's
intellectual merit is its potential to advance understanding of how to measure
teamwork and collaboration skills in STEM OST programs. There is a national call
for more measures to evaluate 21st century skills. C2C's creation of instruments
to measure teamwork and collaboration skills in STEM OST programs helps to
address this gap. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work of C2C addresses broader
impacts and benefit society by creating tools to understand the role STEM OST
programs play in readying our nation's youth for the STEM workforce. C2C will
create instruments validated specifically for this diverse population, allowing
programs to understand the role they play in important societal STEM workforce
readiness outcomes. C2C also benefits the informal science education field by
conceptualizing the construct of teamwork and collaboration within STEM OST
programs and developing validated instruments to understand the impact of these
programs on youth.