* 1335884
* Modeling wastewater sludge hydrolysis aided by high temporal resolution measurements through microbial electrochemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Cesar Torres, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 333,191.00

CBET - 1335884&lt;br/&gt;Cesar I. Torres&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will address our need to better
understand solids hydrolysis by anaerobic microorganisms, focusing on municipal
wastewater sludge. Solids hydrolysis is a crucial, rate-limiting step in
wastewater sludge treatment; while it is also important for many bioenergy
processes, such the production of biofuels from cellulose. Given the complexity
of wastewater sludge, solids hydrolysis encompasses many individual processes
that are difficult to resolve. The lack of comprehensive and highly resolved
data from biological experiments has led to insufficient validation of existing
models for sludge hydrolysis. The use of a microbial electrochemical cell (MXC)
anode, powered by anode respiring bacteria (ARB), provides a new alternative to
probe microbial hydrolysis kinetics events with a much greater precision and
higher temporal resolution than current methods based on methane production. An
MXC allows us to measure respiration rates of the ARB at a very high temporal
resolution (&lt; 1 minute) by measuring their electric current. Simultaneous
monitoring of solids and soluble microbial hydrolysis components along with
current production will enable the accurate measurement of transient hydrolysis
rates with a deeper elucidation of the underlying mechanisms. High resolution
MXC data, along with analytical measurements, will provide a strong basis for
describing lag times for hydrolysis of the three main components of solid
organic matter: carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids. Through the data collected,
this project aims to develop an updated, comprehensive solids hydrolysis model
for municipal sludge and other solid wastes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge
obtained through this project is crucial to improve the optimization of current
technologies in which solids hydrolysis is a rate-limiting step. The project
focuses on wastewater sludge, a complex waste that requires solid hydrolysis for
its treatment and disposal. However, the solids-hydrolysis models developed can
also be used in other applications, such as bioenergy technologies that utilize
a solid substrate (e.g., cellulose). A comprehensive solids hydrolysis model can
allow environmental engineers to better predict the performance of anaerobic
digesters and will be essential to understand how new technologies will perform
in the wastewater treatment field. For example, sludge pre-treatment
technologies are emerging in the wastewater field as a means to improve the rate
of solids hydrolysis. Thus, this project will use MXCs as rapid high throughput
tools to identify the best pre-treatment technology for a given solid waste.
While we use MXCs to learn new insights on microbial kinetics, they also become
a teaching and learning tool, thus broadening the impacts of our research.
Microbial electrochemistry can be epitomized as a tool to study microbial
kinetics in complex systems.