* 1335926
* Collaborative Research: Fate, Transport, and Organismal Uptake of Rod-Shaped Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Navid Saleh, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 05/31/2014
* USD 119,016.00

CBET 1336353 There is currently very little known about the environmental
implications of rigid highly anisotropic nanostructures. Nanorods possessing
high aspect ratios (AR = length:diameter) are an exciting nanomaterial class
with many potential applications. To date, however, only a limited number of
studies have examined the environmental fate of these elongated nanomaterials.
The lack of work in this area is particularly surprising given that it has been
definitively shown that anisotropy affects how nanorods interact with biological
systems. The underlying hypothesis driving the present effort is that changes in
AR and surface chemistry will alter the mechanisms and kinetics dictating
nanorod fate in riverine systems. To test this hypothesis the PIs have developed
a research plan that consists of four highly inter-related project tasks: In
Task 1 we will synthesize gold nanorods with varying AR and we will then
functionalize them using a range of environmentally relevant metal oxides (e.g.,
SiO2, gamma-Fe2O3, CeO2) to obtain a suite of nanomaterials that exhibit both
shape and surface chemical heterogeneity. These nanorods will then be used in
studies to evaluate nanorod aggregation (Task 2), nanorod deposition (Task 3),
and uptake by the filter feeding bivalve Corbicula fluminea (Task 4). Completion
of each of these tasks is an important undertaking in its own right; however, we
have developed a cohesive research plan in which the knowledge gained in any one
task is used to help refine the overall research plan. Intellectual Merit :
Anisotropic nanoparticles are being produced in an ever-expanding variety of
shapes and sizes in ever-increasing quantities. Presently ery little is known
about the environmental implications of these highly complex nanomaterials. The
effort proposed herein will provide a fundamental basis for the description of
how material anisotropy dictates nanomaterial fate in environmental matrices.
The expected intellectual outcomes of this effort are i) systematic examination
of nanorod aggregation kinetics and fractal dimension as a function of aspect
ratio and solution chemistry (ii) delineation of deposition mechanisms by the
systematic variation of particle properties (AR, surface chemistry) and
collector parameters (e.g., collector size and surface roughness) in column
studies; and (iii) quantification of the effects of AR on nanomaterial uptake by
the ubiquitous filter feeder C. fluminea. Although our focus is on gold and
gold-core nanorods, the results obtained are expected to be translatable to
other anisotropic materials. Broader Impacts : A multi-dimensional approach to
broader impacts has been developed. This approach leverages existing programs at
the three collaborating institutions while working to integrate efforts across
the groups. Research dissemination and outreach. The PIs will collectively
promote and disseminate the research results through existing community programs
in Virginia, South Carolina, and Illinois. In addition, the results of this
project will be broadcast to a broad technical audience through the traditional
pathways of peer-reviewed publications and presentations at relevant
conferences. Outreach efforts will target minority students in local high
schools. Undergraduate research. Undergraduate research opportunities will be
made available at all three collaborating institutions. Over the course of their
careers, the PIs have collectively supported over 90 undergraduate researchersin
their laboratories (a significant percentage of whom are members of historically
under-represented groups in science and engineering) and this effort will
provide additional undergraduate research opportunities. Undergraduate and
graduate education. The research proposed in this effort combines nanomaterial
synthesis and characterization techniques with colloidal physical principles in
a manner that is not routinely found in undergraduate chemistry or environmental
engineering curricula. Given this fact, all three PIs will take part in the
development and production of classroom material (e.g., lectures,
demonstrations) based upon this research that will be incorporated into courses
at all three institutions.