* 1335824
* Natural Attenuation and Enhanced Biodegradation of Methyl tert-Butyl Ether in Anoxic Aquifers
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Lee Kerkhof, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 330,000.00

CBET 1335824 &lt;br/&gt;Max M. Haggblom&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) is an intriguing
groundwater pollutant. MTBE is a synthetic chemical with no natural sources and
its biodegradation is a challenge to microorganisms. As a consequence of several
decades of extensive use MTBE has become one of the most frequently detected
groundwater contaminants, requiring remediation due to its persistence in the
environment. The overall hypothesis of this research is that long-term MTBE
contamination will enrich for anaerobic microbial communities that are capable
of utilizing this compound as a source of carbon and energy. Previous research
has demonstrated that MTBE degradation can occur under different anoxic
conditions, and may be an important process in anoxic environments. However,
little is still known about the bacterial species that can utilize MTBE and the
biodegradation mechanisms are poorly understood. The research project seeks to
elucidate the activity of bacteria that mediate degradation of MTBE in anoxic
subsurface environments. Novel microorganisms and their genes responsible for
transformation/degradation of MTBE in contaminated aquifers and sediments will
be identified in order to develop tools for monitoring natural attenuation and
enhanced biodegradation of MTBE in the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the use of MTBE as a fuel oxygenate has now been
widely banned, problems with contaminated aquifers and drinking water sources
persist. MTBE has a very strong turpentine-like taste and smell and can only be
tolerated in drinking water at very low levels. The human-health effects of
long-term inhalation or oral exposures to MTBE are unknown. There has been an
increasing need in the development of effective technologies to remediate MTBE-
contaminated sites. Monitoring tools are critical to gaining an understanding of
how microbial processes, and thus remediation, are affected by different
amendments or other engineering approaches. This project will yield novel
approaches to assess and stimulate bioremediation and to document in situ MTBE
biodegradation in natural attenuation approaches. A variety of natural processes
control plume migration and reduce MTBE concentration. Among these processes,
biodegradation is the most effective in reducing the mass of contaminant in the
environment in a sustainable way. A key challenge is to accurately assess the
efficiency of the remediation techniques in situ. The fundamental
microbiological and environmental engineering knowledge gained from the research
will fill major knowledge gaps in our understanding of fate and transformation
of MTBE in the environment. Implementation of site assessment via emerging
environmental molecular diagnostics for MTBE could lead to cost-savings through
more sustainable remediation practices, aid choice of site approaches that lead
to shortened timelines, and provide information to allow a more rational
approach for site remediation.