* 1335395
* Effect of Heating/Cooling Cycles on the Thermomechanical Performance of Energy Piles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Tien-Chien Jen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2017
* USD 361,454.00

Energy piles are deep foundation elements designed to access and exploit the
relatively constant temperature of the ground and its heat storage capacity for
efficient heating and cooling of buildings. Energy piles present an innovative
way to harvest near-surface geothermal energy, while at the same time serve as
foundations for buildings and other structures such as bridges. This research
project answers two fundamental questions related to the behavior of energy
piles under thermally induced load cycles: (1) Do the thermal load cycles change
the properties of the soil around the energy pile on an elemental level, thereby
affecting the pile's load-deformation behavior? (2) Do the thermal load cycles
alter the soil-pile interface properties on an elemental level, thereby reducing
the axial load capacity of the pile? The research project focuses both on the
effect of cyclic straining and deformations at the pile-soil interface as well
as the effect of temperature cycles on soil behavior. This research will
quantify the effect of temperature cycles on serviceability (i.e. temperature
induced settlement) and ultimate state (i.e. capacity) of energy piles, and will
investigate heat exchange behavior and temperature-induced effects around the
energy pile through a carefully designed laboratory testing program, a full-
scale field test, and advanced numerical modeling. This research will help us
better understand energy pile behavior with particular emphasis on the
fundamental aspects of soil-pile interface behavior. Findings from this research
will help us develop refined design guidelines for energy
piles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy piles provide the means to use the ground as
a renewable heating and cooling resource, thereby reducing the demand on
conventional energy sources, reducing seasonal energy demand fluctuations on the
electric power system, and reducing harmful CO2 emissions. A better
understanding of the fundamental aspects of energy pile behavior will have broad
impact on the use of pile foundations as heat exchangers. The study has the
potential to increase the use of energy pile systems on a commercial scale in
the U.S. and worldwide. The project will also integrate research and education
to support the emerging workforce needed to grow the nation's green energy
industry, an area that is growing and in need of educated professionals.