* 1335934
* CBET:  Upconversion Enhanced Visible Light Sensitization of Semiconductor Photocatalysts for Environmental Application
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jaehong Kim, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

CBET 1335934&lt;br/&gt;Jaehong Kim&lt;br/&gt;Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental application of semiconductor
photocatalysts as a sustainable technology option has received significant
attention over the past few decades with some notable commercial successes. But
challenges still remain and are related to its relatively low efficiency of
photosensitization by longer-wavelength, lower-energy light that is abundant in
the solar spectrum. This project will develop a highly innovative approach of
enhancing the visible light susceptibility of semiconductor-based photocatalytic
process. This research aims at manipulating light to amplify its frequency via a
unique photoluminescence process called upconversion (UC) based on a triplet-
triplet annihilation (TTA) mechanism. Through the TTA-UC process, two photons of
higher wavelength, which are otherwise wasted, are combined and converted to a
single photon with lower wavelength; these upconverted photons are subsequently
used to sensitize photocatalysts and to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS)
that effectively degrade pollutants and inactivate microorganisms in water.
Researchers will employ a pair of organic sensitizers and acceptors that enable
a highly efficient visible to visible or blue to UVA upconversion. Researchers
will select various chromophore pairs, encapsulate them into microcapsules, and
couple them with selected semiconductor photocatalysts. Various
photoluminescence and photocatalytic experiments and instrumental analyses will
be performed to quantitatively evaluate the properties of this new system
including quantum yield, excitation and emission spectra, kinetics of energy
transfer process (time-resolved spectra), and ROS production. The material
synthesis and system development will be specifically targeted and tested for
contaminant degradation and microbial inactivation in water as well as
separation and recovery after use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring access to
inexpensive and clean sources of water is one of the greatest global challenges
of this century. Advanced materials technology, such as the one developed in
this project, offers opportunities to leapfrog over traditional infrastructure-
intensive technologies to develop more sustainable approaches in both
industrialized and developing countries, as long as cost efficacy is assured and
unnecessary collateral impacts are avoided. This project has a great potential
to develop solar-based technology that efficiently harvests lower-energy
portions of the solar spectrum which is otherwise wasted in any existing
photocatalyst-based processes. Researchers expect that UC/photocatalysts with
improved solar energy utilization efficiency and capability for easy separation
can be readily implemented in various environmental engineering practices
including solar photocatalytic disinfection (e.g., implemented using a solar
concentrator), advanced oxidation, and photocatalysis. The project aims at
achieving this goal through effective integration the photophysics of
upconversion, material synthesis, semiconductor photocatalysis, environmental
micropollutant control, and disinfection.