* 1335666
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of Miscible Jets and Drops
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Amy Shen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 09/30/2016
* USD 186,583.00

1335632/1335666 PI: Fuller/Shen

The translation of miscible jets and drops, and the dissolution of drops are
common events encountered in numerous technological processes. It is critical to
understand the evolution of the transient interfacial tension, which has eluded
measurement. These challenges motivated methods recently demonstrated by the PIs
groups to extract very small and transient interfacial tensions existing between
miscible liquids. This collaborative research aims to develop a series of
complementary experiments to understand the fluid dynamics of miscible pairs of
liquids, which can interact with one another through various formats: miscible
jets, miscible suspended droplets, and miscible sessile drops. These experiments
will be supplemented by numerical simulations in collaboration with Professor
Anderson of Eindhoven Technical University. Each of these multiphase flow
systems result in outcomes that are qualitatively different from those
encountered by immiscible liquid pairs. The specific aims are: (1) studies of
drop and jets translating through a second, miscible liquid; (2) suspended
droplets of a miscible liquid experiencing stagnation point extensional flow in
a microfluidic environment; (3) sessile drops of a miscible liquid spreading and
dissolving within a matrix liquid; and (4) diffuse interface simulation of
miscible pendant drops, jets and sessile drops. The results from the modeling
will be compared against experimental determinations of the interfacial shapes
in jets and drops.

The dynamics of miscible liquid pairs has received little previous attention but
are central to many physical processes. The combination of miscible materials
can produce stable, intricate morphologies that are not possible with immiscible
mixtures. Jets of miscible liquids can be used to great advantage in the scale-
up production of highly oriented fibers that are otherwise difficult to process.
The dissolution of miscible, sessile drops is a rich problem in multiphase flow
that offers interesting analogies to desiccating drops along with the
possibility of extracting measures of the interfacial tension between miscible
liquids. The microfluidic approach to measuring interfacial tensions can be
applied to other physical problems, such as systems undergoing chemical
reactions, where the interfacial tension is changing with time. Similar
approaches can also be adapted to incorporate different types of miscible
fluids, drops, and biomolecules. The project will provide research training to
graduate and undergraduate students. The results developed in this program will
also make wonderful teaching tools for the introduction of fluid mechanics and
interfacial phenomena to high school and undergraduate students.