* 1335177
* Coupled Blade-Hub Dynamics in Large Horizontal-Axis Wind Turbines
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Brian Feeny, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2017
* USD 260,000.00

The goal of this project is to deepen our understanding of the dynamics of
horizontal-axis wind-turbine blades, and the loads that they impart to the
gearbox and bearings, ultimately to provide guidelines for wind-turbine
designers to develop turbines with significantly higher reliability. A wind-
blade dynamic model involves effects of rotation, cyclic excitations due to
gravity and steady wind shear (producing both parametric and direct excitation),
aeroelasticity, and arbitrary wind-gust excitations. This work is focused on the
resonances and instabilities associated with nearly identical wind blades
coupled through the hub. Such symmetric arrangements are prone to vibration
localization, which increases the vibration of a single blade. This project
addresses these dynamics with fundamental modeling of the blades and hub,
reduced-order modeling and perturbation analysis which yields the role of
parameters and mechanisms underlying critical behaviors, high fidelity
simulation studies that include the imparted loads on gears and bearings, and
correlation of simulated events with field observations as available from the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory and Sandia. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
study will provide insight to the unknown dynamic loadings that can contribute
to premature wind-turbine failures. The work thus enables a more reliable and
cost-effective wind-energy fleet, which in turn promotes diversification of the
renewable energy supply and the reduction of greenhouse gases. Understanding of
resonances, localization, and instability of coupled blades with direct and
parametric cyclic and aeroelastic excitation, and the effects on dynamic loading
of the gearbox, will provide improved design guidelines for wind-turbine
engineers, and will also advance the field of dynamics. Results will be
disseminated through journal publications, conference presentations, and wind
energy meetings and workshops. A doctoral student and an undergraduate will be
prepared for the wind energy workforce. The PI will conduct outreach through
existing university programs for high-school students and gifted middle school
students.