* 1335478
* Displaced Production Due to Reuse and Recycling: Theory Development and Case Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Roland Geyer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 328,741.00

1335478 (Geyer). The most significant environmental benefit of recycling and
reuse is typically their potential to avoid or displace the production of
equivalent materials and products from primary resources. This also means that
lack of displacement would significantly reduce these environmental benefits.
Unfortunately, the treatment of displacement in industrial ecology and life
cycle assessment (LCA) is currently based on assumptions instead of scientific
theory and evidence. The goal of this project is to advance dramatically the
understanding of the causes, mechanisms and dynamics that govern displacement of
primary production due to material recycling and product reuse. The project will
achieve this by integrating pertinent economic concepts and methods into the
analytical frameworks of industrial ecology and LCA. The resulting consequential
analysis framework will use market models to determine the interaction between
primary and secondary products and materials and thus estimate displacement.
These models will account for supply and demand dynamics, competition between
imperfect substitutes, and market growth and segmentation. The framework will be
tested in several case studies. The case studies will include econometric
analyses in order to determine pertinent economic parameters for key products
and materials, and thus estimate actual displacement rates. The results from the
research will be used to develop recommendations for the treatment of displaced
production due to reuse and recycling in LCA, product-based greenhouse gas
accounting, and product category rules for type III eco-labels. It will also be
used to identify public and corporate reuse and recycling policies and
incentives that foster and maximize displacement. Improved understanding of
displaced production due to reuse and recycling has the potential to lead to
significant improvements in public and corporate reuse and recycling policies.
It will also enable science-based treatments of reuse and recycling in LCA
methodology, greenhouse gas accounting standards, and environmental product
declarations. The research will have direct impact on higher education through a
multi-disciplinary graduate seminar and research opportunities for one PhD and
two undergraduate students. The project will also provide pre-college research
opportunities for high school students through the UCSB Research Mentor Program,
which provides research opportunities for students from underfunded high
schools. Public interest in the research findings will be served through
outreach activities, including the design and presentation of webinars and a
dedicated project website that will contain all public data, models, and
materials, and will continue to be maintained beyond the duration of the
research project.