* 1335693
* Autonomous, Low Cost Platform for Seafloor Geodesy
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2015
* Brian Bingham, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 342,307.00

The PIs request funding to develop a cost effective approach for accurately
measuring short-term vertical motions of the seafloor, maintaining a continuous
long-term record of seafloor pressure without the requirement for costly ship
time. This capability will be developed by equipping a University of Hawaii Wave
Glider with an integrated acoustic telemetry package, a dual frequency geodetic-
grade Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver, meteorological sensors, an
onboard embedded processing unit, and cellular telemetry. They will demonstrate
the use of the Wave Glider to interrogate high accuracy pressure sensors on the
sea floor to retrieve pressure and temperature data, and transmit the seafloor
data along with high rate GPS observables and meteorological data to shore. They
will then integrate the seafloor measurements with surface air pressure data,
and precise vertical measurements of the sea surface from kinematic positioning
of the Wave Glider?s GPS to determine cm-scale accuracy vertical seafloor
motions.

Broader Impacts:

The ability to make real-time measurements of seafloor motions has the potential
to dramatically enhance prediction of marine geo-hazards. Further, if these
glider systems can eventually be adapted for GPS-A systems (i.e., measurement of
horizontal as well as vertical motions) it will revolutionize our understanding
of seafloor deformation. This proposed project has the potential to create a
platform that would be capable of investigating scientific questions related to
tsunamigenic hazards in offshore regions of subduction zones and unstable
volcano flanks. These questions are of great importance to society as many
millions of people are currently vulnerable to tsunami impacts. The addition of
a low-cost, non-ship based resource for collection seafloor geodetic data would
be extremely beneficial to the scientific community. It will also provide
funding for a graduate student.