* 1335613
* Performance and Mechanisms of Iron Electrocoagulation for Removal of Chromium(VI) from Drinking Water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Daniel Giammar, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

CBET-1335613&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Giammar&lt;br/&gt;Washington University in St.
Louis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromium(VI) is a toxic contaminant that has been
observed in private and public water supplies as well as in treated drinking
water. Current drinking water standards are only applicable to total chromium,
which can be present as chromium(VI) as well as the much less toxic form of
chromium(III) that is even a nutrient at low concentrations. It is likely that
new drinking water standards specific to chromium(VI) will be implemented, and
iron electrocoagulation is a technology with the potential to achieve the low
concentrations that may be required. In iron electrocoagulation a direct current
is applied between two iron electrodes. One of the electrodes is oxidized to
release iron(II) to solution, and this soluble iron(II) can directly reduce
chromium(VI) or be oxidized to iron(III) to produce iron oxide solids on which
chromium(VI) can be reduced and adsorbed. Iron electrocoagulation for
chromium(VI) removal has multiple removal pathways that involve homogeneous and
heterogeneous chemical reduction, adsorption, and co-precipitation. The primary
objective of this research project is to advance the mechanistic understanding
of chromium(VI) removal by iron electrocoagulation. The project will evaluate
electrocoagulation performance over a broad range of water chemistry conditions
in a laboratory-scale electrocoagulation reactor. Analytical methods will track
changes in both total dissolved chromium and chromium(VI) to the very low levels
that are being considered for regulations. The investigation will use advanced
spectroscopic and stable isotope tools to identify the dominant reaction
mechanisms occurring in the electrocoagulation reactor. X-ray absorption
spectroscopy, which will be performed at national user facilities, will provide
insights into the oxidation state and molecular-scale coordination of chromium
associated with the solids generated in the reactor. Stable isotope
fractionation of chromium can be diagnostic of specific reaction mechanisms. A
mathematical model for electrocoagulation performance will integrate the
mechanistic insights and data from the laboratory-scale experiments to enable
predictions of performance over a broad range of conditions. The research will
enable the optimal design of treatment strategies and accurate prediction of
treatment performance for chromium(VI) removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide scientific information that will help improve the removal
of hexavalent chromium, a contaminant of critical national interest, from
drinking water. The research will determine the influence of water chemistry on
the reactions involved in the process, which will enable the design of effective
strategies for chromium(VI) removal for a broad range of drinking water sources.
The research activities will determine reaction mechanisms of interest in
environmental engineering as well as earth science and materials science. The
project's overall application of spectroscopic characterization and stable
isotope tools will advance the overall infrastructure for environmental
engineering research. The educational and outreach components of the project
will enhance graduate and undergraduate teaching and promote early student
interest in science and engineering.