* 1335927
* Ultra high boiling performance on nano/microstructured surfaces through electrodeposition of copper and graphene
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* KSV Santhanam, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 372,981.00

CBET 1335927&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kandlikar &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
Ultra High Pool Boiling Performance on Novel Microstructures through Pulsed
Electrodeposition of Graphene/Carbon Nanotubes and their Copper Composites?
strives to gain a fundamental understanding of the boiling mechanism over
enhanced microstructured surfaces with nanocoatings at preferred locations. A
new model that incorporates the role of microconvection in enhancing the boiling
heat transfer will be developed and validated by using advanced visualization
and measurement techniques employing high speed imaging (up to 25,000 fps), and
microthermocouples of 5 - 13 µm dimensions. The model will be further validated
through COMSOL Multiphysics® numerical simulation and pool boiling experiments
over individually designed microsctruture features with nanocoatings applied
over preferred regions. The fundamental insight gained through the localized
bubble/liquid motion and the associated heat transfer will provide new avenues
in enhancing and modeling the pool boiling heat transfer and critical heat flux
(CHF). Some of the recent advances in the field of electrochemistry will be
utilized in developing multi-porous graphene-based structures that are highly
conductive and can provide controlled morphological features for heat transfer
and CHF enhancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pool boiling constitutes an
extremely important mode of heat transfer that is applied in a number of
critical technologies including power generation (nuclear, fossil fuel, and
alternative energy source based), electronics cooling, petrochemical and process
industries, and air-conditioning and refrigeration applications. Heat transfer
performance improvements in the boiling process are generally aimed at: (i) a
reduction in the wall superheat, and (ii) an increase in the maximum heat
transfer rate, identified as the critical heat flux. The proposed project
provides a new pathway to address both of these performance improvement
parameters. The new approach and the modeling proposed in this project will
provide a new pathway in improving energy efficiencies of devices utilizing the
boiling process. This is in particular of great significance for utilizing
alternative thermal energy sources, since the available temperature differences
are generally low and are of critical importance.