* 1335936
* Method Development for Non-invasive Determination of Frozen Biospecimen Quality
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Alptekin Aksan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2017
* USD 285,543.00

Proposal: 1335936&lt;br/&gt;PI: Aksan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately one
billion biospecimens (blood, urine, saliva, bronchial lavage fluid samples and
tissue biopsies) collected from patients and healthy donors are currently being
stored in biorepositories and biobanks across the world. These biospecimens are
stored in -80C mechanical freezers or in liquid nitrogen dewars for future
research; specifically for molecular biomarker discovery and verification. The
quality of the frozen biospecimens is defined by the stability of the molecular
biomarkers they contain. If the biospecimens degrade during storage, the
molecular information they contain is lost. Unfortunately, in most clinics and
hospitals, biospecimen collection and processing protocols have not yet been
standardized and therefore a significant percentage of the collected
biospecimens have deteriorated even before they were frozen and stored. More
damage accumulates during storage due to improper handling and unstable storage
conditions. The main goal of this project is to develop a spectroscopic method
to evaluate frozen liquid biospecimens non-invasively and non-destructively to
screen out the millions of low quality biospecimens currently stored in
biobanks. To reach our main goal, critical parameters of freezing that result in
detrimental ice-macromolecule interactions yielding to structure, and activity
loss in molecular biomarkers will be determined experimentally. The results will
be interpreted with the help of a mathematical model, which the couples
transport and thermodynamic phenomena induced by freezing. The information will
then be used to develop a predictive algorithm to determine the quality of
frozen biological samples using spectroscopic methods in a non-destructive
fashion. Field-testing will be conducted in selected collaborating
biobanks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we aim to develop the science
and technology to rapidly and nondestructively screen out the substandard and
inferior biospecimens that are stored in biobanks across the nation. This will
significantly cut costs and more importantly, stop the use of bad quality
specimens in research. The scientific information generated in this proposal
will also help develop biopreservation protocols that will maximize the
stability of the biological specimens, and develop simpler, economical, and
greener alternatives to existing preservation methods, decreasing the carbon
footprint of biospecimen storage.