* 1335816
* Elucidating Novel Algal-Sludge Granules for Wastewater Treatment and Biomethane Feedstock Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Chul Park, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 334,606.00

CBET - 1335816&lt;br/&gt;Chul Park&lt;br/&gt;University of Massachusetts
Amherst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most municipalities in the US currently use the
activated sludge process to treat wastewater. The process achieves secondary
treatment but is energy intensive, mainly due to its need of aeration for
organic matter and nutrient treatment. Interest in algae-based wastewater
treatment has increased in recent years because of its ability to treat
wastewater without aeration through the symbiotic growth of photosynthetic algae
and bacteria and generate biofuel feedstock. Despite these benefits, the lack of
microalgae bioflocculation, which accounts for the difficulty in separating
biomass from water, and an inability to control algal species in the wastewater
environment have hindered the development of algae processes for wastewater
treatment. The objective of this research is to elucidate biogranulation of
microalgae and bacteria that yields novel algal-sludge granules. These granules
are large, dense, and spherical bioaggregates composed of both microalgae and
bacteria. Preliminary research has found that algal-sludge granules can be
naturally formed in the wastewater environment and be used for treating
wastewater in a flow-through bioreactor. Due to physical characteristics,
granules readily separate out from water, overcoming one of the major challenges
of algae processes. In addition, symbiosis of algae and bacteria within the same
granular biomass facilitates the engineering of an algae process for wastewater
and nutrient treatment. To unveil the mechanisms of biogranulation of microalgae
and bacteria this research will employ a series of batch and a flow-through
reactor studies and investigate the effect of light, temperature, and growth
rates on algal-bacterial granulation. To determine the microbiological nature
and characterize physiochemical properties of algal-sludge granules, the
investigators will conduct genetic, microscopic, and physicochemical analyses on
the biogranules through this research. The project will also use a compliment of
microsensor approaches to document the transport of key metabolic chemicals
across the granules, thus studying microbial activity and function of the
granules and their link to wastewater treatment performances. Finally, the
research will conduct anaerobic digestion study on harvested biogranules to
investigate its fate, digestibility, and methane bioenergy yield by anaerobic
digestion, especially compared to other feedstock, such as sewage sludge and
pure cultures of algal biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contribution of this
research will reveal the fundamental science behind the development of novel
algal-sludge granules and their growth in the context of real wastewater
treatment. This research is significant, because biogranules of algae and
bacteria will result in a controllable and effective algae-based wastewater
treatment process. Additionally, the symbiotic growth of algae and bacteria will
lead to meaningful biomass yield for biofeedstock generation from wastewater
treatment. Collectively, the outcome of this research will not only advance the
field of wastewater treatment, it will also have a substantially broad impact
and benefit to society by reducing the energy consumed during wastewater
treatment and increasing opportunity to recover chemical energy of wastewater in
the form of bioenergy feedstock and biomethane through its anaerobic digestion.