* 1335817
* A PLASMON-ENHANCED TEMPERATURE-SWING PROCESS FOR CONVERSION OF CARBON DIOXIDE TO CARBON MONOXIDE
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Kuhn, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 325,905.00

PI: Kuhn, John&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1335817&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of South Florida&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Plasmon-enhanced Temperature-
swing Process for Conversion of Carbon Dioxide to Carbon
Monoxide&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines a novel photochemical route
for the transformation of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide and oxygen. The
primary research goals are (1) to discover perovskite-type oxides with a large
change in oxygen content (delta) for small changes in temperature in a low
temperature range (T=350 to 400 deg. C), (2) to design and demonstrate
monometallic silver and bimetallic silver-based particles that have peak
plasmonic absorption wavelengths across the visible light spectrum resulting in
a maximum temperature increase, (3) to identify the catalytic consequences of
the composite materials (Ag-based phase supported on the perovskite-type oxides)
on the molecular processes associated with carbon dioxide conversion and oxygen
generation, and (4) to validate the predicted behaviors of prepared materials in
photo-induced temperature swing separation and conversion of carbon dioxide to
carbon monoxide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the field of
carbon management as well as topics of optical properties of metal
nanoparticles, design of mixed metal oxides, and synergy between these two sets
of materials. The project will merge the experimental and computational aspects
in both the research and in the student training. Carbon dioxide emissions are
an imminent and global problem and the proposed effort could significantly
impact the status quo. The project will also contribute to the focus on
sustainability and energy research and teaching at USF through a multi-pronged
endeavor of activities with an emphasis on building students with both
experimental and computational experiences and skills.