* 1335673
* Collaborative Research: Sunlight Inactivation Mechanisms of Pathogenic Bacteria in Natural Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2016
* Kara Nelson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 189,491.00

CBET 1334359/1335673&lt;br/&gt;Alexandria Boehm/Kara Nelson&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University/University of California-Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fecal
indicator bacteria (FIB), such as Enterococcus and Escherichia coli, are used to
assess beach water quality and serve as proxies for human pathogens. FIB
concentrations in natural waters vary diurnally with concentrations and are
often below assay detection limits in mid-afternoon and orders of magnitude
higher at night, which has several implications. First, the time the sample is
collected dramatically impacts the measured concentration, which could make the
difference between compliance and noncompliance with water quality standards.
Second, it is not known whether the concentrations of actual pathogens, and thus
associated health risk, also experience such fluctuations. Therefore, it is
critical to obtain information on the processes that control the diurnal
fluctuations for FIB and human pathogens of concern. Sunlight is believed to be
the major cause of the diurnal fluctuations in FIB. However, the dominant
mechanisms through which sunlight damages microorganisms are not well
understood. At least three mechanisms have been described: endogenous direct
damage to cellular components by ultraviolet wavelengths, and indirect
endogenous and exogenous photoinactivation caused by reactive species generated
inside and outside the cell, respectively, when photons are absorbed by
sensitizer molecules. Research to date has primarily focused on FIB
photoinactivation and has generally been highly empirical and site-specific so
that it is not possible to generalize to predict sunlight inactivation rates in
other environmental contexts or for other organisms. Additionally, there is a
striking lack of data on the photoinactivation of bacterial pathogens. The
objectives of this project are to characterize the susceptibility of FIB and a
suite of pathogenic bacteria to endogenous and exogenous photoinactivation and
develop a quantitative model for photoinactivation. Laboratory experiments will
be used to develop a mechanistic understanding of processes that control
inactivation, and to understand the nature of observed differences between
organisms. Field and laboratory data will be incorporated into a model to
predict inactivation rates, and the model will be tested using a microcosm
study. The model will use environmental parameters as inputs to estimate the
inactivation of bacteria by sunlight and will be useful for estimating
inactivation rates for a wide range of organisms and waters without the need for
site- and organism- specific studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance knowledge in several ways. The research will yield essential insights
into the fate of FIB and bacterial pathogens in the environment, a high priority
research need to protect human health and improve coastal water quality. The
work will have immediate implications for the management of recreational water
for the protection of human health. The improved understanding of sunlight-
mediated inactivation mechanisms and the new modeling approach will also be
directly useful for engineered and natural systems in which sunlight plays a
major role in disinfection, including solar disinfection of drinking water
(SODIS) and wastewater treatment in ponds and wetlands. The results from the
proposed work will be shared with policy makers and beach managers and will
result in the improved protection of human health. The investigators will
integrate the results into their classroom instruction. Graduate and
undergraduate students will participate in the research. The investigators will
develop new curriculum on the impact of sunlight on the treatment of stormwater
runoff for high school students and a module on water and environmental
engineering for elementary school students.