* 1335995
* Modeling of the Subgrid-scale Pressure-Strain-Rate Correlation in the Atmospheric Surface Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Chenning Tong, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 331,339.00

The research focuses on subgrid-scale modeling in large-eddy simulation (LES) of
the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL). LES has become an effective research tool
for the ABL and probably the most important simulation method for it. However,
in the surface layer LES suffers from inherent under-resolution and poor
subgrid-scale (SGS) model performance. This study will address this problem
through analysis of field measurement data, modeling, and numerical simulations
to improve SGS model performance.

Issues in SGS modeling based on the SGS stress and flux transport equations will
be analyzed. In particular, the focus will be put on modeling of the SGS
pressure-strain-rate correlation, which is the main challenge in this modeling
approach. Recent Advection Horizontal Array Turbulence Study (AHATS) field
program has revealed new behavior of this variable as the cause of anisotropy in
the SGS stress in the convective surface layer, contradicting the widely
accepted understanding of its role of return to isotropy. With this knowledge,
the physics of the SGS pressure-strain-rate correlation will further be
investigated, and new transport equation models will be developed.

Intellectual Merit: The research will address the critical issue of modeling the
SGS pressure-strain-rate correlation in SGS stress transport equation-based SGS
modeling for LES of the ABL. It is expected to significantly advance the
understanding of the dynamics of the SGS stress and temperature flux. Due to the
central role of the SGS pressure-strain-rate correlation in the SGS stress
dynamics, new understanding of the physics of this correlation will have a
profound impact on future SGS modeling. The model development activities will be
a first step towards incorporating the new SGS physics into SGS models.

Broader Impacts: The research has broader impacts in several areas. It will
provide education and research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. Improved prediction of the surface layer turbulence and the ABL in
general will be of importance to developing predictive models for atmospheric
dispersion and diffusion, weather forecasting, atmospheric chemistry, wind
energy, and land-atmosphere exchange. The modeling approach will also be
important for modeling boundary layers with strong pressure gradient (e.g.,
curved boundary layers) in the ABL and in engineering flows. Advances in these
areas will benefit the environment and society.