* 1335803
* Conference on Massive Energy Storage for the Broader Use of Renewable Energy Sources, June 23-26, 2013, Newport Beach, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* Sudhakar Neti, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

PI: Nguyen, Trung V. Proposal Number: 1335803 Institution: University of Kansas
Center for Research Inc Title: Conference on Massive Energy Storage for the
Broader Use of Renewable Energy Sources

Renewable energy sources, like wind and solar, could supply a significant amount
of electrical energy, but integration of these sources into the electrical grid
system poses major challenges due to their intermittent nature and unpredictable
availability. Current technologies permit the storage of energy in relatively
small quantities (~ 100 to 200 kWh) that may be sufficient for some
transportation and residential applications. The storage needs for renewable
energy sources as well as the energy storage needs associated with smart grid
applications are likely to be much larger in magnitude (~ 20 to 1,000 MWh).

The solutions that are likely to succeed will necessarily be inter-disciplinary
and this conference will be a catalytic venue for such cross-pollination of
ideas. The proposed conference topics include most of the potential technologies
currently under consideration for energy storage -- and these include storage in
the form compressed and liquefied gases, electrochemical storage systems, and/or
other phase changes in media. This conference deals with energy storage in
massive quantities that will broaden the use of renewable energies. Of specific
interest are the physics, chemistry, thermodynamics and engineering of the
methods and the processes in which such storage can be achieved in an economical
manner particularly in the face of worldwide increase in the cost of materials.
Thermal energy stored at higher temperatures will help improve the
thermodynamics of Rankine and Brayton cycle applications. Some of the
technologies are now mature enough to look into the engineering aspects of the
implementation that deserve scrutiny.

This represents an urgent societal technical need that is likely to gain more
prominence as sustainability and grid management become ever more important. The
U.S. and other governments are starting to pay more attention to the issues on
hand and the topics of this conference are likely to gather more attention as
industry and governments target energy efficiency and environmental impact with
more vigor. This conference will be unique since it brings the focus necessary
on massive electrical energy storage (EES) as well as thermal energy storage
(TES). Funding from NSF will be used to support some of the keynote and invited
speakers and graduate students from academic institutions.