* 1335711
* Reversible photohydration in diene and triene steroids: A mechanism for unexpected persistence of unique, biologically active steroidal contaminants?
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* David Cwiertny, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 394,746.00

CBET 1335711&lt;br/&gt;David Cwiertny&lt;br/&gt;University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trenbolone acetate (TBA) is a high-value anabolic
growth promoter used extensively in animal agriculture, yet its metabolites are
potent endocrine disrupting compounds in aquatic organisms. Recently, the rapid
phototransformation of TBA metabolites, long thought to mitigate their
environmental risk, was found to be reversible in surface waters at ambient
conditions. This unprecedented behavior results in unique diurnal cycling and
substantial regeneration of TBA metabolites at rates that are temperature and pH
dependent, implying unrecognized persistence for these emerging contaminants in
surface waters. Notably, reversible photohydration also appears to occur for
structurally analogous compounds, including some human pharmaceuticals,
suggesting that dienone and trienone steroids may represent a new class of
environmental contaminants whose behavior confounds nearly all current
predictive fate models and regulatory ecosystem risk assessment paradigms.
Motivated by these findings, this project represents a comprehensive mechanistic
investigation of dienone and trienone steroid phototransformation. The PIs
hypothesize that the occurrence, fate, transport and ecological risks of these
steroids cannot be accurately assessed without evaluating photoproduct formation
and long-term stability. Focusing efforts primarily on TBA metabolites due to
their widespread use and capability for endocrine disruption, this study will
(i) characterize TBA metabolite phototransformation products; (ii) determine
environmental factors promoting the formation of metastable products capable of
reversion to parent structures or related steroidal analogs; (iii) explore
whether reversible photohydration is generalizable to other dienone and trienone
steroids and pharmaceuticals; and (iv) assess quantitatively conservation of
bioactivity for structurally similar steroidal transformation products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a class, dienone and trienone steroids are among the
most potent used therapeutically as pharmaceuticals or illicitly as performance
enhancing agents. Included in this compound class are trenbolone acetate, an
anabolic steroid used as a growth promoter for the overwhelming majority of beef
cattle produced in the United States, and dienogest, a progestin used as an oral
contraceptive that is 10 times as potent as levonorgestrel (i.e., Plan B). While
these compounds readily degrade in sunlight, the products of this photoreaction
are unstable and ultimately decompose or revert into the bioactive steroid from
which they were generated. Thus, this project will establish dienone and
trienone steroids as a new class of environmental contaminants whose
transformations do not necessarily reduce threats to ecosystem health, thereby
challenging fundamental paradigms by which we as a community assess and control
the risk posed by contaminants. Collectively, outcomes of this project will
facilitate the improved assessment of the occurrence, fate, transport, and
modeling of dienone and trienone steroids in natural systems, and provide
insights for optimization of engineered treatment systems designed to protect
vulnerable aquatic ecosystems by sequestering or transforming this emerging
contaminant class.