* 1335878
* Mixing of Biofuels in Surface Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Aline Cotel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 329,985.00

CBET 1335878 &lt;br/&gt;Aline Cotel&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ethanol/gasoline blends are being promoted as "clean
energy" alternatives and are viewed by many policymakers as key to reducing
reliance on foreign oil and lowering emissions of greenhouse gases, thereby
satisfying both the energy security and environmental agendas of the U.S.
However, ethanol-based biofuels can pose a risk to the aquatic environment, as
large fish kills attributable to ethanol spills have already been documented.
Due to its complete miscibility in water, ethanol may become mixed in the water
body in high concentrations. The physics of this mixing process are complex and
appear to be influenced by the production of heat and variations in interfacial
tension and viscosity. This research will elucidate the physics of mixing of
biofuels in surface water by conducting experiments to measure the rate of
mixing and entrainment in a multiphase system using DPIT (digital particle image
thermometry) and DPIV (digital particle image velocimetry). The goal is develop
a correlation between the degree of mixing and the relevant nondimensional
parameters. The high concentrations of ethanol may solubilize hazardous
compounds such as benzene from gasoline into the water column. Due to the high
organic compound loading in the water column, pesticides historically present in
sediment may desorb and be re-suspended in the water column. This study will
evaluate the enhancement of desorption of organochlorine pesticides from
sediment that may occur in the presence of ethanol and gasoline mixtures due to
cosolvency effects as well as due to possible changes in the structure in
sediment organic matter. The goal is to quantify the degree of desorption as a
function of the composition of the mixtures of water, ethanol and gasoline, and
the properties of the sediment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort to promote
ethanol/gasoline blends as an alternative fuel, potentially major negative
impacts on the environment have been overlooked. The assumption is the
environmental impact of biofuels on surface water is negligible as "ethanol is
biodegradable." Yet, large fish kills attributable to ethanol spills have
already been documented. The models used for predicting concentrations of
ethanol in rivers do not reflect the actual process of mixing. This research
will examine the physics of mixing of ethanol/gasoline blends in water to help
develop more accurate methods for predicting ethanol concentrations in rivers.
Due to their solubility in ethanol, hazardous compounds present in gasoline may
be solubilized in higher concentrations in a river. With a high organic
contaminant concentration in the water column, pesticides historically present
in sediment may desorb and be re-suspended, thus increasing their mobility. The
information provided by this study will aid in the determination of the
magnitude of the environmental risk posed by spills of ethanol/gasoline blends
in surface waters.