* 1335456
* Unsaturated Hydraulic Characterization of Expansive Clays
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Jorge Zornberg, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 341,259.00

The overall objective of this research is to experimentally determine the
unsaturated hydraulic properties of expansive clays while, at the same time,
gain insight into the relationships between these hydraulic characteristics and
the magnitude of swelling. Accounting for the soil volumetric strains as an
additional variable within the framework of unsaturated hydraulic
characteristics adds complexity to the already intricate, non-linear
relationships representing the response of volumetric water content and
hydraulic conductivity as a function of the soil matric suction. This
investigation will use centrifuge technology to allow measurement of the
unsaturated hydraulic characteristics and associated volumetric changes in
expansive clays. Specifically, centrifuge testing will be used for the
continuous and expeditious measurement of the changing soil moisture content,
suction, hydraulic conductivity and void ratio that occur during unsaturated
flow. This study will allow: (i) gaining insight into the relationships between
unsaturated hydraulic properties and volume changes in highly plastic clays,
(ii) expeditiously determining the hydraulic properties of highly plastic clays,
(iii) understanding the boundary conditions and stresses in clay specimens
subjected to open flow centrifugation, (iv) quantifying the effect of normal
stress, initial moisture content, initial void ratio, soil fabric and imposed
inflow rate on the magnitude and rate of swelling, and (v) developing models
that are suitable to represent the soil water retention curve, the hydraulic
conductivity function, and the swell-stress relationship of expansive
clays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of conceptual and experimental complexities,
the characterization of unsaturated hydraulic properties of expansive clays has
remained largely unexplored. Yet, significant benefits will result from gaining
insight into the variables governing the unsaturated flow in expansive clays, as
the annual cost of damages in the US induced by moisture fluctuations in
expansive soils has been reported to exceed that caused by floods, hurricanes,
earthquakes and tornadoes combined. The broader impacts resulting from the
proposed activity include: (i) using centrifuge testing not only for
geotechnical modeling but also for hydraulic characterization of expansive
clays, (ii) increasing community awareness of the problems associated with the
presence of expansive clays, (iii) transferring of fundamental findings from
this research into practical recommendations, and (iv) developing educational
modules that are useful to integrate research into geotechnical instruction as
well as to introduce geo-hazards concepts into outreach minority programs.