* 1335772
* MRI: Acquisition of Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine to establish high-throughput sequencing capability for ecological and environmental biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Scott Baird, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2016
* USD 123,300.00

An award is made to Wright State University to establish a next generation
sequencing (NGS) capability at Wright State University based on the Ion Torrent
Personal Genome Machine (PGM). Ion Torrent PGM Sequencer is a third-generation
sequencer that is based on the use of a massively parallel array of proprietary
semiconductor sensors to perform direct real-time measurements of the hydrogen
ions produced during DNA replication. The unique combination of fluidics,
micromachining, and semiconductor technology enables the direct translation of
genetic information (DNA) to digital information (DNA sequence), rapidly
generating large quantities of high quality data at low costs. An unprecedented
level of genetic information will thus be acquired in each experiment, which
permits molecular studies in the areas of molecular ecology and genome
investigation, where large amounts of nucleotide sequence data are required for
a comprehensive analysis. Acquisition of this instrumentation will have an
immediate and profound impact on the research at Wright State University. A
variety of specific projects will be enabled through the establishment of the
WSU NGS instrumentation that include microbial community structure
determination, genome typing and sequencing, metagenomics, and gene
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project focus on
the integration of research, education, and student diversity. Directly, the
acquisition of the requested equipment will greatly enhance the research
infrastructure at Wright State University and will improve the quality of
scientific research carried out at the university. NGS instrumentation will
allow faculty to pursue research programs not possible with current resources,
and will foster collaborative and interdisciplinary research efforts among
participating faculty in the biological and biocomputational fields.
Establishment of the NGS instrumentation at Wright State will also help the
university expand its current graduate and undergraduate research and training
programs and will help attract talented students to the university to
participate in cutting edge research. NGS techniques will be incorporated into
several graduate and undergraduate courses that will allow students to learn
about high-throughput sequencing and get hands-on experience with this
technology. New WSU NGS instrumentation will similarly allow many of the
students with disabilities and those underrepresented in science, who are
interested in obtaining research experience, to be trained in state-of-the-art
techniques through several existing programs. The instrumentation will promote
science to minorities and other underrepresented groups, and will make these
students more competitive on the job market.