* 1335821
* Collaborative Research: Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics in Semiconductor Nanocrystal Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Christopher Murray, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 230,000.00

PI: Baxter, Jason / Murray, Christopher&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1333649 /
1335821&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Drexel University / University of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics
in Semiconductor Nanocrystal Solar Cells&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Close-packed
arrays of semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs), or quantum dots, are ideal systems
for fundamental investigations of photo-induced charge and energy transfer in
interacting quantum-confined materials. The materials, diameters, and
arrangement of the NCs can be used to tune the inter-NC coupling to exploit both
the properties of the individual NCs and the long-range effects of the solid.
The emergent optical, electronic, and thermal properties of NC superlattices may
lead to transformational improvements in applications including photovoltaics,
photonics, and thermoelectrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad objectives of
this proposal are (1) to understand ultrafast charge carrier generation,
separation, recombination, and transport phenomena in semiconductor nanocrystal
superlattices, and (2) to control these fundamental photophysical processes to
improve solar cell performance. Specifically, we will investigate films of CdSe,
CdTe, and Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) NCs. CdSe and CdTe NCs are excellent model systems
because their synthesis and optical properties are well-understood, enabling
fundamental ultrafast studies of carrier dynamics in glassy arrays and ordered
superlattices of a single monodisperse NC species, as well as binary NC
superlattices. CZTS NCs provide an exciting new direction for high efficiency
photovoltaics made from non-toxic, earth-abundant elements. The PIs will refine
the synthesis of monodisperse CZTS NCs to enable meaningful ultrafast
spectroscopic characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach centers on
time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy (TRTS) and femtosecond visible/infrared
transient absorption (TA) to probe intraband and interband transitions,
respectively. THz spectroscopy is an ideal, non-contact probe of electronic
materials because the THz frequency regime (0.1 - 3 THz) brackets typical
carrier scattering rates in semiconductors. THz spectroscopy is unique in its
abilities to distinguish between excitons and free carriers and to measure their
dynamics on sub-picosecond to nanosecond time scales, providing an excellent
complement to our steady-state field effect transistor (FET) measurements. Pump-
probe TRTS and TA are ideal techniques to investigate the dynamics of
interfacial charge transfer, recombination, and inter-NC transport of
photoexcited carriers on their natural time and energy
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will advance our understanding of the
physical phenomena that govern ultrafast exciton and free carrier dynamics in
NCs and NC superlattices. Specific studies will include: (1) Determining
mechanisms of charge transport in NC superlattices, e.g. by extended states or
by activated hopping; (2) Measuring dynamics of inter-NC coupling, interfacial
charge transfer, and long-range charge transport in superlattices of a single
monodisperse NC species; (3) Determining the dependence of dynamics and
transport mechanisms on NC size, capping ligand, inter-NC spacing, and long
range order; (4) Understanding charge separation and transport in binary NC
superlattices; and (5) Incorporating good candidate materials into solar cells
to demonstrate improvements in efficiency that result from carefully designed NC
architectures. This work will address the challenge of maintaining quantum-
confined NC photophysics while also enabling long range charge transport
necessary for devices. PI Baxter?s expertise in ultrafast spectroscopy and solar
cells and PI Murray?s expertise in synthesis of NCs and superlattices make the
team well-equipped to carry out this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
understanding of fundamental photophysical processes such as interfacial charge
transfer, recombination, and inter-NC transport in NC superlattices developed
here can be applied to create high-efficiency NC solar cells. Availability of
efficient, low-cost, clean, and sustainable solar cells made from earth-
abundant, non-toxic materials would transform the US energy portfolio. This
project will result in the education and training of two Ph.D. students and
multiple undergraduates. Additionally, PI Baxter is developing new courses on
"Fundamentals of Solar Cells" and lab-based "Nanomanufacturing for Energy
Applications" for students from both universities. Outreach will extend to K-12
students by the PIs? continued participation in NanoDay@Penn, Philly Materials
Day at Drexel, and mentoring local high school teachers through NSF RET and
university programs. These programs are particularly beneficial for
underrepresented groups since they target students and teachers from the School
District of Philadelphia, whose student body is over 80% minorities.