* 1335197
* Subsurface warming as a trigger for Heinrich events
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Brian Haley, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2017
* USD 458,901.00

Few discoveries have galvanized the interest of the paleoclimate community more
than Heinrich events, which represent the episodic discharge of icebergs from
the Hudson Strait Ice Stream of the Laurentide Ice Sheet to the North Atlantic
Ocean during late-Pleistocene glaciations. Although commonly attributed to
internal ice-sheet instabilities, their occurrence at the culmination of a large
reduction in the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) suggests a
possible trigger by climate. Models suggest that ocean responses to an AMOC
reduction might trigger Heinrich events through warming of intermediate-depth
(subsurface) waters, destabilizing grounding lines and ice shelves with
attendant ice-stream surging. Evidence for subsurface warming remains widely
debated, however, with an alternative hypothesis involving brine formation to
explain geochemical signals recorded at intermediate water depths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a team of geologists, paleoceanographers,
and geochemists from Oregon State University will evaluate the hypothesis that
Heinrich events were triggered by subsurface warming following a strong
reduction in the AMOC. Using a variety or geochemical proxies measured on
benthic foraminifera from several intermediate-depth sites in the western and
central subpolar North Atlantic, they will establish the timing and amplitude of
warming relative to Heinrich events, with particular emphasis on Heinrich event
1. The outcome of this study will be resolution of the otherwise enigmatic
climatic context of Heinrich events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work also
extends beyond an explanation of the geologic record by providing a
demonstration of the potential for a future response of land ice to changing
ocean circulation and temperature, an issue of great concern in projections of
future sea-level rise. This work thus has direct societal relevance by
developing an improved understanding of the response of ice sheets to current
and possible future changes in ocean circulation and temperature, which are
among the greatest causes for concern in projections of land-ice loss and
consequent sea-level rise. This project will also provide a unique environment
for mentoring and training young scientists. The proposal will train a Ph.D.
student and recruit an undergraduate student from an underrepresented group
through the Increasing Diversity in Earth Science program.