* 1335155
* Local Algorithms for Random Networks: Power, Limitations and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* David Gamarnik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop systematic understanding of
the performance and limitations of local algorithms for combinatorial
optimization problems on random networks. The scale of modern technological,
communication and social networks renders many computational tools and concepts
too impractical to meet the contemporary computational speeds. In light of this
challenge, the research on network computational models has recently focused on
local algorithms paradigm. One of the most common generative models for real
life networks is the random graph model. Thus the research focuses on the
performance and limitations of local algorithms for random graphs. A particular
focus is on studying the so-called solution space geometry of combinatorial
problems on random graphs and its implications for the design and analysis of
local algorithms. It is now known that certain optimization problems undergo a
phase transition property, dubbed shattering, described as splitting of the
space of feasible solutions into many disconnected components. Many attempts to
construct algorithms which perform beyond this phase transition point did not
succeed. Thus the shattering property is conjectured to be the main "culprit"
for the non-existence of local algorithms beyond the phase transition point. A
recent work of the PI establishes the non-existence of local algorithms for some
optimization problems beyond this phase transition point, thus establishing for
the first time the direct link between the shattering phase transition property
and the performance of algorithms. The research focuses on the systematic study
of this fascinating link between the phase transition property and the design of
algorithms. If successful, the results of this research will provide a deep
connection between the performance and algorithmic complexity of local
algorithms and structural properties of random networks. The research agenda is
truly interdisciplinary, lying at the crossroads of several fields. The
activities draw on tools from a variety of disciplines, including the theory of
algorithms, combinatorics and graph theory, applied probability and statistical
physics, thus bringing together ideas from a diverse set of communities. The
results of this research will be disseminated in top journals and conferences in
the respective fields. Research seminars will be conducted to introduce students
to the topic of algorithms and computations on networks.