* 1335024
* Vibration-based Damage Detection of Complex Structures with Engineering Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Weidong Zhu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 276,152.00

The objective of this research is to develop new vibration-based damage
detection methods for complex structures and apply them to engineering systems
such as the newly developed space frame wind turbine towers, wind turbine
blades, stay cables, and periodic cellular materials. A robust model-based
method that uses minimum vibration measurements to detect the locations and
extent of damage in structures with different types of joints, including bolted,
welded, and riveted joints and interference pins, and in tensioned wire ropes,
will be developed. New methods will be developed to model various types of
joints and tensioned wire ropes. A damage-sensitive vibration shape (VS)-based
method will be developed to detect damage in wind turbine blades using a 3D
scanning laser vibrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring the health of complex
structures on a regular basis can provide a sustaining status assessment of
structures and avoid their unexpected failure. The model- and VS-based damage
detection methods can be used to monitor the health of safety-critical
structures such as wind turbine towers and blades, stay cables, and airframes.
Various aspects of the research will be adapted for educational purposes to
students at all levels, from high school students to Ph.D. students. Some finite
element modeling, dynamic testing, and damage detection results will be
demonstrated to underserved high school students in a summer educational program
to spark their interest in science and engineering. Various symposia on
modeling, dynamic testing, and damage detection will be organized to broaden the
impact of the research to the scientific community, and to bring together
researchers from different scientific societies.