* 1335191
* Using Foraminiferal Nd Isotope Records to Test the Paradigm for Deglacial Atlantic Deepwater Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Delia Oppo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2016
* USD 399,967.00

Deepwater export from the northern North Atlantic to the ocean interior is
widely believed to have decreased significantly during cold events of the last
deglaciation (Heinrich Event 1 and the Younger Dryas). Motivated by recent
debate on the topic, the proposed work will produce a novel reconstruction of
Atlantic deglacial circulation based on well-dated records of neodymium isotope
composition spanning the last ~25,000 years. These records will be developed
from analyses of planktonic foraminifera from three depth transects in the
western Atlantic (north, tropical, south). In combination with benthic oxygen
and carbon isotope measurements, the neodymium isotope records will be used to
1) constrain potential end-member changes, 2) determine water mass variability
in the upper, mid-depth, and deep Atlantic, and 3) evaluate the current paradigm
of deglacial deepwater variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will advance
the understanding of ocean circulation dynamics related to abrupt climate
change. The project will support cross-disciplinary collaboration between a
senior scientist and an early-career investigator at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution. Undergraduate and high school students will be trained in
laboratory techniques. In addition, ten high school students from diverse
backgrounds will be engaged through a one-week internship facilitated by the PI
in collaboration with a local high school teacher.