* 1335148
* Gravity Currents and Related Phenomena: A Circulation-Based Modeling Framework
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Eckart Meiburg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 269,999.00

Meiburg, Eckart &lt;br/&gt;1335148 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to develop
analytical models that predict the front velocity of gravity currents date
&lt;br/&gt;back over several decades. The most significant of the prior models
impose the conservation of mass and streamwise momentum in order to describe the
current. However, in doing so they introduce an additional unknown in the form
of the pressure jump across the gravity current front, so that an additional
equation is required to obtain a closed system and an empirical energy argument
needs to be invoked. Hence, all of them contain a certain degree of
arbitrariness. Interestingly, high-resolution Navier-Stokes simulations by
various authors show that the dynamics of gravity currents are determined by the
conservation of mass and momentum alone, so that one should not be free to
impose an additional energy constraint. Hence, a physically correct analytical
gravity current model also should be based on the conservation of mass and
momentum alone, and it should not invoke an energy argument. Rececently, the
PI?s group showed that it is indeed possible to develop such a model, based on
the vorticity formulation of the momentum conservation equation. In this
approach, the pressure variable does not appear, so that it avoids the need for
a closure assumption based on an empirical energy argument.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predictions by the new model are shown to be in excellent
agreement with numerical simulation&lt;br/&gt;results, much closer than the
earlier models. These comparisons furthermore demonstrate that all of the
earlier models violate the conservation of vertical momentum. The proposed
research will use this novel concept of circulation-based modeling to
investigate a wide range of gravity-driven flows with interfaces and free
surfaces. Specifically, it will address such flows as internal bores,
intrusions, stratified flows over obstacles, exchange flows over sills and
particle-driven currents. Furthermore, high-&lt;br/&gt;resolution DNS
simulations will be conducted in order to assess the range of validity of these
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop a fundamentally new class of circulation-based models for
a wide range of stratified flows. These models will be transformative in that
they avoid the violation of vertical momentum inherent in existing models, along
with their arbitrariness due to empirical, energy-based closure assumptions.
This is accomplished by employing the vorticity form of the momentum
conservation equation, thus eliminating the need for empirical closure
assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop conceptually new, more accurate models for a broad class
of stratified flows driven by gravity. Such models serve as basis for describing
a wide range of atmospheric and oceanic phenomena from sea breezes and
thunderstorm outflows to powder snow avalanches and turbidity currents. In
addition, they are employed in numerous technical applications involving two-
phase flows. On the educational side, the proposed research project will educate
and train graduate, undergraduate and high school students in the concepts of
single-phase and two-phase flow modeling, large-scale numerical simulations,
scientific computing, parallel computer architectures and flow visualization.