* 1335890
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Education at Hope College.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Leah Chase, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 427,450.00

An award is made to Hope College for the purchase of a Nikon A1 laser scanning
confocal microscope system that will provide the cornerstone for the renovated
microscopy facility and transform a wide range of research projects in the
departments of biology, chemistry and geological and environmental sciences.
Briefly, research projects include regulation of stem cells during development
using the well-characterized model organisms Caenorhabditis elegans (nematode)
and Danio rerio (zebrafish), the study of membrane trafficking molecules in
neurons, 3D surface imaging of skeletal crystal orientation in sea urchin
spines, effects of reproductive hormone secretion on the function of neurons,
the role of proteins involved in cell growth and angiogenesis, examining
interactions with single molecule chemistry, and evolutionary biology studying
DNA binding proteins using the parasite, Giardia lamblia. A significant impact
with the acquisition of a confocal microscope is that investigators will be able
to expand their abilities to collect data at a higher level of optical quality,
thus enabling them to perform more complex experiments, especially using live
samples, in which time course and molecular localization studies are critical.
Furthermore, use of the confocal microscope will allow investigators to maintain
the expectations of their respective fields in data publishing standards, thus,
allowing them to be more competitive for external research funding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquiring a confocal microscope will transform the Hope
College community and beyond in two major ways. The first major impact is the
large number of undergraduate researchers that will receive training on the
confocal microscope, which includes both Hope College students and non-Hope
undergraduates accepted for the Summer Hope Academic Research Program.
Additionally, the summer research programs include high school students and
teachers accepted into the Research Experience Across Cultures at Hope, which
focuses on recruiting students from under-represented populations in the
sciences. The result of actively engaging undergraduate and high school
researchers at Hope College for laboratory training using cutting edge
technology, such as confocal microscopy, is that many of these students go on to
pursue a PhD in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM). The second major impact is that the investigators involved in these
projects routinely present their research to the general public. By collecting
data using cutting edge technology, they can present more compelling projects to
the public with the goals of: 1) engaging more people in the scientific process,
2) demonstrating the relevance of the research projects, ranging in topics from
cellular function to environmental impacts on local ecology and 3) recruiting
talented students into the STEM fields as a career.