* 1335481
* Thermomechanical and Powder Sintering Aspects in Electron Beam Additive Manufacturing - Applications to Overhang Support Designs
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Kevin Chou, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2017
* USD 144,983.00

The goal of this research is to renovate the support structure designs for part
overhang geometries in powder-bed Electron Beam Additive Manufacturing (EBAM).
It is hypothesized that the poor thermal conductivity of sintered powders is the
root cause of part defects such as warping associated with part overhang (or
similar) geometries. Hence, the required function of support structures is not
from the weight-carrying standpoint; rather, the complex thermal and mechanical
phenomena of the EBAM process, which lead to residual stresses and distortions,
should be studied for functional support designs. Specifically, this research
will characterize sintered powder porosity and its effects on thermal
properties, develop finite element thermomechanical simulations incorporating
porosity-dependent thermal properties for temperature and stress predictions in
EBAM, evaluate overhang geometry effects on the part thermomechanical behaviors
in EBAM and correlate with warping severity, and investigate different support
patterns to evaluate the effectiveness of a designed
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will enhance the
performance and efficient usage of the EBAM technology through improved and
effective support structures. Thus, the project will directly benefit the users
of metal Additive Manufacturing (AM) technologies, strengthening the global
competitiveness of the nation's industry. Collaborating with one of primary EBAM
users, Marshall Space Flight Center, the research team may further apply
findings to tackle pragmatic problems that exist in AM technologies. Moreover,
new process understanding from this research will benefit studies on other
powder-based AM processes such as selective laser sintering. In addition,
working with the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences, the research team
will disseminate the project results timely and widely to the AM industry.
Further societal impacts of this research include reviving high school students'
interest in engineering and technology, particularly, from underrepresented
groups.