* 1335766
* Squeezing Motion of Capsules and Erythrocytes in Microfluidic Channels and Vascular Capillaries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Panagiotis Dimitrakopoulos, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 07/31/2018
* USD 308,519.00

1335766&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dimitrakopoulos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The squeezing motion
of capsules and erythrocytes in narrow microfluidic channels and vascular
capillaries has wide applications in many biomedical and physiological processes
including targeted drug delivery, cell sorting and characterization lab-on-a-
chip devices, hemopathology, and oxygen delivery to body?s tissues via the
capillary network. However, there is limited understanding of the involved
lubrication physics of membrane interfaces with the confined solid walls for the
fully three-dimensional dynamics. To elucidate the realistic motion of capsules
and erythrocytes in narrow solid vessels, the proposal plans to investigate: (a)
the squeezing motion in narrow square and rectangular microchannels with various
configurations, and (b) the squeezing motion of capsules and erythrocytes in
vascular capillaries with a diameter of 3-8 microns. Both healthy cells and
erythrocytes affected by hereditary elliptocytosis will be considered. The
computational study of these challenging systems will be facilitated via the
non-stiff Membrane Spectral Boundary Element algorithms developed by the PI and
his research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has the potential
to make a significant contribution in the physical understanding of the
realistic motion of capsules and erythrocytes in microfluidic channels and
vascular capillaries, and thus elucidate the targeted drug delivery, the
resistance of blood flow and the cell deformation which affect the erythrocytes?
aging and lifetime. These findings can be used to improve lab-on-a-chip devices
and the control of hereditary elliptocytosis, and thus enhance public health.
The results of the proposal will be integrated into the education program of the
University of Maryland and become generally known via scientific meetings,
journal publications and the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by Mathematical Biology of the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the BioMaPS
fundings from the Chemical, Biological, Environmental, and Transport Division in
Engineering and the Division of Mathematical Ssciences.