* 1335217
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Construction of Educational Exceptionalities
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2016
* Rachel Fish, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 08/31/2016
* USD 12,000.00

SES-1335217 Adam Gamoran Rachel E. Fish University of Wisconsin-Madiso

U.S. school data has revealed extreme racial and ethnic inequality in
exceptionalities, with students of color up to three times more likely to be
identified with disabilities as their white peers, and white students up to
three times more likely to be identified as gifted as their peers of color.
Presumably, parents and teachers intend to support students' academic and social
outcomes when they intervene by referring students to be tested for
exceptionalities. How do these benevolent micro-level interactions connect to
macro-level racial and ethnic inequalities? Existing research explains racial
and ethnic disproportionality in special and gifted education by arguing either
1) that schools make biased decisions or 2) that co-factors, such as poverty,
explain racial and ethnic differences. This literature is limited by its
treatment of exceptionality as a natural category. This research treats
exceptionality as a social construction, and the meaning of this construct
changes with there are with a student's race and ethnicity. The major research
question is how do schools shape this construction of exceptionalities based on
race and ethnicity? To address this question, the research uses a mixed-methods
approach to 1) examine school-level variation in the effects of students' race
and ethnicity on teachers' decisions to refer students to special education
through an experimental audit design; and 2) identify the mechanisms creating
the construction of exceptionality through observations and interviews with
teachers and parents. The central hypothesis of the study is that under
sufficient racial and ethnic diversity, exceptionalities are constructed in ways
that reproduce racial and ethnic inequalities. Broader Impacts

This project has clear implications for policy and practice, as scholars,
policy-makers, and practitioners have demonstrated the need for further
understanding of the causes of disproportionality in special education and
gifted services. Federal and state law has prioritized the documentation and
amelioration of racial ethnic inequality in education, yet we do not yet
understand why the disproportionality exists. Research findings will illuminate
the role of school context, with potential implications for school desegregation
policy, teacher training, and exceptionality identification processes.