* 1335988
* MRI:  Acquisition of PS-3 Automated Peptide Synthesizer to Enhance Research and Training at Texas A&amp;M International University
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Anju Gupta, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 41,627.00

1335988&lt;br/&gt;Gupta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI project proposal requests
funds for an automated PS3 peptide synthesizer system to&lt;br/&gt;facilitate
the expansion of a peptide chemistry laboratory at Texas A&amp;M International
University&lt;br/&gt;(TAMIU), a Hispanic serving institution in South Texas. To
foster the continued expansion&lt;br/&gt;of research at TAMIU and to better
provide educational/research opportunities for their students,&lt;br/&gt;this
proposal requests funding for equipment that will: 1) contribute to the limited
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the mechanism by which cell penetrating peptides
(CPPs) translocate cell membranes; 2)&lt;br/&gt;increase knowledge of which key
spider silk peptides are associated with specific
mechanical&lt;br/&gt;properties; 3) elucidate the mechanisms of carbohydrates
receptors responsible for malignant&lt;br/&gt;behavior of cancerous cells 4)
provide training and access a research methodology to a large&lt;br/&gt;number
of predominantly Hispanic students, who are historically underrepresented in
math and&lt;br/&gt;science professions; 5) augment the education experience of
several existing biology courses&lt;br/&gt;and enable the creation of an
additional elective chemistry course on polymers; 6) foster&lt;br/&gt;intramural
and extramural collaborations, and 7) increase TAMIU?s competitiveness for
extramural&lt;br/&gt;research funding and publications.