* 1335014
* Process Modeling and Enhancements of Laser-Induced Plasma Micro-Machining (LIP-MM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Kornel Ehmann, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,999.00

The focus of this research is to gain deeper insight into the physics of the new
process of Laser Induced Plasma Micromachining, which promises better and faster
micro-feature fabrication as compared to conventional micro-machining with a
focused laser beam. Physics-based models will be formulated for the
investigation of the mechanisms of plasma generation, plasma-matter interaction,
and the prediction of machined feature geometry. New optical techniques and
unique enhancements to this process, based on the optical manipulation of the
shape of the plasma into plasma patterns rather than a spot, will be explored.
This will increase process productivity and speed by at least one order of
magnitude, and facilitate the fabrication of two- and three-dimensional
geometries and patterns. Comprehensive experiments involving all aspects of the
mechanics of the process will also be performed to validate the models
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successfully realized it is anticipated that
the technology created by this project will enable major advances in critical
areas of miniaturization technologies, given its multiple concomitant advantages
such as its multi-materials capability, low heat-affected zone, high throughput,
greater in-process flexibility and, most importantly, its pattern or
feature/area-based rather than spot-based or writing nature of machining. This
latter ability will result in significantly increased process throughput as
compared to current focused laser beam based micro-manufacturing processes.
Process capabilities will include the ability to generate high-accuracy features
such as deep channels, dimples, through holes and other freeform structures on a
variety of materials including metals, polymers, ceramics, composites and other
transparent, reflective and brittle materials. The obtained results will also
open doors for new research on non-lithography based single-step micro-
manufacturing techniques for building and generating micro/meso-scale devices
and patterns.