* 1335454
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Statistical Prognosis and Service Decision Making for Teleservice Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Yong Chen, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) collaborative project is to establish a series of data-driven
modeling, failure prognosis, and service decision making methodologies that are
tailored for both the opportunities and the needs of teleservice systems. In a
teleservice system, the historical off-line records of failure events and the
condition monitoring signals collected from a large number of units are
available. At the same time, the condition monitoring signals from the in-
service units are collected in real time as well. This unprecedented data
availability provides us significant opportunities to develop accurate and
robust algorithms to predict the remaining useful life and make optimal service
decisions. The research consists of the following components: (i) a new state
space formulation and nonlinear filtering approach for multi-phase condition
monitoring signal modeling and estimation; (ii) a unified framework to jointly
model the condition monitoring signals and the time-to-failure data for failure
prognosis; (iii) a condition-based predictive service policy based on the joint
prognosis model; and (iv) implementation and validation through collaboration
with the General Motors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will enhance the science base of teleservice systems and catalyze
a transition from reactive/preventive service to an integrative model-based
predictive paradigm. The research is particularly timely for the booming
teleservice industry, helping them to evolve from experience-based operations
into efficient optimized operations. Given the information explosion and the
ubiquitous existences of data, the research results can be applied to the
teleservice of a broad spectrum of products such as manufacturing systems and
communication systems. The synergistic nature of this project can provide
students the unique opportunity to obtain training in various fields related
with teleservice systems, including reliability, signal processing, vehicle
engineering, statistics, and operations research.