* 1335476
* GOALI: Novel Piezoelectric Device Fabrication Using Digital Projection based Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2017
* Yong Chen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,035.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to solicit fundamental knowledge and understanding in
fabricating piezoelectric devices with controlled shape and functional
characteristics in order to develop an innovative and cost-effective additive
manufacturing process for the nation's biomedical imaging industry. In the
planned research, both the green-part fabrication for desired accuracy and
resolution and the heat treatment procedure for required piezoelectric
properties will be studied. The process modeling and related controlling methods
will be established for the piezo-composite based additive manufacturing
process. The effects of the addition of Sol-Gel solutions and related heat
treatment procedures will be evaluated to understand their relations to
piezoelectric properties. The property measurement and experimental validation
will be performed with industrial partners to verify the capability of the
additive manufacturing process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel piezoelectric
devices used in electronics, photonics, sensors and actuators require more
complex shapes and better precision for improved performance. Research results
of this GOALI award will provide knowledge and understanding to meet the
critical need of improved accuracy and resolution control as well as the
densification control in the piezo-composite based additive manufacturing
process for piezoelectric device fabrication. A globally competitive biomedical
imaging industry will contribute to the nation's economy and healthcare, and new
piezoelectric devices with better quality and lower manufacturing cost will
benefit consumers and the society. The project will also enhance the
infrastructure for ultrasonic imaging research and education at the University
of Southern California by providing a digital fabrication method with increased
shape flexibility. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students and mid-
career professionals will benefit through classroom instruction and involvement
in the research. Outreach programs to high school students will be utilized to
increase minority participation. The designed hands-on learning experience and
exposure to advanced manufacturing applications will increase the interest of
domestic students in science and engineering.