* 1335856
* Microbial Conversion of Lignocellulosic Biomass into 1-Propanol and 2-Butanol
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Michael Adams, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

This project will design novel 1-propanol and 2-butanol pathways based on a diol
dehydratase, to engineer the pathways in Escherichia coli, and to develop
biological processes to convert lignocellulosic biomass into liquid biofuels
1-propanol and 2-butanol. The research work consists of the efforts in releasing
fermentable sugars from lignocellulosic materials microbially, designing and
constructing metabolic pathways and microbial production platforms to convert
the released sugars into the desired products, and developing integrated
processes to deliver 1-propanol and 2-butanol from lignocellulosic resources.
The key elements of this research work are the protein engineering of a diol
dehydratase to enhance dehydration of 2,3-butanediol and metabolic engineering
of E. coli to enable the efficient production of 1-propanol and 2-butanol from
Caldicellulosiruptor bescii treated lignocellulosic biomass. Eventually, the
long-term objective of the proposed project is to develop scalable and
ustainable technologies to efficiently generate 1-propanol and 2-butanol from
renewable sources, specifically 1) improving E. coli strain properties for
efficient 1-propanol production; 2) improving the properties of the diol
dehydratase to meet process metrics via protein engineering; 3) developing
strains and integrated processes for the generation of 1-propanol and 2-butanol
from lignocellulosic biomass.

Both 1-propanol and 2-butanol have the physicochemical properties of high energy
density, low vapor pressure, and low water content, which make them better
liquid biofuels than currently widely-used bioethanol. The outcome of this
research will advance our understanding of microbial metabolism and lead to the
development of practical technologies for the production of 1-propanol and
2-butanol from lignocellulosic biomass through microbial fermentation,
representing the efforts of expanding natural metabolism for bioenergy
applications and impacting the disciplines of chemistry, biological sciences,
and engineering. The research and education efforts will be integrated as the
following: 1) A Metabolic Engineering & Synthetic Biology Course and a Metabolic
Engineering & Synthetic Biology Laboratory will be developed based on the
proposed research to strengthen the BioChemical Engineering Program at the
University of Georgia (UGA), which will provide undergraduate and graduate
students with the interdisciplinary training of chemistry, biological sciences,
and engineering. 2) The proposed research will be integrated with community
education through the existing cooperative extensions at UGA including the
Georgia 4-H organization and the educational programs at the State Botanical
Garden of Georgia with the priority of encouraging the participation of minority
and educationally or economically disadvantaged groups. 3) The proposed research
will be integrated with the existing programs of Bioenergy Systems Research
Institute at UGA to provide students with training, internships, exchanges, and
scholarships.