* 1335694
* SusChEM:  Carbon Capture and Utilization by Controlled Carbonate Mineralization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Bradley Chmelka, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 647,545.00

1335694 (Doherty). One of the defining problems of our time is that levels of
CO2 in the atmosphere have increased from 315 ppm in 1958 to 394 ppm in 2012,
leading to concerns about changes in climate occurring at a rate that will be
difficult to manage. The steady increase in CO2 emissions from stationary
sources across a spectrum of industrial processes (e.g., electricity generation,
manufacturing of cement, chemicals, plastics) has raised tremendous interest in
the process of carbon capture and utilization, ideally without adversely
affecting living standards world-wide. But, if CO2 capture is to be economically
and environmentally sustainable in the long-term, it is crucial to find ways of
turning CO2 from harmful waste into a useful product at an economical price.
This project is a high-risk high-reward strategy toward achieving this goal. A
novel holistic approach for CO2 capture underpinned by scientific and green
engineering foundations that has the potential to transform CO2 into a useful
solid product with net positive value will be explored. The current standard
approach to dealing with this problem has been to separate CO2 from combustion
gases in the form of a highly compressed and almost pure fluid that is then
disposed of in one of several ways, most of which will require careful
monitoring for re-emission. Instead, pn this project, the combustion gases will
be reacted with reagents (Ca2+, OH-, silicates, or saccharides/phosphonates) to
form a benign and potentially valuable solid carbonate material with
applications in the construction industry. The proposers estimate that the
energy penalty for carbonate mineralization technology is significantly less
than that for current approaches. They propose to establish and optimize the
governing molecular processes that underlie the use of subsurface geological
brines or reactive minerals as feedstocks to capture and utilize CO2 in the form
of solid carbonates and/or silicates. These feedstocks have high Ca2+ contents,
as well as desirable alkalinities, which significantly increase the carbonation
rates. The proposes hypothesize that deep molecular understanding of the
metastable solid products formed, coupled with state-of-the-art conceptual
process design and development (a systems approach), will lead to an effective
combined capture and utilization technology for CO2 that will be transformative
in its approach and potentially in its societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the approach is the novel coupling of fundamental
materials science at a molecular level to establish the molecular design rules
for the formation and stabilization of reactive metastable carbonate/silicate
solids with process design (systems) strategies for implementing these rules at
macroscopic scale. This will be achieved by exploiting state-of-the-art
techniques of NMR spectroscopy, which have only recently become available for
key 43Ca, 25Mg, 13C, 31P and dipolar-coupled 29Si and 1H species in carbonates
and cementious materials. The novel use of saccharides/phosphonates or other
organic molecules to stabilize reactive carbonates is expected to promote their
processability, storage stability, and conversion into valuable structural
materials. Based on the molecular insights obtained, materials processing
variables (e.g., temperature, pressure, pH, composition, and reactor/separator
configurations) will be assessed and optimized to control precipitation and
crystallization of carbonate solids with engineered structures, particle
morphologies, and surface compositions, including techno-economic
considerations. The broader impacts of this research include (1) educating
graduate and undergraduate students broadly in state-of-the-art methods of
molecular engineering of crystalline solids and process design strategies for
their syntheses, (2) fostering broad awareness of greenhouse gas emissions,
their impacts, candidate strategies for CO2 utilization, and associated energy
and environmental ramifications, and (3) the specific possibility for developing
a paradigm-changing approach by which CO2 is converted to a valuable structural
material. The insights gained from the proposed project will be general,
enabling students and the broader scientific community to develop novel
approaches for converting waste products into potentially valuable materials,
along with quantifying process design and economic factors through a systems
approach to evaluate cost-effectiveness.