* 1335550
* Effects of Metals from Flue Gas on Microalgae Biofuels and Co-products: Sustainability and Scalability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* David Britt, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 335,081.00

CBET - 1335550&lt;br/&gt;Jason Quinn&lt;br/&gt;Utah State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of alternative transportation
fuels is imperative to meeting current energy demands without contributing to
global climate change. Microalgae are considered a promising feedstock, but
require specific resources (e.g. water and concentrated carbon dioxide) that are
either difficult to provide in high purity and concentration or that compete
with other essential activities such as food production. A variety of microalgae
feasibility assessments have been performed that assume the seamless integration
of waste carbon dioxide sources, such as coal fired power plant flue gas, with
microalgae cultivation. The utilization of flue gas as a source for carbon
dioxide in the cultivation phase of microalgae represents an environmentally
favorable process step for the production of biofuels from microalgae. The
burning of coal generates a carbon dioxide rich stream ideal for integration
with microalgae, but also contains trace amounts of a variety of heavy metals
such as arsenic, cadmium, cobalt, chromium, copper, mercury, manganese, nickel,
lead, antimony, selenium, tin, tellurium, titanium, vanadium, and zinc. The
integration of flue gases as a nutrient source in microalgae cultivation will
ultimately introduce these heavy metals into the growth media where they can be
absorbed and potentially concentrated by the microalgae. The fate of heavy
metals and their effect on microalgal cultivation and the characteristics of end
products from the use of flue gas as the carbon source will be quantified by
this study. Understanding the effect and fate of heavy metals in the microalgae-
to-biofuels process will enable higher resolution environmental assessments. The
study will investigate 1) the effects of the presence of heavy metals in growth
media on microalgae growth and lipid content and the effects on the quality of
biodiesel produced, 2) the effects of heavy metals on downstream processing of
the lipid extracted algae via fermentation for production of acetone, butanol
and ethanol and methane production from anaerobic digestion, and 3) the
sustainability and scalability of the microalgae to biofuels process integrated
with flue gas. Accomplishment of these tasks will facilitate the evaluation of
the effects of heavy metals found in flue gas on microalgae cultivation and
resulting products. This study will investigate potential processes where heavy
metal buildup could occur and quantify the amounts involved. Systems models will
be informed by the experimental data for scalability and environmental impact
assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new insights into
the environmental impacts of integrating microalgae cultivation with carbon
dioxide derived from industrial point sources such as coal power plant flue gas.
The integration of flue gas with microalgae cultivation will inevitably
introduce heavy metals into the growth media that can be absorbed and
concentrated. This study will evaluate the end fate of heavy metals present in
microalgae growth media and investigate the effects on growth, fuel properties
and co-products from the microalgae to biofuels process. The information learned
from the experimental work will be integrated into a modeling effort to directly
assess the large-scale environmental implications of integrating carbon rich
flue gas with microalgae cultivation.