* 1335233
* Collaborative Research: Resolving Centennial-Scale Environmental Change and Geomagnetic Field Variability From Iberian Margin Sediment Drifts Cored on IODP Expedition 339
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2013,03/31/2014
* Gary Acton, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 03/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

This proposal seeks to use continuous u-channel and discrete paleomagnetic data
in combination with color analysis and shipboard data to develop chronological
and climate data on the Quaternary contourite section cored during IODP exp.
339.The magnetic data will enable development of a detailed regional type
section of Quaternary geomagnetic field variability with implications for both
geochronology and larger questions concerning the nature of the magnetic field
and geodynamo. Five sites cored during exp. 339 will be examined and preliminary
data suggests that magnetic properties can be correlated from hole-to-hole. The
thickness of the Quaternary record and overall high sedimentation rates could
make these cores particularly amenable to this type of detailed analysis. This
study, in combination with isotopic, astronomic, and stratigraphic analysis will
enable construction of an exceptionally detailed chronology which can then be
tied to climate models, especially those related to thermohaline circulation.
This is directly related to the primary objective of exp. 339 which is the
development and constraint of models relating saline Mediterranean outflow to
climate variations and events. In the modern Atlantic, this outflow has
important effects of the circulation of deep ocean water. The understanding of
these circulation patterns is one important element of predicting global climate
variations.