* 1335372
* Fostering International Cooperation in Airborne Global Scale Geosciences  : Planning Workshop for Joint Use and Development of Meteorological Research Aircraft
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Jeffrey Stith, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 05/31/2015
* USD 46,130.00

Joint use and development of facilities with international partners is desirable
for all parties. This award is to support researcher participation on a joint
workshop between airborne scientist from the U.S. and Germany. The award will
provide support for up to nine university scientists to attend an international
workshop to foster collaboration between scientist that utilize the U.S. High
performance Instrumented Airborne Platform for Environmental Research (HIAPER)
and that might potentially utilize the German High Altitude and Long Range
Research Aircraft (HALO). In addition to the university participants, the U.S.
contingent will include relevant staff from the National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR). There will be similar participants from the German research
community. The goals of this workshop are to:

1. Educate each group about planned and on-going research programs. 2. Exchange
information as to the procedures of each country for developing field projects
and explore ways that each country might be involve the partner country's
research. 3. For common instrumentation, explore ways to develop common formats,
calibration procedures, mission flight planning tools and data management
procedures in order to develop common data products. 4. Discuss unique research
instrumentation on the two platforms and discuss opportunities for sharing
existing instrumentation and developing new instrumentation that cans be shared
across the two aircraft. 5. Discuss developing joint research campaigns.

Successful outcomes from this workshop will include joint use/development of
instrumentation and the potential for joint scientific projects.