* 1335320
* Optimization of Frost Protection
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2017
* George Scherer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 299,892.00

Concrete is protected against frost damage by adding surfactants (called air-
entraining agents, AEA) that stabilize air voids, which serve to accommodate the
volume expansion as pore water freezes and to create suction in the unfrozen
pore water that offsets the pressure exerted on pore walls by ice crystals. The
goal of the proposed work is to optimize the performance of entrained air voids.
We will study the interaction of commercial AEA and other surfactants with
cement paste to obtain quantitative information about the rate and extent of
adsorption of AEA on air bubbles, and the rate of growth and pore size of the
lime-rich shells that form on their surfaces. The adsorption kinetics will be
studied by tensiometry, which quantifies the change in concentration of the
surfactant in the solution. Compressibility measurements at near-atmospheric
pressure will quantify the rigidity of the shells as they evolve. To examine the
microstructure of delicate early-age hydration products, we will use
supercritical drying to remove the pore liquid without creating capillary
pressure. This will produce unaltered structures for examination by nitrogen
sorption and electron microscopy. The results will be used to interpret
dilatometric curves obtained during freezing of cement paste and mortar.
Dilatation during freezing depends on the nucleation behavior, which will be
manipulated by incorporation of a nucleating agent (metaldehyde), and on the
ability of the air voids to confine ice inside, which depends on the pore size
in the shell. &lt;br/&gt; The project will provide a sound basis for choosing
chemical additives that optimize the frost protection of concrete, and a
methodology for evaluating new organic additives. By improving the frost
resistance of concrete, the cost of maintaining the civil infrastructure will be
reduced, and the emissions of CO2 will be decreased, because less cement will be
required for replacement of structures. The introduction of new methods for
studying the process of air entrainment, and for preparing artifact-free samples
for analysis, will open new avenues of research in materials science. The
tensiometric method for evaluating air voids could replace less quantitative
procedures currently used in industry. This work will contribute to the
education of a female graduate student and post-doctoral researcher, and will
provide topics for undergraduate independent research, senior theses, and
REU/RET projects. &lt;br/&gt;