* 1335990
* Understanding plasma nucleation for a priori control of synthesis of carbon allotropes at the nanoscale
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Mohan Sankaran, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 07/31/2018
* USD 185,000.00

1335990 Sankaran

Carbon nanomaterials are a special class of materials with a diverse range of
structures and unparalleled electronic, photonic, and chemical properties that
have elicited interest for a wide-range of technological applications. This
project will study the homogeneous nucleation of carbon nanomaterials in a novel
microplasma process. Microplasmas are non-equilibrium, atmospheric-pressure
plasmas formed in confined electrode geometries that allow particles to be
nucleated and rapidly quenched to limit their final size and agglomeration.
Preliminary results have shown that nanodiamond, carbon clusters less than 5 nm
in size exhibiting diamond phase, can be produced at near ambient conditions,
far from the thermodynamic stability of diamond, by dissociation of ethanol
vapor in a microplasma. This project will extend these experiments to the
formation of other carbon allotropes including fullerene and graphene.
Dissociation of carbon precursors in the microplasma with varying C:H:O ratios
will be characterized by optical emission spectroscopy to relate radical species
such as carbon dimers and atomic hydrogen to particle nucleation. Particle
nucleation will be monitored in real time by aerosol mobility measurements. The
as-grown carbon nanomaterials will be collected and further characterized by
high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, micro Raman spectroscopy,
X-ray diffraction, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. A particularly
important aspect of the work will be to explore the influence of quenching rate
on particle formation by pulsing the microplasma at different frequencies.

This project will provide new insight into the formation of carbon
nanomaterials. By linking plasma chemistry to material structure, an empirical
model for homogeneous nucleation analogous to chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of
thin films will be developed. Size-structure relationships such as the stability
of nanodiamond will be established by varying the residence time and quench rate
in the microplasma. Ultimately, the research will enable the structure of carbon
nanomaterials to be controlled at nucleation so that it is possible to tune
their properties for various applications. The research activities will provide
educational opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students,
and be a part of an elective course on nanotechnology at a local high school.