* 1335035
* Geometry and Statistics on Spaces of Dynamical Systems for Pattern Recognition in High-Dimensional Time Series
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Rene Vidal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 391,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop a mathematical framework for
efficiently comparing dynamical systems identified from high-dimensional time-
series data as well as algorithms for clustering, classification, and
statistical analysis of such data. Dynamical systems are widely used for the
analysis, verification, and control of physical, mechanical, thermal, chemical
and biological processes. However, there are many emerging applications in which
one also needs to "compare the dynamics of two processes". In computer vision,
for example, one can use dynamical models to describe kinematic and video data
of human motion. While different people move differently, the dynamical models
of two people performing the same task (e.g., walking) should be "closer" to
each other than the models of two people performing different tasks (e.g.,
walking vs running). Framework will be developed for spaces of linear dynamical
systems whose quotient structure is defined by the action of a group on a smooth
manifold. A family of efficiently computable distances in the ambient space will
be used to define a family of "group-action-induced distances" in the quotient
space. Such distances will be used to develop methods for performing
classification, clustering and statistical analysis on spaces of dynamical
systems. These methods will be evaluated on kinematic and video data of human
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of methods for comparing
dynamical models can impact both basic science and the society at large. In
control theory, such methods can impact system identification and robust
control. In computer vision, such techniques can be used to discriminate human
and crowd activities in video data, which is relevant to many applications in
surveillance, security, traffic monitoring, sports coverage/broadcast, human-
computer interaction, etc. This project will train engineers and scientist in
multidisciplinary research that will need concepts from differential geometry,
machine learning, and computer vision. As such, it can potentially impact many
other related fields. This project will also impact many diversity outreach
activities, including ongoing REU programs, the Women in Science and Engineering
(WISE) program and summer camps for K-12 outreach. Datasets and code will be
made publicly accessible for research and educational purposes.