* 1335443
* XPS:CLCCA:Collaborative Research:Harnessing Highly Threaded Hardware for Server Workloads
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Alvin Lebeck, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 365,999.00

Data centers provide the computational and storage infrastructure required to
meet today's ever increasing demand for Internet-based services. Web servers
deliver a vast range of information on demand, ranging from static content such
as files, images, video and audio streaming services, to dynamic content created
via scripting languages (e.g,. PHP) or stand alone C/C++ applications (e.g.,
search results). Server performance, scaling and energy efficiency
(throughput/Watt) are crucial factors in reducing total cost of ownership (TCO)
in today's server-based industries. Unfortunately, current system designs based
on commodity multicore processors may not be the most power/energy efficient for
all server workloads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's massively parallel
accelerators (e.g., GPUs) provide exceptional performance per Watt for certain
workloads versus conventional many core CPUs. Unfortunately, these devices have
not found wide-spread general purpose use outside the high-performance computing
domain. This project expands the use of massively parallel accelerators to
server and operating system-intensive workloads by innovating across the
application, runtime, operating system, and architecture
layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on the observation that server
workload execution patterns are not completely unique across multiple requests.
The goal of this project is to develop computer systems (software and hardware)
that exploit similarity across requests to improve server performance and
power/energy efficiency by launching data parallel executions for request
cohorts. The three primary aspects of this research are 1) mapping traditional
thread/task parallel workloads onto data parallel hardware, 2) developing a new
accelerator-centric operating system architecture, and 3) developing new
architectural mechanisms to support this new class of accelerator workloads and
operating system software.