* 1335657
* Leptospirosis in California sea lions:   Population impacts and persistence in a long-term study of infectious disease in marine mammals
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2019
* James Lloyd-Smith, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,399,997.00

Despite increasingly stark evidence that infectious diseases have dramatic
effects on marine ecosystems, research on disease ecology in marine systems has
lagged behind that in terrestrial systems. There is a particular need for long-
term case studies, with quantitatively accurate data and well-characterized
biology, to enable research into how oceanographic processes affect pathogen
spread and how disease impacts will be altered by climate change. This unique
project will carry out an integrated field, clinical, laboratory and modeling
research approach to establish a case study for the dynamics of Leptospira
interrogans in California sea lions (CSL; Zalophus californianus). Leptospirosis
has caused recurrent seasonal outbreaks in CSL since at least 1984, resulting in
major disease outbreaks every 3-4 years. The PIs will investigate the
quantitative impact of leptospirosis on CSL population dynamics and the
mechanism that has enabled L. interrogans to persist in the CSL population over
the past three decades. The project will answer the following hypotheses: 1.
Data from stranded CSL provide quantitative information on long-term dynamics of
L. interrogans prevalence in the free-ranging population, 2. L. interrogans
impacts CSL population dynamics by infecting more than 20% of the CSL population
during disease outbreaks, and killing 1-2% of infected CSL. The project will use
this data to develop a mathematical model that integrates immunological and
stranding data, which will then allow for predictions of the fraction of the CSL
population that is infected each year, 3. L. interrogans is persistent in the
CSL population, and the mechanism of persistence involves a chronic asymptomatic
carrier state and subsequent shedding of L. interrogans by individual CSL. A
longstanding puzzle concerns how the pathogen persists in the 6-8 month interval
between outbreaks. The PIs will conduct a pathology study to determine whether
CSL can become chronic carriers of L. interrogans, and will also sample free-
ranging CSL individuals when disease outbreaks are not occurring to search for
asymptomatic shedders. This project will establish the L. interrogans/CSL system
as a unique and powerful case study for infectious disease in marine mammals,
enabling subsequent research into impacts of climate change and connections to
the broader coastal ecosystem.

The broader impacts of this study will involve training graduate, veterinary,
and postdoctoral students in interdisciplinary science. Outreach and involvement
of underrepresented groups will be facilitated by a partnership with a UCLA
program to engage minority and life-challenged undergraduates by making videos
about the research for classroom and online viewing. Findings will be
communicated using visitor center tours and mobile K-12 programs reaching
>130,000 people per year. Finally, the research will inform reservoir control
for leptospirosis worldwide and the results will be shared with environmental
and health researchers and policymakers via the PIs leadership positions in the
U.S. Marine Mammal Commission and other professional associations.