* 1335605
* Salvaging dinosaur embryos, eggs, and associated geological data from Tustea, Romania, for future phylogenetic and paleobiological studies
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2013,09/30/2013
* Gerald Grellet-Tinner, The Journey Museum
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2013
* USD 7,252.00

RAPID: Salvaging dinosaur embryos, eggs, and associated geological data from
Tustea, Romania, for future phylogenetic and paleobiological studies

Gerald Grellet-Tinner, Journey Museum, Rapid City, South Dakota EAR-1335605

ABSTRACT PI requests funds to travel to Cluj, Romania to salvage fossil dinosaur
eggs and embryos and associated geological data from the world-renown Tustea
dinosaur-nesting site. The extremely small Tustea fossil site is presently 90%
destroyed by unwarranted bulldozing. The destruction of the relatively thin
fossil-bearing layer represents a major loss for paleontology and science and
threatens hope for future, long-term studies of the identity of the embryos,
their phylogenetic placement, in depth paleobiological investigations of the
nesting sites, and the association of dinosaur embryos with the associated eggs.
Dr. Codrea from the University of Cluj discovered and recovered fossil dinosaur
eggs and embryos. He asked Dr. Grellet-Tinner to travel to Cluj to assist in the
salvaging operation and study of the resultant specimens. The PI's home
institution, the Journey Museum in Rapid city, South Dakota, serves a large
community of Native Americans, the regional school system, and the national and
international adult population. A portion of the museum's geology/paleontology
exhibit features the PI's previous research. It will be updated and expanded to
incorporate the outcome of the new research in the form of displays and molds of
the embryos and eggs.