* 1335397
* Novel Drivetrains for Wind Turbines with Geared Infinitely-variable Speed Converters and Variable Electromotive-force Generators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Weidong Zhu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 250,001.00

The objective of this project is to theoretically and experimentally investigate
novel drivetrains for wind turbines with infinitely variable speed converters
(IVSCs) and variable electromotive-force generators (VEGs), which can reduce
failures, cost, and power loss; harvest more wind power; and reduce the cost of
wind energy. By mechanically converting a variable wind input speed to a
constant output speed using an IVSC, which is an all-mechanical gear train with
minimal speed variation, one can generate grid-compatible constant-frequency
power without using a power converter. A novel concept of an eccentric motion
system that differs from all other continuously variable transmissions will be
investigated. Two new concepts of VEGs are investigated: a generator with an
adjustable overlap between the rotor and the stator and a multiple-generator
configuration. The proposed research integrates various subjects including
kinematics, dynamics, control, and electromagnetics. New control theories and
laws will be developed for IVSCs and VEGs and implemented.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an all-mechanical speed converter can generate cost
savings from simpler assembly and lower maintenance. Besides wind energy
generation, the new knowledge generated from this research can be used to
develop water turbines to harvest current and tidal energy; new transmissions
and VEGs for cars, trucks, military vehicles, and ships; motion controls for
airplanes and construction machines; and energy harvesting devices for ocean
wave energy and vibration energy from railway tracks. Various aspects of the
proposed research will be adapted for educational purposes to students at all
levels, from high school students to Ph.D. students. The infinitely variable
motion control and energy harvesting concepts will be demonstrated to
underserved high school students in a summer educational program to spark their
interest in science and engineering and to expose them to engineering research.
Students in different disciplines will be involved in different aspects of wind
energy research; research results will be showcased at wind energy forums to
arouse public awareness of clean energy.