* 1335181
* Resilient Connections Between Hard Walls and Steel Frames in Metal Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Justin Marshall, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 191,322.00

This project will pursue research in understanding interaction between light
metal building frame and hard masonry wall through energy absorbing and robust
connections under seismic and wind loading. Analytical research will be pursued
for initial development of connections. Experimental research will be conducted
in the laboratory for viable connections that are configured to transfer wind
loads as well as absorb energy to enhance seismic performance. The goal is to
develop connections in masonry walls that will work with the metal frame to
enhance resistance of the system under multiple hazards. An industrial advisory
group will assist in selecting connections for their practicality in
construction. The light frame metal buildings are widely used for industrial and
commercial buildings; improving resiliency of these buildings will reduce
economic losses in hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
accomplished through a series of research tasks that include analytical
modeling, experimental testing, development of a design methodology, and
evaluation of system performance in multiple hazards. The first task will be to
determine connection demands between stiff and flexible elements for seismic and
wind events through analytical modeling. The second task will quantify the
requisite strength, energy dissipation and connection deformation demands
required to achieve enhanced performance. The third task will be design,
analysis and comparative evaluation of energy dissipation and robustness of
connections through nonlinear finite element analysis. Experimental testing of
connections with high performance potential while being economical and
constructible will follow. The final task will be assessment of building system
for energy absorption capacity and robustness under wind and seismic loading.
The education and outreach components include high school students attending
Engineering Day, college students mentoring high school students and targeted
outreach to professional practice.