* 1335748
* Collaborative Research: Thermal Transport in Elastic Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Robert Handler, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 09/30/2016
* USD 150,392.00

CBET 1335748&lt;br/&gt;PI: P. Ligrani (SLU) /R. Handler
(TAMU)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer additives, such as polyacrylamide, have
unique characteristics in liquids, including highly non-linear, non-Newtonian
behavior. To augment transport, the polymers are stretched in constriction by
flow strain, which is induced by, for example, streamline curvature. The
extensibility of the polymer and resulting polymer deformation, leads to a sharp
growth in the local elastic stress, a sequence of events referred to as the
Weissenberg instability, which occurs when the Weissenberg number is greater
than approximately Â½ or 0.5. Overall consequences include increased polymer
viscosity, in some cases, by up to 3 orders of magnitude. Such changes also lead
to increases in effective polymer thermal conductivity, and augmentation of
thermal transport. However, such increases in thermal transport from elastic
turbulence have never before been investigated, and thus, to develop innovative
methods to enhance mixing and thermal transport in small-scale environments at
low Reynolds numbers, experiments and simulations will be coordinated and
conducted on thermal transport in elastic turbulence. One principal aim is to
determine the efficacy of using elastic turbulence to augment thermal transport,
by characterizing the phenomena both experimentally and numerically. Numerical
modeling and prediction of the physical trends of both measured and non-measured
quantities will be performed with three-dimensional Direct Numerical Simulations
(DNS). As such, another overall intent is enhancement of fundamental
understanding of the associated physical processes associated with elastic
turbulence, as it is induced in liquids by polymers subject to stretching and
constriction by flow strain. A resulting product will be new numerical and
analytic models to describe and represent the related elastic turbulence
physical phenomena, especially thermal transport. Generally, milliscale (or
millimeter-scale) devices and flow environments will be employed to produce
flows in the rotating-Couette and Dean flow geometries. These flows each provide
shear and streamline curvature (centrifugal effects) and thus are ideally suited
to producing elastic turbulence in dilute polymer solutions. As part of this
research, a new Prandtl number model and a new effective conductivity model for
elastic turbulence will also be developed. This will be facilitated by
measurements of flow characteristics (time-varying and time-averaged) and heat
transfer coefficients, and fully three-dimensional direct numerical simulations
(DNS) with non-linear elastic models, such the FENE-P, to elucidate polymer
solution characteristics. The present study follows several important recent,
related fluid mechanics investigations, and as such, will address important gaps
in knowledge regarding the effects and influences of polymer additives on
thermal transport in milliscale and microscale liquid flows. As such, the
present study is highly transformational and relevant because of the new
physical understanding which will be provided, and because of the variety of
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, much attention has been
devoted to technological advances related to miniaturization, with particular
attention to technologies at the micro-scale and nano-scale, but also to milli-
scale devices. For example, improvements in manufacturing technology and micro-
fabrication have led to the miniaturization of a variety of different types of
devices and sensors. The ability to predict the fluid motion in and around these
devices is essential for their design and optimization. As the length scales of
these devices decrease for liquid flows, effects become significant which are
not present in larger-scale devices. Because of the small dimensions and very
low speeds which are involved, the flows within these components are generally
laminar, with relatively low magnitudes of mixing and thermal transport. Such
laminar flows are thus a consequence of the limitations imposed by the small
sizes of the miniature devices. Such flows, and the devices associated with
them, are vital and important for a range of applications in areas such as
pharmaceutics, medicine, heat transfer, biomedical engineering, and electronics
cooling. In every case, the devices associated with these application areas
would generally benefit by increased mixing and augmented transport from elastic
turbulence. Such mixing is important for a variety of situations within the
mentioned application areas, including the use of liquids to cool electronic
components, mixing of different chemical components to manufacture
pharmaceuticals, lab-on-a-chip devices which involve the interaction and mixing
of different fluid streams, and miniature heat exchangers for use in devices
ranging from automobiles, to appliances, to components within space systems,
including satellites.