* 1335338
* SusChem: Nanocomposites Incorporating Stereocomplexation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* John Dorgan, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2017
* USD 290,000.00

This research is about making plastic materials which are more environmentally
friendly. To do so, the principles of Green Chemistry and Engineering are
followed. These principles include the use of renewable resources and making
materials which are biodegradable. The research seeks to develop new and
improved bioplastics. The approach of this research will be to incorporate tiny
nanometer-sized biodegradable cellulosic whiskers as a reinforcing phase in a
bioplastic matrix called poly(lactic acid). To obtain improved properties, the
surface of the tiny nanowhiskers must be engineered at the molecular scale. This
surface engineering is accomplished by reacting the cellulose surface with
environmentally benign compatibilizing agents. These surface modified
nanowhiskers are subsequently mixed into the bioplastic as a reinforcing phase.
The research is predominantly experimental in nature materials will be reacted,
mixed, and molded. Test samples will be measured to determine important physical
properties and the project will employ state-of-the-art analytical tools to
elucidate important structure-property relationships. The combination of
research themes involving sustainable ecology, biotechnology, and nanotechnology
places the work in the exciting emerging field of
ecobionanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this
research will include several different positive outcomes. Bioplastics have
lower environmental footprints when quantitatively evaluated using life cycle
analysis techniques. On a pound-for-pound basis, they require less energy and
produce fewer emissions than their corresponding petroleum based plastics. Not
only are such materials better for the environment, they reduce the dependence
of the United States on foreign oil. The project is consistent with Federal
policies supporting greater use of biobased products including the Blueprint for
the Bioeconomy and the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008. The research
will create new bioplastic materials and technology transfer will support the
creation of Green Jobs and domestic manufacturing. Teaching and training will be
promoted as the project supports students. Outreach activities include faculty
and student participating in the Environmental Learning for the Future (ELF)
program at local elementary schools. Students educated in the principles of
Green Chemistry and Sustainable Materials Science will graduate with the skills
needed to meet the important technical challenges of the 21st century