* 1335781
* Collaborative research: Particle Dynamics in Viscous Shear Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Marc Ingber, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 179,998.00

1335781 PI: Ingber

1335907 PI: Vorobieff

The fundamental rheology of rigid particles suspended in viscous shear flows is
still not well understood, and in particular, the origins of experimentally
observed irreversibility in what is nominally a reversible flow are unclear. The
main objectives of this collaborative project are to identify the primary causes
of the irreversibility, to quantify the irreversibility, and to determine how
best to include irreversibility into mesoscopic models of suspension flows.
While there exists a general notion of irreversibility being caused by short-
range interactions, the exact nature and magnitude of these interactions is
unknown and, in many cases, various roughness models or repulsive forces are
applied more or less in an ad hoc manner. As long as this fundamental research
question remains unanswered, there is no fully satisfactory way to formulate any
type of rheological model. The project will attempt to establish that a
universal treatment of irreversibility must be scale-dependent. For relatively
large particles (greater than, say,100 microns), the major cause of
irreversibility in suspension flows is typically surface roughness. As the size
of the particles decreases below 100 microns, it is hypothesized that there
exists a transition in the major cause of irreversibility from surface roughness
to nonhydrodynamic static forces which may include forces such as electrostatic
and van der Waals forces. Furthermore, the project will establish that
irreversible particle migration scales linearly with a measure of nonlinearity
of the shear flow. The establishment of these hypotheses will have a strong
impact on rheological models, which currently lack universality.

The proposed research directly affect several key areas of science and
engineering, with many implications for everyday life. Suspension flows are
important in a wide variety of evolving technologies including advanced
materials processing, chromatography, encapsulation, microfluidics, secondary
oil recovery by hydraulic fracturing, carbon-dioxide sequestration, and the
transport of sediments, contaminants, and slurries, to name a few. Several
rheological models have been developed over the past several years to help
engineers develop effective processes involving suspensions. Although these
models have been relatively successful in determining steady state concentration
profiles, they fail to model the transient states. This research will remediate
the shortcomings of the existing models. The research effort will be
complemented with a strong educational and outreach component.