* 1335088
* Aggregate formation under turbulence: small-scale  biophysical interactions driving carbon flux in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2019
* Brian White, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2019
* USD 750,000.00

The process of marine aggregate formation is extremely important to the global
carbon cycle since sinking aggregates often dominate the carbon flux from the
surface ocean, removing CO2 from active exchange with the atmosphere. Existing
models predict that the rate of aggregate formation depends on both particle
encounter and coagulation efficiency, but the specific relationships describing
the latter's dependence on a range of measurable biological and physical factors
are still lacking. In this study, researchers from the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill will use an interdisciplinary approach to experimentally
investigate how aggregate formation varies depending on three factors: 1)
production of extracellular polymeric substances, 2) turbulence intensity, and
3) particle size. Results from this study will aid in our understanding of
carbon export following phytoplankton blooms, and in predicting carbon cycling
in a changing ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In collaboration with
the University of North Carolina (UNC) Baccalaureate Education in Science and
Teaching program, one undergraduate student training to become a high school
teacher would participate in the study to obtain research experience. At the UNC
Science Expo, the proponents plan a presentation to the general public on the
importance of marine snow aggregates to global climate change. In addition, they
plan a demonstration of their ongoing research project at the Joint Fluids
Laboratory to the public, K-12 students, and government officials. One postdoc,
one graduate student, and one undergraduate student would be supported and
trained as part of this project.