* 1335787
* A Scalable Single-Step Process to Create Multifunctional Coatings
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Surita Bhatia, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2019
* USD 316,248.00

1335787&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bhatia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Films based on colloidal
dispersions are widely encountered as paints and coatings, with emerging
applications in energy, data storage, and electronic devices. Oftentimes, there
is a need for multifunctional coatings, where the upper surface of the film
provides a specific functionality such as corrosion resistance, enhanced gloss,
or anti-bacterial properties. To impart this structure, a multi-step deposition
process can be used. Alternatively, a single-step process can be used by casting
a dispersion of particles with various functionalities. If particles with varied
sizes and interactions are used, a self-assembled structured coating with a
prescribed concentration profile could be obtained. Previous theoretical work
has highlighted the contribution of both hydrodynamics and colloidal
interactions to the formation and concentration distribution in multicomponent
films. However, experimental verification of this model has been hampered by
limitations of characterization methods to determine structure and composition
throughout the film and a lack of model systems in which the interaction
potential of each component can be systematically
varied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we will develop a fundamental
understanding of how particle size and interactions can be used to tune the
structure of multicomponent films, using a combined theoretical and experimental
approach. The project is an international collaboration between PI Surita
Bhatia, who brings expertise in characterization of colloidal materials and
scattering techniques, and Prof. Alexander Routh (Cambridge University), an
expert in colloidal hydrodynamics who brings expertise in theoretical modeling
of film formation. The proposed work leverages world-class facilities for x-ray
characterization at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), where Bhatia is an
affiliate, and benefits from the expertise of the BP Institute for Multiphase
Flow at Cambridge University, of which Routh is a member. Our study
distinguishes itself from previous work in that we will use techniques such as
small-angle scattering to quantify the interparticle potential of our
experimental systems, enabling a more direct comparison to theoretical
predictions, and in the use of advanced scattering techniques such as grazing
incidence SAXS (GI-SAXS) to probe structure and composition throughout the film.
The latter technique offers significant advantages over techniques such as AFM,
which probes only surface structure, and x-ray reflectivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will impact a number of industrial
applications, most directly the coatings industry. It will contribute to the
development of single-step film formation processes that would decrease
production time and costs of multifunctional films. We will work with industrial
contacts to hold focused symposia at conferences to disseminate the results to
both academic and industrial audiences. Concepts from the research will be
incorporated into core undergraduate and graduate courses. Broader impacts
related to human resources include training of a graduate student in both
experimental and theoretical techniques for soft materials, interaction of this
graduate student with industrial scientists, and the development of a trans-
Atlantic collaboration between two leading soft matter groups. Bhatia has a
demonstrated commitment to recruitment and retention of female, minority, and
disabled researchers and will focus on recruiting under-represented students for
this project.