* 1335263
* MRI: Development of Instrument on Robot-aided, Cognitive Virtual Rehabilitation for Automatic Physical Training of Individuals with Disabilities (iRAPID)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Jeffrey Gray, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2018
* USD 499,999.00

Proposal #: 13-35263&lt;br/&gt;PI(s): Hu, Fei&lt;br/&gt; Qahouq, Jaber Abu;
Brown, David A.; Gray, Jeffrey G.; Tsoupikova, Daria&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Alabama ? Tuscaloosa&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRI/Dev.: Robot-aided,
Cognitive Virtual Rehabilitation for Automatic Physical Training of &lt;br/&gt;
Individuals with Disabilities (iRAPID) &lt;br/&gt;Project
Proposed:&lt;br/&gt;This project, developing iRAPID, a robot-aided cognitive
virtual rehabilitation instrument for automatic physical training of individuals
with disabilities, integrates several hardware components (the KineAssist robot,
programmable treadmill, biomarkers (sensors) and Xbox kinect sensors) to build
an augmented virtual reality animation of the patient. A series of newly
developed software tools will support virtual rehab research computations of
body balancing and neuro-pattern changes during rehab.&lt;br/&gt;The instrument
will be designed to be suitable for three different cost/performance levels,
with successive levels making use of more comprehensive sensors. Combining the
sensors (e.g., functional NearInfraRed and EEG brain imaging) with physical
rehab mechanisms (e.e., treadmill) make possible interesting research areas
related to the effectiveness of physical rehabilitation training. Hence, iRAPID
will be a cognitive, research-oriented rehab instrument with automatic, accurate
rehab training progress computation. To enable the stated goals, the system
should be capable of recording a wealth of sensor measurements. Advancing the
next-generation rehab system, the work&lt;br/&gt;- Adopts a hierarchical (3
layers), incremental (3 modes) development strategy,&lt;br/&gt;- Supports
computational rehabilitation research, and&lt;br/&gt;- Adopts evolution-oriented
software design.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation
enables research an education of an exciting new field, Cognitive
ElectroBiomedical Systems (CEBS), enables the training in CEEBS of two PhD
students, and outreach to minorities. CEBS is a trans-disciplinary (TrD) field
has distinguished features compared to multi-disciplinary (MuD) and inter-
disciplinary (InD). The authors compare these fields to a cake where different
ingredients are not easily distinguishable (TrD) giving a new format product,
and a plate of salad that still has clear existence of different ingredients
((InD). The PhD training program will have a training structure included
TrD/MuD/InD curriculum and service learning. The Director of Multicultural
Engineering Program (MEP) will assist in involving underrepresented students
with summer CAMP and K-12 activities. This development is likely to highly
contribute within an EPSCoR jurisdiction.