* 1335739
* RUI: Viscosity Imaging and Chemical Reactions as Tools for Control of Fluid Instabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Patrick Bunton, William Jewell College
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 179,557.00

1335739&lt;br/&gt;Bunton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation uses
fluorescent probe imaging of the two-dimensional viscosity field during reactive
flow, as well as Schlieren imaging, to map how flow instabilities depend on the
relative rates of hydrodynamic flow and chemical reactions. The proposed
research includes: (1) development of molecular-probe fluorescence imaging
technique for in situ monitoring of viscosity applied to a well-characterized
miscible and Newtonian glycerol-water system in Hele-Shaw cells; (2) extension
of this technique to measure the spatio-temporal evolution of the viscosity
field for a chemically-reactive flow system of step-growth polymerization; and
(3) investigation of the relative roles of rate of reaction to hydrodynamic flow
rate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;When a high-mobility
fluid displaces a fluid of lower mobility, the instability known as fingering
occurs. If the two fluids are of comparable viscosity, then the mobility is
dominated by density differences and buoyancy-driven convection occurs. If the
source of the mobility difference is viscosity, then viscous fingering can occur
in a horizontal Hele-Shaw cell. When fluids of differing viscosities and
densities are brought together in a gravity field, then the outcome depends on
the relative sizes and signs of the stabilizing and destabilizing effects of
density and viscosity. This proposal focuses on viscous fingering&lt;br/&gt;(VF)
in the absence of a gravity field, i.e., in a horizontal Hele-Shaw cell. Despite
the central importance of the viscosity profile to experimental interpretation
and theoretical models of VF, the viscosity field has yet to be measured in situ
during flow. Hence, the actual viscosity gradient must be assumed or
interpolated based on a given model. This work develops a technique addressing
this issue using a viscosity-sensitive fluorescent probe. After gaining the
viscosity field driving VF, one desires to control the field and the
instability. A set of step-growth polymerization reactions will be used as model
systems in horizontal Hele-Shaw cells because both rate of reactivity and
viscosity of the reaction product can be controlled by varying the concentration
of the initiator or catalyst or the functionality of the monomers. Schlieren
imaging will be used to produce a phase diagram of resultant instability versus
rate of reaction and hydrodynamic flow rate. Fluorescent-probe imaging of the
viscosity field will provide quantitative data that will be related to
theoretical models of the viscosity profile. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Viscous fingering has been studied extensively in part due to
its high impact in oil recovery and in pollution spreading in porous media. A
large body of literature exists on experimental studies on one hand and on
theoretical investigations that focus on computing the spatio-temporal evolution
of viscosity fields. A gap exists however in quantitative comparisons between
experiments and theory mainly due to the difficulty of quantitative measurements
of the evolution in space and time of the local viscosity. This quantitative in-
situ monitoring of 2D viscosity field enabling the tuning of the relative
reaction and hydrodynamic time scales will broadly impact the field of
hydrodynamic instabilities in porous media and will lead to controlling the
instability. Additionally, as an outreach, Physics and Elementary Education
students will implement a set of optics and fluids activities for middle school
students. These activities will be primarily based on the Optics Discovery Kits
prepared by the Optical Society of America but with additional demonstrations
and activities drawn from fluid dynamics. Supplies will remain with a middle
school science teacher in high-need school (such as an Hispanic urban charter
school) to empower this teacher to excite future students.