* 1335572
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: THE BENEFICIAL AERODYNAMIC EFFECT OF BUTTERFLY SCALES
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Nathan Slegers, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 118,254.00

Lang/Slegers&lt;br/&gt;1335848/1335572&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wings of the
Monarch butterfly exhibit scales with a morphological structure that has a
characteristic size on the order of micrometers. This unique micro-patterning
results in a surface drag alteration, and leads to an increase in thrust and
lift during flapping and gliding flight at high Reynolds numbers (Re ~= 10e3-
10e4). This reduction in energy expended would be important to the Monarch which
has the longest migration of any insect. Preliminary results performed by the
PIs indicate: (1) flow passing transverse to the rows of scales can decrease the
local surface drag by 40% at low Re via a roller bearing effect, (2) flow
passing parallel to the rows of scales can increase local surface drag by over
100%, (3) higher drag differences occur in the very low Re regime (Re ~ 5), (4)
leading edge vortex strength may vary based on surface drag alteration, and (5)
initial flight tests of Monarch butterflies indicate a 10% increase in flapping
frequency for those without scales to maintain similar energetic free flight.
Proposed work will statistically determine the increased aerodynamic efficiency
of butterfly wings with scales through flight testing of live Monarch specimens
in a state-of-the-art autonomous tracking facility at the University of Alabama
Huntsville; preliminary results have already shown the capability to obtain mm
level tracking of body and wing motion at 370 fps. Autorotating drop tests of
single Monarch forewings will also be performed by a REU student to measure
increased aerodynamic performance with the presence of scales. A series of
dynamically scaled tests carried out in high viscosity silicone oil at the
University of Alabama will allow for models of butterfly-inspired geometries
with an increase in 10 to 100 times in sizing from real scales. The proposed
studies will (1) measure variation in the drag coefficient over streamlined
models in drop tests with butterfly-inspired surface patterning, (2) utilize
DPIV measurements of boundary layer formation in tow tank studies over flat
plate models with butterfly-inspired surface patterning, and (3) evaluate
leading edge vortex strength variation based on surface patterning inspired by
butterfly scales in pitching plate experiments. The third set of experiments
will utilize the TSI V3V system for full 3-D volumetric velocity flow
measurements recently acquired by the PI through a NSF MRI-R2
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
collaborative effort will result in the potentially transformative discovery of
a new and unique passive surface drag control methodology derived from butterfly
scales functioning at the micro-scale level. Proposed work will test our working
hypothesis that local surface drag alteration results in reduced energy
requirements for butterflies in flapping and gliding flight. Additional work
will better elucidate the surface drag alteration and corresponding vortex
control for fluid dynamic confirmation of the hypothesized mechanisms for
increased aerodynamic efficiency. This fundamental understanding will advance
knowledge for the ultimate use of a butterfly-inspired surface patterning for
other engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;Innovations in the field of boundary layer control are needed to
provide efficient methodologies to decrease drag (resulting in increased
payload, range or fuel savings) for MAVs as well as higher Re applications. A
unique, bioinspired technology in the form of a passive microgeometry leading to
drag reduction has the potential to impact this area of research with future
applications with increased energy conservation and flow control. The discovery
of the biological aerodynamic function of butterfly scales would also result. In
addition, the proposed study involves a number of other beneficial outcomes
including the training of students at all levels and broad dissemination of
results in journals/conference proceedings and the public media (e.g. National
Geographic Online). Undergraduate student involvement will take place through
REU participation with a focus on involving underrepresented groups. Bio-
inspired engineering is an excellent topic for public outreach, and butterflies
generate a high level of interest.