* 1335526
* Multi-Dimensional Stress Quantification at Complex Loaded Structural Components with Nonlinear Rayleigh Waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Didem Ozevin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 266,414.00

The goal of this research is to develop a new procedure for nondestructive
testing of built structural components. The project will quantify the multi-
directional state of stress of loaded structural elements including residual
stresses. The proposed approach uses nonlinear Rayleigh Waves for assessing the
state of stress in normal and shear directions. The hypothesis is that
acoustoelasticity describes the relationship between stress and ultrasonic
waves. This approach will quantify three stress components through use of
Rayleigh Waves. These waves interact with shear stress and permit three angled
ultrasonic measurements to solve three unknown stress values simultaneously. The
research involves analytical formulations of propagation of Rayleigh Waves; the
numerical simulation will be validated with laboratory experiments. This
approach has the potential of applicability to a variety of structural
components of bridges, nuclear power plants and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
penetration depth of the Rayleigh wave depends on the perturbation frequency.
This property will be utilized to quantify the normal and shear stress
components. A range of excitation frequencies will be studied to understand the
influence of shear stress on the ultrasonic waves, and quantify the nonlinearity
coefficients for three directions. The basic equations of nonlinear ultrasonic
will be modified to include the shear stress term; the resultant equations will
be verified with the laboratory experiments. The measurement approaches to be
tested in this project include piezoelectric receiver-transmitter with the
coupling correction, electromagnetic transducer system and piezoelectric
coupled-laser induced ultrasonic waves. The stress level resolution is targeted
at 10 MPa with 90 percent confidence level.