* 1335215
* DMREF: Emergent Functionalities at the Epitaxial Interfaces of Correlated and Spin-Orbit Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Michael Weinert, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 810,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will combine
analytic and predictive computational theory with experimental molecular beam
epitaxy (MBE) growth and characterization to investigate the physical phenomena
of well-characterized epitaxial materials with dimensions on the order of one to
a few unit cells. These materials are expected to have enhanced functionalities
such as superconductivity emerging from the interplay of strain, proximity to
the substrate, and correlations and spin-orbit interactions. Through the use of
different substrates, the doping, spin-orbit strength, correlations, and
magnetic coupling can be varied, thus mapping out large areas of phase space
appropriate to different models of superconductivity. The material systems to be
studied include the three-dimensional topological insulators (TI) and Fe-based
superconducting thin films grown by MBE on various substrates. The research will
address issues related to 1) the proximity-induced superconductivity in 3D TIs;
2) the effect of interfacial bonding on superconducting properties of ultrathin
FeSeTe films; 3) the polarization doping of Fe-based superconductors at
interfaces; and 4) the strain-induced normal to topological insulator
transitions. In situ scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy will be used
to study the electronic and superconducting properties, coupled with ex situ
scanning transmission electron microscopy and transport measurements. Density
functional theory calculations will be used to determine the normal state
properties of the bulk and surface materials and, with the ability to vary
parameters such as spin-orbit coupling strengths, these calculations will
constrain and provide realistic input to different models of superconductivity.
Together, the various calculations will help optimize the experiments in an
iterative manner, as well as providing a deeper understanding of the
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Advances
in predictive computational electronic structure theory, models of correlated
systems, and the ability to engineer the structure of materials at the atomic
scale provide the opportunity of synthesizing materials with specific
properties. In this project, experiment and theory will work closely and
iteratively to produce "designer materials" that can further our understanding
of the fundamental materials physics as well as being of potential technological
use. Specifically, well-characterized epitaxial films of topological insulators
and iron-based superconductors a few atomic layers thick will be grown on
different substrates. At these spatial dimensions, properties can vary
significantly compared to the bulk, possibly generating novel physics and
emergent functionalities through the interplay of strain, proximity to the
substrate, correlations, and spin-orbit interactions. Participating graduate and
undergraduate students benefit from a highly collaborative and multidisciplinary
research training.