* 1335731
* Physical and Computational Concepts for Systematic Development of Drag Reducing Surfaces in Pipes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Ronald Adrian, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

PI: Adrian, Ronald &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1335731 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broad goal of the proposed research is to investigate the structure of
turbulence eddies in pipe flows for the purpose of developing passive drag
reducing surfaces suitable for implementation in large-scale engineering systems
such as the U. S. national network of pipelines. Despite the many drag reducing
strategies that have been tried to reduce wall friction caused by turbulent flow
over surfaces, it is difficult to find any clear, undisputed set of principles
that explains how one should design surfaces to reduce skin friction drag. The
surfaces that have been successful, such as riblets, have been devised by trial
and error methods coupled with the knowledge of the simplest aspects of wall
turbulence, or by bio-mimetic approaches that copy methods used by life forms
such as shark skin. However, progress over the past decade in understanding the
coherent structures responsible for creating friction stresses now brings the
possibility of a systematic approach to drag reduction within reach. The matter
of transition to turbulent flow in pipe flow is an especially vexing question
that has remained open for more that a century. The answers to these questions
seem likely to be essential, or at the least very valuable, to the invention of
drag reducing agencies that operate by inhibiting the formation of turbulence or
diminishing its strength. The specific goals are to investigate the transition
to turbulence in pipe flow at Reynolds numbers well above the lower critical
value; to investigate the eddy mechanisms leading to re-laminarization of
accelerating turbulent flows; and to develop large eddy simulation methods
capable of revealing, with high fidelity, the effects of drag reducing surfaces
at high Reynolds numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;The transition to turbulence in pipe flow is one of the longest
standing mysteries in fluid mechanics. Understanding the origins of turbulence
in pipe flow will guide efforts to design drag reducing agents. Explaining the
eddy mechanisms underlying the behavior of relaminarizing flow will test current
physical models of wall turbulence such as the hairpin packet paradigm, and also
provide insights into a form of turbulence behavior that reduces drag. Exploring
singular perturbation methods for devising models for simulating high Reynolds
number flow with fully resolved near-wall physics may improve our ability to
simulate and model turbulent flow over surfaces, including complex drag reducing
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;Tools that will
contribute to the eventual development of drag reducing methods for pipe flow
would enable economically valuable energy savings. Overcoming turbulent friction
consumes a surprisingly large fraction of the United States' national energy
budget. The system of pipelines carrying oil and natural gas throughout the U.
S. requires 3% of the roughly 1 T$ annual energy expenditure to pump the fluids,
corresponding about 30B$ per annum to overcome the flow resistance due to
turbulence in the pipes.