* 1335269
* Environmental regulation of retinal and bacteriochlorophyll biosynthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Jed Fuhrman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2017
* USD 827,621.00

Rhodopsins are the simplest energy-harvesting photoproteins and community
metagenomics have revealed that their synthesis genes are ubiquitous throughout
the world oceans. These include microbial rhodopsin (proteorhodopsin (PR)),
which occur in an estimated 75% of marine bacteria and archaea in oceanic
surface waters. The discovery of this abundant and widespread photoprotein in
the surface ocean has challenged the notion that solar energy can only be
converted into chemical energy for growth in marine ecosystems through
chlorophyll-based photosynthesis. Although the potential of light-driven energy
flux in ocean ecosystems through PR could be significant, the physiological and
ecological functions of this type of rhodopsin remains undetermined, mainly due
to the lack of a technique for a direct measurement of this photoprotein. To
evaluate the ecological relevance of PR in the marine environment, The
investigators have developed a new analytical technique to measure the
concentrations of the light-sensitive pigment in the PR, the chromophore
retinal. Because rhodopsins have a single retinal chromophore associated with
the polypeptide opsin, the total number of retinal molecules is equivalent to
the total number of PR.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project
will employ the PI's newly developed protocol to examine the effects of light,
organic carbon and trace metals availability on PR and bacteriochlorophyll
synthesis using field and laboratory manipulations. Such experiments will
establish the impact of abiotic factors on the two known bacterial
photoheterotrophic metabolisms. The laboratory studies will be complemented with
the analyses of those pigments in field samples collected along spatial and
temporal gradients in light intensity, organic carbon and trace metals in
different oceanographic regimes. Gene expression patterns will be determined in
concert with changes in retinal and bacteriochlorophyll concentrations and
microbial growth responses in the field and in the laboratory. Therefore, the
combination of observational and manipulative approaches, will address
fundamental questions in regard to the impact of retinal-based photochemical
energy transformation in the ocean, a process that still is not well
understood.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate
education at USC will be furthered through active participation in the joint
laboratory experiments and field work. The PIs research program includes a
commitment to undergraduate student training by requesting support to target
qualified underrepresented students from other L.A.-area schools, as well as
active mentoring of undergraduate senior research theses at USC. In support of
this effort Sanudo-Wilhelmy is starting a new initiative for minority
recruitment at USC, using the Society for Advancement of Chicanos and Native
Americans in Science meetings and publications as a platform. This project will
also completely support the dissertation work of one USC graduate student and
provide the funding for publication of his results, as well as to allow him to
present his work at national meetings. The scientific and societal impacts of
this project include elucidating the ecological importance of energy-
transforming PR, without which we will never have a complete understanding of
all of the essential mechanisms sustaining major biological processes in the
world ocean.