* 1335965
* Turbulent Particle-Fluid Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Andrea Prosperetti, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,951.00

1335965 PI: Prosperetti

While much numerical research has been conducted on the effect of suspended
point-like particles in a turbulent flow, only a very limited amount of
information is available for situations in which the particle size is comparable
to, or exceeds, the length scales of the flow, from the Kolmogorov length on up.
The obstacle to overcome is the major computational effort necessary to resolve
the detailed flow features in the presence of the complex, time-evolving no-slip
boundaries represented by the particles. The PI has developed a powerful
computational method to address this difficulty, which has recently been made
even more efficient by reprogramming it for GPU-based computers. This method
will be used to run truly direct numerical simulations of turbulent fluid flows
with thousands of suspended finite-size particles and to extract from the
numerical results information on various features of the fluid turbulence
modification caused by the particles. In addition to these specific results on
disperse particulate flows, one of the aims of the work is to demonstrate the
possibility of running routine simulation involving many thousands of particles
at volume fractions between 0.05 and 0.20 on GPU-based work stations in a matter
of hours or a few days at most.

Natural processes offer a wealth of instances in which solid particles are
transported by fluid flows: marine sediments, gravity currents, sand dunes and
many others. Such flows are also of great technological relevance, primarily in
the energy area where fluidized bed combustors, catalytic oil cracking, coal
gasifiers ad chemical looping combustors are prime examples. A reliable
theoretical understanding of these systems, which the numerical simulations to
be undertaken in this project will provide, is essential for a variety of
reasons ranging from the modeling of environmental flows to carbon
sequestration, to the development of new or scaled-up designs without expensive
preliminary experimentation, and many others.