* 1335958
* MicroCT Imaging Based Theoretical Simulation and Protocol Design in Magnetic Nanoparticle Hyperthermia
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Ronghui Ma, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 301,193.00

CBET 1335958&lt;br/&gt;PI: Zhu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elimination all cancerous
tissue at the original site is crucial to prevent recurring tumors or tumor
metastasis. It is well known that cost of treatment is high and treatment
outcomes are usually poor once tumor metastasizes to other parts of the body.
Magnetic nanoparticles subject to an alternating magnetic field hold a high
cell-killing potential in cancer treatment because it can deliver confined
thermal energy to tumors, while preserving the surrounding healthy tissue.
Nanoparticle distribution in tumors is a major factor in determining tumor
temperature elevations and treatment efficacy. Unfortunately, particle spreading
is difficult to model and control due to tumor heterogeneous structures and
complex processes such as particle deposition, agglomeration, and intake.
Theoretical simulation of temperature fields in tumors based on actual
nanoparticle deposition distribution and tumor geometry can be used to design
heating protocols to truly achieve individualized and optimal treatment
planning. The objectives of this research project are to utilize microCT image
technology to understand nanoparticle transport in heterogeneous tumors, to test
computational capacity of handling vast data of images, to implement image-based
design approaches in evaluating thermal damage in tumors, and to validate
treatment protocols in realistic tumor models. To achieve the project's
objectives, innovative tasks will be developed in a combined theoretical and
experimental setting to test whether the microCT image-based computational
approaches are successful in designing optimal treatment protocols for prostatic
tumors implanted in mice. The designed protocols will be evaluated via measured
tumor temperatures during heating, histological analyses of thermal damage in
tumors, and tumor shrinkage monitoring after the heating treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide insights in understanding
effects of tumor porous structures and injection parameters on nanoparticle
deposition in tumors via microCT imaging, and to improve theoretical simulation
accuracy based on image-generated tumor geometry and particle distribution. It
is believed that the various particle deposition patterns observed previously
reflect the effect of heterogeneous tumor porous structures and infusion
parameters on nanoparticles spreading in tumors during injection. It is expected
that the fundamental knowledge gained will result in optimal delivery of thermal
damage in tumors. It is envisioned that the collected first-hand quantitative
imaging of nanoparticle spreading patterns can also be used to test assumptions
and simplifications in future multi-scale modeling, to extract transport
properties, and to ultimately advance understanding of nanoparticle transport in
tumors with heterogeneous structures. In addition to designing treatment
protocols for magnetic nanoparticle hyperthermia, the results of the project may
be extended to other applications including nanotoxicology and drug delivery
using nano-carriers.