* 1335653
* Shear-induced transitions and instabilities in shear banding fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Reimer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 290,000.00

Muller, Susan &lt;br/&gt;1335653&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An experimental study of
transitions and instabilities in shear banding fluids using wormlike micellar
solutions as model fluids and measurements of velocity fields and critical
conditions is proposed. While shear banding, i.e. discontinuities in the
velocity gradient in a flowing material, has been reported in a broad range of
important materials, including suspensions, emulsions, foams, granular
materials, and liquid crystalline polymers, wormlike micellar solution provide a
convenient paradigm for studies of shear banding fluids for many reasons.
Wormlike micellar solutions show simple viscoelastic behavior that is
characterized by a single relaxation time, are easy to prepare, and, in contrast
to polymers, are not susceptible to shear-degradation or chain scission. Recent
theoretical and experimental work suggests that both interfacial and purely
elastic instabilities may occur in these systems. Inertial instabilities are
also likely, and these systems thus promise incredibly rich dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the proposal lies in understanding these interactions and scaling in shear
banding materials. A Taylor-Couette (TC) flow apparatus, where the flow occurs
between concentric, rotating cylinders, will be the model flow for these
experimental studies. The TC problem offers a number of unique features that
make it ideal for teasing apart the forces that drive instability. First, the
role of inertial destabilization for Newtonian fluids has been well-studied, and
inertial (centrifugal) destabilization can be completely eliminated if the flow
is generated through rotation of only the outer cylinder. Counter-rotation of
the cylinders leads to a nodal surface in the base flow where the angular
velocity is zero and leads to essentially an "inner" TC geometry bounded by the
rotating inner cylinder and the stationary nodal surface, and an "outer" TC
geometry bounded by the stationary nodal surface and the rotating outer
cylinder. Counter-rotation thus provides a convenient mechanism for introducing
both a free (rather than hard, no slip) boundary and a continuously variable
length scale for the gap between the cylinders. Purely elastic instabilities in
the TC problem are also well-understood and progress has been made in
understanding the combination of inertia and elasticity. Shear banding fluids
introduce two additional wrinkles: the new length scale introduced by the shear
band, and the potential for interfacial instabilities associated with the
discontinuity in properties across the shear band. In contrast to elastic
instabilities, interfacial instabilities are stabilized by increased curvature.
Thus, the TC problem provides a platform for systematically isolating the
effects of these three competing instability modes, for understanding the
scaling of the modes with curvature, kinematic, and fluid parameters, and for
understanding the role of rigid versus free boundary conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
study lie in processing of shear banding materials, which is relevant to a range
of industrially important systems, including powders, suspensions, oil sands,
and foams. A postdoctoral scientist will receive training and mentoring, as will
approximately 6 undergraduates who will be recruited to participate in this
research. This research will also be integrated into graduate coursework on
transport phenomena and complex fluids at Berkeley.