* 1335296
* Computationally Efficient Algorithms for Markov Decision Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Eugene Feinberg, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 285,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop computationally efficient
algorithms for solving certain classes of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs).
MDPs, also known under the name of stochastic dynamic programming, provide major
operations research methods and tools for dynamic optimization of stochastic
systems. They are broadly used for the optimization of production, service,
telecommunication, and military systems. In addition to operations research,
MDPs are used in many other disciplines including electrical engineering,
computer science, and economics. The project will investigate the problems with
the two most often used objective criteria: average costs per unit of time and
the expected total discounted costs as well as risk sensitive criteria. In
addition to problems with a single objective criterion, it will investigate
problems with multiple criteria and constraints. The computational efficiency
will be studied with respect to the parameters of an MDP and with respect to the
parameters of the initial problem formulation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide new methodologies and
computer algorithms for finding exact and approximate solutions to MDPs modeling
applications to production and service systems. These applications include
inventory and queueing control, scheduling, and resource allocation. This
project will also contribute to the development of human resources in science
and engineering. First, it will support Ph.D. students at the Stony Brook
University to conduct research related to this project. Second, it will create
research and educational projects for graduate and undergraduate students
including minority and female students in science and engineering. The results
of this project will be used in applied probability and dynamic programming
courses that the PI teaches. The results of this project will be disseminated
via journal publications, the internet, and included into the text "Introduction
to Markov Decision Processes" the PI is currently working on.