* 1335822
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Multiscale Theory and Computer Simulation of Skin Absorption Phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gerald Kasting, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 196,890.00

1335822 PI: Kasting

1335835 PI: Nitsche

1335869 PI: Nitsche

Detailed mechanistic understanding of molecular absorption through the skin is
critical to the evolving needs of transdermal and topical drug development, and
risk assessment of chemical exposures. This project addresses the primary
current scientific stumbling blocks for more reliable prediction of transient
drug/chemical absorbed amounts and concentrations in skin tissue as well as
systemic absorption, all involving multiphase transport processes at various
scales. Specifically, it will: (i) produce a significantly advanced model of the
stratum corneum (SC, outermost barrier) layer, including solute diffusion with
reversible keratin binding within the corneocyte phase, diffusional anisotropy
within the lipid phase, and more concrete representations of the SC porous
pathway than are currently considered; (ii) extend a quantitative diffusion
model of the viable epidermis below the SC to include intra- and extracellular
protein binding; and (iii) develop a realistic model of hindered solute
diffusion through the collagen/proteoglycan matrix of the underlying dermis.
This strategically targeted set of theoretical and computational developments,
informed by selected experimental data, will materially advance the ability to
quantitatively predict skin-absorption parameters. Such parameters are directly
relevant to a broad spectrum of industrial applications in pharmaceutical and
consumer products, and are also critical to supplying the science needed to
inform and satisfy evolving regulatory requirements for chemical risk. On the
academic side the project is collaboration between the pharmaceutics group of
the PI at the University of Cincinnati, and the microscopic transport groups of
two PIs at the State University of New York at Buffalo and the University of
Illinois at Chicago. The industrial co-PI for this GOALI project is at Procter &
Gamble. With the technical input and experience of the industrial partner, the
science generated will be incorporated into an accessible and transparent
computational platform that can be understood by the product development,
toxicology, and regulatory communities.

This project will advance the science of drug/chemical transport through skin,
which is of substantial commercial value to industrial corporations (especially
cosmetic and personal care companies such as the GOALI partner P&G) dedicated to
preserving the public health while advancing business interests through new
product development. The primary envisioned application of the technology is an
improved, user-friendly computer tool for dermal risk assessment that is of
particular importance in light of current and foreseeable restrictions on animal
testing. This tool will be made available to the general public, other companies
and government agencies by the disclosure mechanisms discussed within the
proposal. Broader medical impacts include insights into the mechanism of contact
sensitization and dermal drug activity. One of the central elements of the
project is the theoretical, coarse-graining, method, whereby microscopic details
of drug/chemical transport at the cellular level can be successfully
incorporated into predictions of the overall outcome of, for example, a chemical
exposure or the application of a drug patch. Parts of the analysis will answer
such open theoretical questions as how to carry out coarse-graining in
biological systems, where molecules frequently bind and unbind to the tissues
through which they move. Broader carry over to other areas of biology are
concretely mapped out in the project; these include (i) effects of binding on
cellular communication through intercellular pores, and (ii) molecular motion in
lipids, including applications to cryobiology. Specific aspects of this research
will be spun off into undergraduate and graduate curricula in engineering,
pharmaceutical sciences and public health. Finally, high school outreach and
recruiting from underrepresented groups will leverage (i) a current NSF S-STEM
grant supporting need-based scholarships in one of the co-PI?s departments, and
(ii) professional engineers in the local AIChE section.