* 1335416
* Evasive Flow Capturing Problem: Optimal Allocation of Weigh-in-Motion Stations, Tollbooths, and Security Checkpoints
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Paul Schonfeld, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 220,000.00

The goal of this research project is to introduce a new flow capturing
framework, "Evasive Flow Capturing Problem" (EFCP), and develop mathematical
solution techniques for optimizing locations of facilities that targeted drivers
wish to avoid. The flow capturing problem consists of locating facilities in
order to maximize the number of users who should encounter at least one of these
facilities along their predetermined travel paths. Existing models for solving
this problem commonly assume that if a facility is located along (or relatively
close to) a predetermined path, the transportation flow along this path is
considered captured. However, this assumption is untenable when locating
facilities that drivers try to avoid, such as facilities used to intercept
violators, toll evaders, intruders or hazardous cargoes. The project's methods
will be applied in realistic case studies for optimally locating truck weight
enforcement facilities as well as security and safety
checkpoints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research is expected to
improve current practices of transportation agencies in locating weight-
enforcing facilities, which often consist of simply prioritizing the most
damaged roads. The methods for locating weight-enforcing facilities could speed
up decision making processes of public agencies and provide solutions that
greatly reduce 1) road maintenance costs, 2) environmental damage and 3)
accident costs due to overweight commercial vehicles. The methods for optimal
location of security and safety checkpoints could considerably improve homeland
security and the risks of transporting hazardous materials. The computer
implementations of the proposed work (e.g. codes for the solution techniques and
input data) will be made available online for future extensions and will be used
in graduate optimization courses that serve women and under-represented
minorities. The developed methods and results will also be disseminated through
technical conferences, journal papers, and presentations to transportation
agencies.