* 1335810
* MRI: Acquisition of genome sequencers for Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Beth Orcutt, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2017
* USD 535,211.00

The PIs request funding for the acquisition of an integrated system of
instruments required for genomic sequencing of environmental microorganisms.
This includes sequencers and supporting instruments for DNA extraction and
sequencing library preparation. The requested sequencing instrumentation will
complement the already existing infrastructure at Bigelow for pre- and post-
sequencing analyses, to provide comprehensive support for microbial genomic
studies. This acquisition will accelerate existing and new research programs,
and enable novel technology development. By enabling improved and expanded
Single Cell Genomics Center (SCGC) services to external users, it will also
benefit the global research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of the proposed instrumentation stand to
expand our understanding of marine plankton genomics at an unprecedented rate.
The association with the SCGC at Bigelow Laboratory is a very strong connection;
where leading research in sorting and amplifying high quality single cell
genomes from bacteria, archaea and small eukaryotes has taken this facility to
the top in the world for this field. The societal benefits are related to the
advancement of the science to be conducted at this center using the acquired
instrumentation, and through a strong outreach plan that involves curricula of a
diverse suite of initiatives including training in research for undergraduates
(REU), study semesters for Colby College students, workshops with the state of
Maine, and specialized workshops such as have been held for scientists
interested in single cell genomics. The acquired instrumentation will be used
for hands-on training at student and professional levels that is very hard to
find, in which the workshops can include start-to-finish experiences from DNA
extraction through computational analysis.