* 1335913
* Multiscale Simulations of Multiphase Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Gretar Tryggvason, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 338,679.00

1335913 PI: Tryggvason

Direct numerical simulations (DNS) have made significant contribution to our
understanding of multiphase flows over the last two decades. As their use has
increased, and increasingly complex systems are being examined, two major issues
have emerged. The first is that in many situations small-scale features emerge
that require excessive (and often unachievable) resolution. These features
either emerge spontaneously as thin films or threads or due to the addition of
new physics that takes place on time and length scales very different than those
of the flow. The second issue is that the wealth of data generated by DNS now
far outstrips what can be used in standard models for the average flow field.
This project is aimed at addressing both issues through the following two
objectives. (1) The use of embedded analytical description for accurate capture
of topology changes in simulations of multiphase flows. The approach is based on
the observation that many small-scale features (films, threads, boundary layers,
etc.) have a relatively simple structure and can therefore be described
relatively accurately by analytical or semi-analytical models that are evolved
concurrently with the fully resolved larger-scale motion. In this project,
earlier work of films and mass transfer will be extended to capture accurately
the rupture of films and threads. (2) Explore the evolution of various advanced
statistical ways to describe the topology of complex multiphase flows. Such
quantities include the area concentration tensor, average surface tension
effects, and others, yet to be determined. The goal is to establish how these
quantities correlate with the structure of the flow, and to attempt to model
their evolution. Particular attention will be focused on how these quantities
change during topology changes, their influence on the overall evolution of the
flow, and the importance of predicting rupture accurately. The numerical methods
will be made available through an online repository, along with a thorough
documentation of the methodology and the use of the codes.

Multiphase flows are critical in energy conversion, material processing,
chemical industry, atmospheric processes, and living systems. Incremental
improvement in the efficiency of such processes translates into billions of
dollars in savings and new discoveries have the potential to transform whole
industries. Computational studies will bring about both incremental and
transformative changes in the management of multiphase systems. Educational
material aimed at lowering the barrier to entry for new researchers will be
developed and undergraduate students will be exposed to the area through
research projects.

This project is partially funded by an CISE/ACI CIF21 Venture Fund for Software
Reuse.