* 1335585
* Managing Downstream Patient Flow Processes Using Improved Coordination and Staffing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Sanjay Mehrotra, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2017
* USD 145,000.00

The objective of this award is to develop models and study the downstream
patient flow processes from the perspective of in-hospital staffing decisions
for the escort staff. Queuing models will be developed using real life
operational data. These models will be used to estimate the properties of the
waiting time incurred by a patient, while waiting for transfer to an in-hospital
unit from the emergency department. The waiting time properties will be used in
an optimization model that will determine the staffing level. The optimization
model will incorporate quality of service constraints. Solution techniques for
solving this optimization model will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will lead to improvements in modeling
and solution techniques for making shift staffing decisions in the emergency
department patient transfer process. The primary goal of this work is to
determine the right number of escort staff at the emergency department during a
shift. Determining the right number of escort staff will reduce patient
admission delays resulting from the unavailability of an escort staff, when
required for patient transport. Reducing patient admission delays will free up
capacity in the emergency department, which will improve patient safety in
emergency departments that run at near capacity. This work will also help reduce
the overall patient care cost due to more effective utilization of resources,
and contribute to developing new modeling methods and computational tools
available for staffing problems.