* 1335609
* CMOS-Compatible Nanomanufactured Optoelectronic Integrated Circuits on Silicon
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Constance Chang-Hasnain, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The overarching goal of this project is to develop manufacturable, monolithic
integrated optoelectronic and electronic circuits by integrating III-V compound
nanopillar optoelectronic devices onto silicon substrates. The objectives of
this research are (1) to control the synthesis of nanostructures on silicon such
that they can be placed or seeded by design and scaled for mass production and
(2) develop electrically pumped lasers monolithically integrated with silicon
photonics and electronics. Using metal-organic chemical vapor deposition
synthesis technique, the nanopillar growth mechanism will be fully investigated
to achieve precise control of growth sites, density, doping and heterostructure
formation. Heterostructures are sandwich layers of different materials. Building
upon that, electrically-pumped nanopillar laser with a silicon transparent
emission wavelength will be designed, fabricated, and characterized.
Furthermore, nanopillar lasers will be integrated onto silicon waveguides with
high coupling efficiency for optoelectronic applications. Waveguides are
structures that guide light or electromagnetic waves.

The development of such optoelectronic integrated circuits will bridge the gap
between optoelectronic devices on III-V semiconductor platform and integrated
circuits on silicon with a unique manufacturing mechanism. Its success will add
novel breakthrough functionalities onto cost-effective silicon wafers with
greatly reduced power consumption, size, and weight. One of its transformational
impacts on our society could be bringing our personal hand-held devices to a
wide spectrum of applications in healthcare, sensing, imaging, and
communication. In addition, this project will result in a disruptive technology
for nanomaterial manufacturing, developing a major capability that will
fundamentally transform the synthesis of lattice-mismatched materials, which are
materials whose crystal structures don?t match up. Together with its research
activities primarily conducted by graduate students, this project will also
offer interdisciplinary opportunities for high school and undergraduate students
to gain hands-on experiences in cutting-edge research.