* 1335473
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Dynamics of Water Governance:  Civil Society and Expert Knowledge as Agents of Change.
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Maria Akchurin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 9,892.00

Elisabeth Clemens&lt;br/&gt;Maria Akchurin &lt;br/&gt;University of
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research investigates how expert
knowledge and civil society mobilization shape the institutions governing water
resources. The investigators will combine comparative-historical and
ethnographic methods to analyze changes in water policy from the late 1970s to
the present. The research is guided by three interconnected questions. First,
why did market-oriented reforms in water governance lead to durable
institutional change in some settings yet fail in others? Second, how did
different kinds of experts within and outside the state, on the one hand, and
civil society groups, on the other, influence these institutional trajectories?
Finally, how do the material and moral properties of water affect the ways in
which experts and civil society groups influence water governance institutions?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study examines these dynamics in Argentina and Chile
over time, focusing on water governance in two types of settings: drinking water
supply systems in densely populated urban areas, and drinking water supply
systems in less densely populated areas adjacent to industrial water users. The
research relies on two main types of data collected through field research:
archival documentary data supplemented by secondary historical sources and semi-
structured interviews with key respondents supplemented by ethnographic
observation. The study bridges political sociology, the sociology of expertise,
and social movement scholarship to inform how experts and civil society
organizations shape and participate in pressing debates about the environment,
development, and the roles of states and markets in addressing the management
and distribution of a resource that is simultaneously treated as an economic
good and a basic human right. The study incorporates the properties of water
into an understanding of how knowledge and legitimacy around its governance are
produced, and also draws insights from science and technology studies to enrich
more conventional accounts of institutional change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water is an essential natural resource and water
politics have become increasingly visible in discussions about environmental
governance and socioeconomic development on a global scale. By studying
trajectories of institutional change in water policies since the late 1970s,
research findings will contribute to our understanding of water governance by
examining historically grounded empirical questions to reflect on how states and
markets mediate the relationship between environment and society. The findings
will be shared via publications in the United States as well as with water
experts and civil society organizations in Argentina and Chile. The project has
the potential to generate interdisciplinary dialogue, contributing sociological
insights to the body of knowledge about the political and social processes
involved in managing water resources.