* 1335295
* Monitoring Quality of Nanostructured Thin Films in Polymer Solar Cell Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Andre Gesquiere, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2017
* USD 299,745.00

This award supports fundamental research to capture and decipher optical
signatures associated with the nanoscale properties of semiconducting polymer
thin films in order to enable low-cost manufacturing of high-quality polymer
solar cells. The research will achieve this goal by establishing a clear mapping
among solar cell efficiency, morphological details of polymer thin films, and
corresponding optical signatures. Specifically, the project will first fabricate
a collection of benchmark semiconducting polymer thin film samples exhibiting a
range of properties relevant to solar cell performance such as variation in
thickness, material coverage, and aspect ratio of polymer nanostructures. Then
these benchmark samples will be characterized using state-of-the-art off-line
methods. Finally the off-line data will be compared and correlated to in-line
optical signatures captured in real-time by measuring the light absorption from
green and red laser beams intersecting the films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge
gained from this research will enable development of real-time quality
monitoring tools in roll-to-roll manufacturing of polymer solar cells.
Manufacturing platforms equipped with such in-line monitoring capability can
implement closed-loop feedback controls for improved quality consistency leading
to higher yield and lower production costs. It is anticipated that the real-time
quality assurance principles gleaned from this research can also be applied to
manufacturing processes of other polymer semiconductor thin-film devices, such
as solid state lighting and flexible electronic circuits. Students at both the
graduate and undergraduate levels with diversified backgrounds will directly
participate in various aspects of this project. Because the research program may
spawn new start-up opportunities, highly motivated college students will be
mentored and engaged in the creation of business ventures through participation
in clean energy business plan competitions. K-12 students will benefit from the
program through vivid classroom demonstrations of advanced manufacturing
concepts.