* 1335491
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms and Processing Strategies for Sn Whisker Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Indranath Dutta, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2018
* USD 280,000.00

The growth of tin whiskers on fine pitched tin-plated electrical interconnect
lines poses catastrophic short circuit problems in lead-free electronic
components. In the past, this problem was mitigated by adding a few percent
lead, which is no longer permissible due to a world-wide ban on lead. This
research is aimed at developing robust strategies for mitigating tin-whisker
growth by two different mechanisms. One path proposed is to alter the plating
chemistry by adding dopants in the electroplating bath to emulate mechanisms
that enable lead to impart whisker growth resistance to tin. Another is to
modify deposition conditions to promote a near-equiaxed grain structure instead
of typically prevalent columnar grains, allowing absorption of mass flow without
whisker growth. To achieve this, the project will integrate an intellectual
component of alloy-design/microstructure with a deliverable manufacturing
component. To aid alloy-design, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations will be
performed to provide insight into the influence of dopant elements on grain
boundary energy and diffusivity in tin. The expected outcomes will be stress
reduction in the tin plating as well as insight into the key mechanisms of
whisker formation, including the impact of process conditions on the size and
density of whiskers produced.

If successful, the process technology proposed here will have significant impact
on the electronics manufacturing industry. The results will be particularly
relevant for the power, space and military electronics industries, where
lifetimes are measured in decades making whisker formation an egregious problem.
The work will integrate research and graduate student training at New Mexico
Tech and Washington State University by fostering discovery, interactions with
the industry, dissemination of results in conferences, as well as mentoring of
undergraduate and high school students. It will provide students with hands-on
experience in an industrially relevant technology, where materials processing,
microstructure, mechanics, and thermodynamics are all tied together in a single
problem of world-wide impact.