* 1335008
* Stochastic Motion Planning and Estimation with Non-Gaussian Uncertainty Distributions on a Lie Group
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Taeyoung Lee, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 219,517.00

This project is focused on computational framework for stochastic motion
planning and estimation of complex dynamical systems. As uncertainties in a
dynamical system arise from various sources and they cannot be completely
eliminated from any numerical analysis or experiment, the evolution of
uncertainties should be carefully characterized in motion planning and
estimation. This research utilizes non-commutative harmonic analysis to
represent an arbitrary type of uncertainty distributions in an intrinsic
fashion, and they are propagated according to the Fokker-Planck equation. Based
on these, stochastic optimal motion planning will be designed to obtain feasible
paths of a vehicle that maximize the probability to achieve a goal in uncertain
environments. In addition, nonlinear estimation schemes will be constructed
according to Bayesian framework to characterize uncertainties accurately with
sensor measurements. These formulations will be developed in a coordinate-free
fashion on nonlinear configuration manifolds represented by a Lie
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
provide a fundamental framework for stochastic analysis with arbitrary large
uncertainties, eliminating the common restrictive assumption that uncertainties
follow a specific Gaussian distribution with small variances. This result will
be particularity useful for motion planning and estimation of complex dynamical
systems in highly uncertain circumstances, such as unmanned aerial vehicles that
are capable of interacting with unknown dynamic environments through agile
maneuvers autonomously. This award will contribute to the development of an
engineering-driven computational math course and a research monograph, through
which we aim to cross-train students in both mathematics and engineering. The
results will be disseminated broadly to K-12 students by organizing engineering
summer camps, thereby exposing them to research activities in an earlier stage
and invigorating their interests in math and engineering.