* 1335862
* Investigating the structure and thermal damage resistance of molecular precursor derived ceramics for high power laser radiometry
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Gurpreet Singh, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2018
* USD 268,202.00

CBET - 1335862

PI: Gurpreet Singh, Kansas State University

The purpose of this research project is to develop a fundamental understanding
of the effect of size and shape of BN and C-C (i.e., BN networks and graphene-
like chains) domains on the thermal transport in molecular precursor derived
ceramics for high power laser radiometry. A one-step synthesis technique
involving pyrolysis of ?home-made? polysiloxane and polyborosilazane precursors
for the formation of ceramics with embedded graphene-like carbon and BN networks
will be utilized for enhancing thermal transport in ceramics. Further, the
molecular precursor derived ceramic phase will be functionalized with carbon
nanotubes to develop thermal absorber coatings with desired thermal and optical
characteristics to resist damage from high-energy laser beams (1 to 10 kW). The
project deliverables include: (a) structural data as characterized by a
combination of Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and high-
resolution transmission electron microscopy; (b) thermal properties (thermal
diffusivity, specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity) of the ceramic as
assessed by use of custom made setup based on American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) standards and alternatively through Laser Flash Method; (c)
Optical absorbance and laser visual damage threshold of the ceramic; and (d)
correlations and theory describing the effect of BN and C-C domain size and
shape on the thermal damage resistance of the ceramic.

This project will explore the structure and thermal properties of ceramics
prepared from controlled thermal decomposition of single source molecular
precursors. These ceramics have unique structure consisting of nanometer size
carbon chains and boron nitride network, which cannot be obtained through
conventional ceramic processing techniques. Therefore, generation of new
scientific data relating the structure to various thermal properties of these
ceramics will eventually result in the development of advanced energy conversion
systems. If successful, this project will influence multiple areas that include
thermal imaging devices, high-energy laser thermal detectors, energy storage
devices, and space structures. Further, collaborations with multiple engineering
programs at Kansas State University (K-State) will allow participation by
undergraduates from underrepresented groups. In addition, this project will also
further existing collaboration with scientists at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST), who will host student researchers providing
them with effective hands-on scientific and technical training.