* 1335417
* DMREF: Mechanics of Three-Dimensional Carbon Nanotube Aerogels with Tunable Junctions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Mohammad Islam, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 719,712.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) grant
provides funding for the development of a systematic and comprehensive
understanding of how the mechanical properties of three-dimensional carbon
nanotube aerogels depend on pore geometry, pore size distribution, and the
characteristics of the junctions between nanotubes to improve the performance
and to predict an optimal design of nanotube based porous structures. The
mechanical properties of the nanotube aerogels can be readily manipulated via
modification of the junctions or ?nodes? between the nanotubes. For example,
coating the nodes with graphene layers transforms these aerogels into
superelastic and fatigue resistant materials. Further, the nanotube aerogel is a
strong example of a nearly ideal rigid rod network, and lends itself for
comparison with simulations of an ideal percolating network of rigid rods. The
project will begin with the development of three-dimensional mechanical models
for nanotube aerogels that include realistic network structures as well as
nanotube and junction properties that approximate experimental system. The
mechanical properties of the aerogels, including modulus and hysteresis, as a
function of network and junction parameters will then be measured. By varying
the junction properties, the range of available nanotube aerogel properties will
be surveyed in order to provide insight and guidance on desirable (and
unfavorable) junction characteristics. The guidance from simulations will then
be translated to fabricate three-dimensional nanotube networks with diverse
junctions that are coated with graphene, covalently crosslinked, and fused with
continuous hybridized bonds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will not only facilitate the development of a deep understanding
of the behavior of highly porous networks, but also have significant practical
applications. Conducting and porous materials with high surface area and
mechanical integrity are actively sought for energy applications as an improved
electrode material in batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors. The ability to
predict, design, and synthesize these structures with computation coupled with
experiment will advance the pace at which electrode materials can be designed,
and will serve as a model for advancing other porous materials.