* 1335283
* Additive Manufacturing of Near-Net Shape and Fully Dense Shape Memory Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Todd Palmer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 12/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports the study of a novel laser-based additive manufacturing
technique to fabricate materials with unique ability to return to its original
shape after severe deformation, referred to as shape memory alloys. Two primary
objectives are to develop a fundamental understanding of the manufacturing-
structure-property relationships and to tailor the underlying microstructural
morphology and thus the shape memory material response. Parts are built-up as
successive metallic powder layers are deposited and laser consolidated. For the
alloys, temperature or external force/stress facilitates an atomic structure
change that begets a solid-solid microstructure phase transformation. By
reversing the sense of external stimuli (heating/cooling or loading/unloading)
after deformation, the transformation happens in reverse and the bulk material
recovers its original shape. Small-scale shape memory alloy plate and rod
geometries will be synthesized using additive manufacturing. This work
characterizes both the thermal-induced and stress-induced phase transformations
as well as underlying atomic-/microstructure using transmission electron
microscopy. The evolution of the transformation during deformation is visualized
by combining temperature cycling and mechanical stressing experiments with real-
time micro-scale measurements of localized displacement/strain and temperature.

The additive manufacturing technique builds 3-D computer generated model
geometries layer-by-layer in a cost-effective, energy efficient, and
environmental conscious manner. The materials design aspect of this fundamental
study takes advantage of the capabilities of the technique for parallel
processing of diverse powder mixtures and parallel synthesis with variable
processing parameters. This will determine fundamental relationships between
processing parameters, microstructure, and shape memory behavior. Additive
manufacturing offers a novel approach to commercially manufacture near-net shape
constructs. The work is the foundation for geometrically complex hierarchical
structures - micrometer scale plate and rod geometries are structural building
blocks. Shape memory alloy hierarchical structures are promising for practical
applications including earthquake and impact mitigation and vibration damping
for civil, naval, automotive, and aerospace structures.