* 1335502
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Multiscale Design of Hard and High Temperature Resistant Coatings by Computation and Experiment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Efstathios Meletis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 639,178.00

This project involves an interdisciplinary effort to conduct multiscale design
of hard and high temperature resistant (Si,Zr)-B-C-N coatings which are
thermally stable and oxidation resistant for high temperature (&gt;1500o C)
applications. The project couples multiscale computations and experiment to
merge the high-temperature oxidation resistant properties of Si-B-C-N and high
hardness properties of Zr-B-C-N systems. The predictive effort spans from
atomistic to multiscale distinct element method simulations to formulate solid
predictions of the optimized compositions. These predictions will provide
critical guidance for synthesizing coatings with targeted properties. We expect
that in these new coatings, the desirable properties will coexist, resulting in
a new generation of protective layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is far
reaching as it can enable new concepts for protective coatings and the
development of a new multiscale tool to predict materials' response. Molecular
dynamics investigation will address the fundamental issue of combining desirable
properties by varying chemical composition and structure. The application of the
distinct element modeling down to the nanoscale represents a new powerful tool
to simulate the global behavior, allowing the design of future materials at
large. The focus of this research - the discovery of new coatings working under
extreme conditions - can find application in multitude of critical components
such as turbine blades, reusable launch vehicles, hypersonic vehicles, and
thermal barrier applications. The research program is integrated with a multi-
layered education and outreach program involving curricula development, exposing
students to a novel interdisciplinary field, and summer camps. Opportunities
will be provided to underrepresented groups by targeting the large Hispanic
population in the State of Texas. This program is in partnership with the
Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers and includes a minority recruitment
program, a Latino Summer Camp for K-12 Hispanic students and a public awareness
component. Also, undergraduates from Pi Tau Sigma Honors Society will be engaged
in activities of the American Ceramic Society.