* 1335645
* DMREF: Iterative Theoretical Morphology Prediction, Synthesis, and Characterization of Novel Donor Oligomers for Accelerated Materials Discovery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kendall Houk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 990,001.00

Technical Description: Solution-processed oligomer-based organic photovoltaic
materials are promising candidates for next-generation solar cells due to their
low-cost potential, ease of fabrication, and tunable characteristics. The
relationship between molecular structure and materials morphology critically
affects performance characteristics such as charge mobility. This collaborative
project, sponsored by the Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer Our
Future (DMREF) program, explores the structure-morphology relationship, and then
uses knowledge gained to employ a screening and iterative design approach. The
project unites computational, synthetic, and device construction and
characterization research labs at UCLA to accelerate development of these
materials. A tiered computational approach for multiscale morphology modeling of
oligomeric donor material is being developed, using a combination of rapid
sampling and accurate ranking techniques using integrated electronic structure
calculations, crystal structure prediction, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations,
and charge transport calculations. Crystal structure prediction methods sample
possible packing arrangements and provide initial geometries for MD simulations
of each arrangement, upon which high-accuracy accelerated MD with a polarizable
force field can be employed to simulate local chemical properties and disorder.
As part of this approach, known first-principles and charge transport analysis
methods predict donor morphology-influenced properties such as hole mobility and
bulk electronic structure. From combinations of large libraries of donor and
acceptor subunits, screened oligomers with promising electronic structures and
morphologies are synthesized via site-selective cross-coupling reactions.
Microscopy and x-ray diffraction methods are used to analyze morphologies,
including morphology changes due to annealing, and to compare to theoretical
predictions. Photoluminescence quenching, transient absorption spectroscopy, and
charge extraction by linearly increasing voltage are used to assess device
performance. This tightly knit collaborative effort enables feedback from
experimental results to be used for iterative systematic tuning of candidate
molecules and improvements of computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: The need for clean and affordable energy demands the
development and improvement of alternative energy sources. The sun supplies the
Earth with 9000 times the world's current energy consumption, making solar power
an attractive option. Oligomer (small molecule)-based organic solar cells are
low cost relative to the current solar technology and have experienced
significant increases in power efficiency in recent years. But major
improvements are needed to enhance its commercialization potential. In a
collaborative project, computational, synthetic, and device characterization
research labs at UCLA are developing new methods and models to improve
prediction of materials morphology - the way in which many molecules fit
together - in these devices. The goal is to predict the performance of oligomer-
based organic solar cell performance and to accelerate the discovery of new
materials. From vast libraries of candidate molecules, the performance of new
high-performance devices is screened computationally to predict promising
molecules to be used to create and test devices and then improve performance of
these devices. This project involves graduate students in diverse research teams
to learn and develop interdisciplinary skills. Students involved gain experience
in each aspect of the project. Encouragement of the next generation of
scientists to engage in STEM careers is being fostered through mentorship of
undergraduate students and through K-12 outreach.