* 1335383
* Electrospray Materials Synthesis for Solar Energy Harvesting and Energy Storage
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Alessandro Gomez, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 388,903.00

The search for new nanomaterials with the right physical and chemical properties
for power and energy applications is very intense and is likely to play an ever
increasing role as discovering alternatives to fossil fuels becomes ever more
urgent. Much less effort is being put in the pursuit of manufacturing of these
newly discovered materials. This grant provides funding to fill this niche and
investigate a novel approach to the manufacturing of thin films of nanomaterials
for energy storage and harvesting applications. The approach is based on the
electrospray?a device that has unique capabilities to produce nanoparticles of
uniform size and deposit them with control over size, shape, structure and
composition. Using clean-room microfabrication techniques for the construction
of multiple spray nozzles, one can operate several sprays in parallel for
increased deposition rates, to match the needs of practical applications.
Specific aims of the proposed research include: deposition of nanomaterials with
controlled structure, assembling and testing semiconductor thin films in
functional devices and scale-up for inexpensive manufacturing in industrial
applications. Applications considered are cells for solar energy harvesting and
Si/C electrodes in lithium-ion batteries for energy storage. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The adoption of an inexpensive electrospray ?printing? capability
will result in substantial cost reduction in the fabrication and installation of
solar cells. In the case of lithium-ion batteries, nanostructured electrodes
using synthesized Si/C nanoparticles will lead to increased energy density and,
in turn, to greater range for battery use in the transportation sector. Si/C
nanoparticles are chosen since they can accommodate large volume changes
occurring during charge and discharge cycles of the battery. Importantly, the
proposed electrospray manufacturing approach can be extended to other materials,
including biomaterials, which will impact broadly the rapidly evolving field of
nanomanufacturing.