* 1335160
* GOALI: Building Engineering Through Topology Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,02/29/2016
* William Baker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 02/29/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This project addresses the structural engineering of buildings by constructing
engineering concepts through topology optimization. Structural topology relates
to geometric configurations of components that fit in to the structural system
of the building. The goal is to tailor topology optimization techniques to
building systems and to use this technology as a means to connect architects and
engineers in design of buildings. To achieve this goal, the challenges are to
move away from traditional ?box-like? building shapes by exploring innovative
bio-inspired and natural artistic designs as well as to enable a formal linkage
between structural engineering and architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed techniques for tailored building design will be a novel addition to the
realm of topology optimization. This research will explore natural load path
topology optimization of tall buildings; will provide integration of structural
engineering and architecture design optimization through the final design of
buildings; will achieve new advances in lateral bracing systems; and will
develop high-fidelity computational models. The computational framework will be
formulated to provide both architects and engineers freedom to design innovative
buildings that are artistic and yet with pragmatic consideration of economy. The
Co-PI, a principal in a consulting engineering company, has background in design
of super-tall buildings. The students working in the project will intern in the
consulting company and the inter-disciplinary research team will work in close
collaboration in all stages of the project.