* 1335340
* GOALI: Volumetric Error Analysis of Machine Tools
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Robert Landers, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2017
* USD 305,000.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) project is to create a new, viable paradigm for machine tool
calibration and geometric error compensation. Traditional calibration techniques
take dense, accurate error measurements using laser interferometers over a very
narrow range of the machine tool operating space. In this work laser trackers,
which have reduced accuracy compared to laser interferometers, are used to take
error measurements over the entire machine tool operating space, fundamentally
altering the calibration problem landscape and requiring new methods for
synthesizing and identifying kinematic models. Position-dependent six degree-of-
freedom kinematic errors will be introduced and identified at each joint, along
with quantified levels of accuracy. The constructed kinematic models will
provide a foundation for the creation of new compensation methodologies for
table-based and real-time systems. The new machine tool calibration and
compensation tools will be combined into a holistic volumetric error analysis
framework that will provide users with predictive tools capable of quantifying
the tradeoffs involved when calibrating and compensating a machine
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results will generate the scientific and
engineering knowledge needed to calibrate and compensate machine tools in a
time-efficient manner over their entire operating space using complete,
validated geometric error models. The decreased calibration costs, reduced part
qualification time, and increased machine tool accuracy will allow a wide
variety of products to be fabricated more cost-effectively and with superior
quality, benefiting consumers, the economy, and society. This research project
is a unique collaboration between Missouri University of Science and Technology,
Boeing, MAG, Automated Precision Inc., and the Center for Aerospace
Manufacturing Technologies. It will also provide exciting research opportunities
for undergraduate students, promote learning opportunities for industrial
practitioners, and broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering.