* 1335418
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Synergy, Crowding out, and Small Business: Linking Macro, Meso, and Micro Networks
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2015
* Lingxin Hao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2015
* USD 11,171.00

SES-1335418&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lingxin Hao&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Nazish
Zafar&lt;br/&gt;Johns Hopkins University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small businesses
provide a means for individuals with limited resources to earn a living and they
contribute toward the versatility of urban economies, but these businesses
typically have a short life cycle and the majority do not last more than 5
years. Therefore, to compete and survive, business owners rely on numerous
sources of support such as their personal networks while governments also offer
support through policies and programs. This dissertation examines the
interaction between networks, policies, and programs. One school of thought
claims that support from the external policies and programs displaces the
support provided by private networks, while another theory claims that they
actually stimulates private support, i.e. the relationship is synergistic. This
study acknowledges that both dynamics are possible, and focuses on exploring the
channels through which the synergistic connections are made. These channels
could include grassroots organizations and business groups. The sites for this
study include two global cities: Singapore and Sao Paulo, Brazil. Singapore
provides an ideal case study as there is a strong tradition of policies and
programs working closely with the grassroots whilst Sao Paulo provides a useful
comparative to illustrate a system in which active external support is less
embedded. Primary data will be collected through a series of qualitative
interviews with business owners, community leaders, and policy officials,
surveys with the business owners, and participant observation to acquire an
ethnographic perspective. Transcripts from parliamentary debates and policy
reports will provide a historical and contemporary perspective for the analysis.
Three major theoretical streams inform this dissertation: social network
analysis, new institutionalism, and the synergy thesis. Together, these theories
illuminate the context in which small businesses operate, but they also expose
the need for further research on how synergistic relations might operate between
private networks and the external policies and programs. The innovation in this
research is to examine the role of bridging institutions in society where
support from policy links with existent private networks to optimize the success
of small businesses. This research seeks to expand our knowledge on the public-
private nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Small businesses
are increasingly framed as an engine of economic development in countries around
the world. The research aims to inform policy on effective channels for
supporting small businesses by identifying bridging institutions and elaborating
on their linking mechanisms, as well as provide empirical flesh to current
theories on state and society, specifically, elaborating on how intermediate
groups facilitate symbiosis between governments, markets, and social networks.
This study will also include the organizational strategies of women and
immigrants. The findings will be published in academic journals as well as
policy reports to bolster research, teaching, and understanding in this field of
research and development. It will also be invaluable for the development of
course material for teaching university courses.