* 1335004
* Floor Vibration Serviceability Studies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2019
* Mehdi Setareh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 08/31/2019
* USD 254,962.00

This project will pursue research in prediction of floor vibrations due to human
activities. The research plan consists of two parts: (1) a study of the effects
of the human-floor system interaction, and (2) a study of floor vibration
assessment for human acceptance. To conduct the research, the project will use
laboratory experiments, field investigations, and analytical studies. Finite
element analytical model will be used to represent the structural system of the
floor. Experimental research will be conducted using an existing two-story
structure in the Laboratory. The test structure will help the investigators to
study the effects of human-structure interaction and assess floor vibrations
under a controlled laboratory environment. In addition, parameters for the
assessment of floor vibrations for human perception will be studied. A series of
field tests and measurements on large floor structures are planned to validate
analytical and laboratory results.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this
research will be of significance to the committees dealing with building
serviceability issues as related to floor vibrations. Unacceptable floor
vibrations can be a serious serviceability issue for architects, engineers, and
building owners. This problem is becoming prevalent due to the use of higher
strength materials, use of computer-assisted design to optimize the weight of
structural members, rhythmic human activities such as dancing, aerobics, indoor
jogging, etc., and innovative designs by architects achieving long, column-free
spans resulting in a reduction in the natural frequency and damping. The result
is that many floors are susceptible to annoying vibrations requiring expensive
retrofitting. In addition, housing of sensitive equipment such as magnetic
resonance imaging scanners, electron microscopes, etc., on building floors
require very low vibration limits for their proper operations. It is necessary
to predict analytically vibration performance of floors when subjected to
excitations by human activities. The most important issues in floor vibrations
are the dynamic interaction between humans and floor structure and human
perception of vibrations