* 1335545
* Biological Mechanisms for Exploiting Resonance in Undulatory Swimming
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Tetsuya Iwasaki, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2017
* USD 280,000.00

The goal of the proposed project is to understand whether and how neuronal
control circuits exploit mechanical resonance during animal locomotion to
achieve highly efficient rhythmic body movements. General principles will be
uncovered through a specific case study of dynamical mechanisms underlying
undulatory swimming of leeches. Diverse behaviors of leeches are generated by
relatively simple neuronal circuits, providing a unique opportunity for
preliminary understanding of how the brain works in the most primitive form. A
simple integrated model of leech swimming, amenable to analytical studies, will
be developed from detailed, experimentally validated, component models of the
neuronal circuit, motoneuron activation, muscle biomechanics, and body-fluid
interactions. Theoretical and computational studies of the model will then be
performed to examine how the neural control circuits process sensory signals and
achieve oscillations near a resonance under nominal and perturbed environmental
conditions.

Once uncovered, resonance entrainment principles will contribute to
understanding of general complex systems that achieve robustness, adaptability,
and emergence. These new functionalities, when engineered, will have a broad
range of applications, including robotic vehicles that maintain efficiency of
transportation under varying environments. In the medical field, understanding
of the neural control mechanisms is fundamental to determining the cause,
rehabilitation, and cure for loss or reduction of locomotor ability due to
neurological disorders or spinal cord injury. The research activities are
integrated into educational activities at both K-12 and college levels. A
graduate student will be trained for experimental data processing and model-
based dynamical systems analyses. Through research experience activities,
undergraduate students will develop educational software modules for
simulation/animation of leech swimming to stimulate K-12 students' curiosity for
science/engineering during such occasions as Engineering Open House. The results
will be broadly disseminated to both biology and control engineering communities
to enhance cross-cultural fertilization.