* 1335302
* Testing Stable Isotopes of Human Dental Calculus as a Nondestructive Proxy for Paleodiet
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2017
* Simon Poulson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2017
* USD 119,502.00

For over thirty years, bioarchaeologists have used stable carbon and nitrogen
isotopes to evaluate the dietary habits of earlier human populations. Given that
bone preserves better than skin, fingernails, and hair in most taphonomic
contexts, the primary biomaterial used in isotope analysis is collagen. This
protein, the organic fraction of calcified bone, is not directly available for
analysis so methods used to isolate collagen are destructive.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to collagen, dental plaque is a biofilm that forms on the
teeth of humans and other animals. When plaque accumulates and is not removed,
it calcifies to form dental calculus. In 2008, calculus was collected from
medieval and post-medieval Basque skeletons from Vitoria, Spain with the aim of
isolating plant phytoliths. The goal of this project was to determine if
researchers could observe directly the introduction of edible plants from the
New World to Spain, with special emphasis on maize. Unfortunately, processing
calculus samples to find phytoliths was minimally successful. With 58 samples
and diminished hopes of finding phytoliths, five calculus samples were sent to
the geochemistry lab at the University of Nevada, Reno for stable isotope
analysis. The researchers could find no evidence in the literature that anyone
had ever attempted to obtain stable isotope signatures from calculus, so they
were not optimistic there would be enough carbon and nitrogen to get a good
signal from a biomaterial primarily made up of calcium and phosphate
minerals.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The initial analysis of five samples yielded
surprising results. There was more carbon than anticipated, it yielded ratios
that could be replicated on repeated trials, and these ratios were close to the
values obtained from bone collagen for earlier European populations. When the
samples were tested for nitrogen, a similar result was found. There is
sufficient nitrogen in calculus to get a good isotope estimate and the results
were consistent with values for earlier European populations based on bone
collagen.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project does not center on the utility of
stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes in paleodietary analysis as that has been
demonstrated in hundreds of studies over the past 35 years. The project goal is
to determine whether a new biomaterial ? dental calculus ? can be used to
estimate C and N ratios, especially in instances where destructive analysis is
prohibited. The key is that calculus is not part of the skeletal or dental
system but is an add-on that goes through a cycle of addition and removal (by a
dental hygienist) in modern human populations. Prior to dental hygiene, emphasis
was more on addition and less on removal so calculus is common on the teeth of
earlier humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While results to date are encouraging,
this project will conduct the necessary additional tests to determine if dental
calculus can be a consistent and effective proxy for isotope analysis. Calculus
samples will be obtained from human groups with divergent subsistence patterns,
including Greenlandic Inuit, Greenlandic Norse, classic and colonial Maya, and
prehistoric Peruvians, to determine if isotopes from calculus exhibit
differences in protein consumption and the varied use of C3 and C4 plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If consistent results can be obtained, dental calculus
might provide a much more accessible source of data and may also avoid
resistance by Native American groups to this sort of analysis using destructive
analyses techniques on human skeletal remains. The project will validate a
method of isotopic analysis that is faster, non-destructive and less expensive
than the current standard testing bone collagen, which would be a major
contribution to the sub-field of paleo-diet studies.