* 1335282
* Collaborative Research:   Systematic Direct Mixing Measurements within the Global Repeat Hydrography Program (SYSDMM)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Moum, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 576,310.00

To date, less than a thousand profiles of turbulence have been acquired in the
deep ocean and these are concentrated in only a few geographic regions. As a
result of this paucity of direct measurements, the distribution of mixing is
inferred largely through proxies and parameterizations that have known
limitations. Mixing budgets remain poorly constrained. The purpose of this pilot
project is to demonstrate that systematic, repeated sequences of turbulent
mixing over full-ocean depths can be obtained in a broad distribution throughout
the global ocean. To accomplish this goal, the investigators in this project
will deploy chi-pods - "turbulent mixing meters" on standard shipboard
CTD/LADCPs package operated by the Global Repeat Hydrography Program. A few
thousand turbulence profiles will be collected and analyzed over a three-year
period. The chi-pods are self-contained instruments that have been quantifying
mixing on equatorial moorings since 2005. They use fast response thermistors and
precision accelerometers to measure microscale temperature gradients, from which
the dissipation rate of temperature variance, รท and the eddy diffusivity of heat
and other tracers. Unlike traditional velocity microstructure measurements based
on shear probes, temperature microstructure measurements are not sensitive to
platform vibration - a necessity for deployment on moorings with a surface
expression or from a CTD rosette. The CTD-chi-pod has modifications that allow
it to be easily clamped to a standard rosette with minimal impact during repeat
hydrography operations, and has been proven successful in several recent pilot
experiments in shallower waters.

Intellectual Merit: Diapycnal mixing in the ocean interior has a strong
influence on upper ocean heat and nutrient budgets, abyssal circulation, and
water mass distributions. An initial attempt to develop and implement
parameterizations of diapycnal mixing for large-scale models is underway as part
of an NSF-funded Climate Process Team. The largest impediment to that effort is
the incredible scarcity of direct turbulence observations, particularly those
that cover the full water column depth. This project will demonstrate the
feasibility and value of collecting a global dataset of microstructure
observations that will be made publicly available as soon as possible after
acquisition, following repeat hydrography protocols. The data will allow the
PIs, as well as the broader scientific community, to calculate better global and
regional averages of diapycnal mixing rates, explore underlying dynamics that
control the geographic distribution of ocean turbulence, evaluate gradual
changes in basin-averaged mixing rates, assess uncertainty and systematic bias
in finescale shear and strain parameterizations of mixing that are becoming
widely used, and validate turbulence parameterizations that will be going into
the next generation of regional and climate models.

Broader Impacts: The proposed measurements will be the first comprehensive set
of direct mixing observations easily available to the broader community. These
measurements can be used by a wide range of scientists to constrain everything
from regional tracer budgets to biological nutrient fluxes to global energetics.
The results will be particularly useful for testing and improving
parameterizations of turbulent mixing being developed for global climate models
(http://www-pord.ucsd.edu/~jen/cpt/), as diapycnal mixing rates remain one of
the most influential tuning parameters in such models. This project will train
one graduate student and give other students exposure to open-ocean
observational techniques.