* 1335850
* Computed tomography image-based study for understanding the impact of electrode microstructure on lithium ion battery performance
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Likun Zhu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2017
* USD 291,002.00

PI: Zhu, Likun&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1335850&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Indiana
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Computed tomography image-based study for
understanding the impact of electrode microstructure on lithium ion battery
performance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive research has been conducted to
develop advanced lithium ion battery (LIB) technologies to meet the demands of
the ground transportation industry for LIBs with higher energy and power
densities, lower cost, and safer operation. In addition to the development of
advanced materials for the anode, cathode, and electrolyte, the structure of the
electrodes at the micro- and nano-scales also plays a critical role in
determining the performance of a LIB because the electrode?s composite matrix
must be designed to provide both electron and lithium ion transportation, which
eventually affects the LIB?s voltage, specific capacity, and discharge/charge
rate. Currently, a fundamental understanding of the impact of an electrode?s
microstructure on LIB performance is still lacking due to the inhomogeneity,
complexity, and three-dimensional (3D) nature of the electrode?s microstructure.
In this study, a novel approach is proposed to gain greater understanding of the
microstructure of the electrode and its impact on the LIB?s physical and
electrochemical performances when using liquid electrolytes as well as solid
electrolytes (all-solid LIBs). The knowledge gained in this study is expected to
help identify the optimal conditions of the composite electrode?s components and
microstructure that will yield compact and safe LIBs with high energy and power
densities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project takes a unique,
interdisciplinary approach using experimental and theoretical analysis tools
from the areas of electrochemistry, nanotechnology, transmission x-ray
microscopy, material science, and numerical modeling. This work is expected to
establish the engineering and scientific foundation for safe and high
power/energy density LIBs. To achieve such an objective, the research efforts
will first focus on the fundamental understanding of the porous microstructure
of the composite electrode and its impact on the electrochemical performance of
liquid electrolyte LIBs, followed by exploration into the impact of the
electrode?s microstructure on all-solid LIB performances. X-ray nano-computed
tomography (nano-CT) with sub-100 nm resolution will be employed to obtain the
3D microstructure of the LIB electrodes. For the first time, synchrotron x-ray
nano-CT will be attempted to perform microstructural characterization of the
composite electrode and to identify the particle/particle interface in all-solid
LIBs. Both liquid electrolyte and all-solid LIB cells with finely tuned
microstructure will be designed, fabricated, and characterized in the PIs? labs.
A rich array of knowledge will be obtained through systematic experiments
regarding the effects of various factors in the LIB electrodes. A comprehensive
mathematical model and simulation framework based on the finite volume method
will be established to reveal the physical and electrochemical processes in the
electrode. The experimental and numerical results will be used to establish the
correlations between the LIB?s performance and the electrode
microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful implementation of this
research would directly facilitate the improvement of current LIBs that use
liquid electrolytes and the development of next generation all-solid LIBs. The
scientific and engineering knowledge gained from this project will improve
battery capability allowing for the widespread use of environmentally
sustainable energy sources, especially in ground transportation. Graduate and
undergraduate students will gain critical hands-on research experience through
this project. Summer camps will provide local high school students and K-12
teachers a unique opportunity to explore the interdisciplinary fields of
advanced battery technologies and renewable energy.