* 1335857
* High efficiency photovoltaics through engineering spontaneous emission
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Edo Waks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,180.00

PI: Munday, Jeremy&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1335857&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Maryland College Park&lt;br/&gt;Title: High efficiency
photovoltaics through engineering spontaneous emission&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to show that the suppression of the spontaneous
emission rate of a solar cell leads to an improvement in the cell?s efficiency.
The inhibition of spontaneous emission leads to increased carrier concentrations
and hence an increase in the quasi-Fermi level splitting and cell voltage. To
suppress the spontaneous emission rate, photonic crystals will be used, which
are well known to decrease the radiative rate of recombining carriers. This
effect will lead to higher open circuit voltages and hence higher cell
efficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past two decades, much work has been
done in the two separate fields of spontaneous emission engineering and in
photovoltaics. This proposal represents the convergence of these fields, which
may have a transformative impact on photovoltaic devices by adding an additional
degree of freedom to the design: spontaneous emission engineering. Photonic
crystals are known to inhibit spontaneous emission, which leads to an increase
in the carrier lifetime. By increasing the free carrier lifetime, and hence the
density of free carriers, the quasi-Fermi level splitting increases, leading to
an improvement in the open circuit voltage. In this project, photonic crystal
solar cells will be developed to suppress spontaneous emission and improve solar
cell power conversion efficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
societal benefits of improving clean energy generation technologies, the PIs
will engage in a number of activities aimed to encourage future scientists,
educate the public, and disseminate new finding to the scientific community.
These activities include recruitment of under-represented groups through the
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Undergraduate Research Program
(LSAMP URP) at the University of Maryland, the Undergraduate Summer Research
Program within the Institute for Research in Electronics and Applied Physics,
and outreach to local high schools by encouraging and supporting high school
students to perform research projects in their labs.