* 1335038
* Collaborative Research: Synthesis of User Interfaces for Collaborative Systems in Uncertain Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Meeko Oishi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 179,687.00

The research objective of collaborative project is to synthesize observability
and estimation techniques from hybrid control theory to design and validate
user-interfaces for expensive, high-risk, and safety-critical collaborative
systems (e.g. avionics and biomedical devices). The user interface provides a
means for the user to observe the underlying automated system as well as for the
user to apply inputs to the system. This research will develop deterministic and
stochastic methods for systems under both normal and abnormal operating
conditions. The developed techniques and algorithms will be designed to
accommodate environments that have complex information requirements, inevitable
uncertainties and measurement errors, and nontrivial continuous dynamics, such
as those found in air traffic control and aircraft flight management systems.
Specifically, this research addresses the development of 1) observability-based
conditions to assess the correctness of information content in user interfaces
(modeled as hybrid systems with discrete push-button and continuous joystick-
type inputs), 2) mode estimation techniques for fault detection (for operation
under abnormal conditions) and a prioritization of display elements, 3) display
design via sensor scheduling to determine the optimal combination of information
for a given display mode, and 4) abstraction-based conditions for correctness of
user-interface design (that assume the user interface is a reduced
representation of the actual underlying system under standard and abnormal
conditions). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
could help identify human-automation interaction problems (such as automation
surprises, inadequate or excessive information contained in the user interface,
and mode confusion) in collaborative systems before they are built, tested,
deployed, and possibly while they are operating. The control algorithms and
interface design aids developed through this research are generic, and have
potential to improve the effectiveness in collaborative systems in a variety of
domains. This research plan will contribute to the formal methods in human
computer interaction community, and to the control theory communities focused on
the design of decision support aids. Developed theory, code, and data will be
disseminated in a timely manner. Students will benefit through development of a
new, multidisciplinary graduate course in control of collaborative systems, with
particular emphasis on avionics and air traffic applications, as well as from
mentoring and participation in this research.