* 1335868
* Wind Turbine Array Performance Based on Coupling CFD with Doppler Lidar Measurements
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yulia Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 336,215.00

PI: Peet, Yulia&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1335868&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Arizona State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Wind Turbine Array Performance Based
on Coupling CFD with Doppler Lidar Measurements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the size
of the modern wind turbines grow, the effect of the atmospheric boundary layer
(ABL) variability on their operation becomes significantly more important. This
project will develop and validate a novel methodology to integrate field wind
velocity measurements obtained by the Doppler lidar into a high-fidelity
computational model for wind plant flow and power characterization. Doppler
lidar measurements give the most reliable information of the microscale
meteorological structures modulated by the regional terrain and local weather
patterns. High-fidelity wind plant flow models based on Large Eddy Simulations
(LES) generate highly-resolved spatio-temporal data including unsteady turbine
loads for assessing the structural response and power performance. When driven
by realistic atmospheric measurements, LES simulations will provide invaluable
information to study the unsteady response of wind turbine arrays to the
stochastic atmospheric environment. Knowledge of these unsteady responses is
required to create reliable models for wind turbine control and wind farm layout
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique multiscale approach will be develop
to propagate the effects of the sub-mesoscale atmospheric motion captured by the
real-time observations down to the wind plant and wind turbine scales governed
by the viscous effects and blade/wake interactions. This approach will combine
the optimal interpolation assimilation of the Doppler lidar data to retrieve the
vector field information, reconstructing the smaller scales by driving the
auxiliary ABL LES simulations to match the lidar observations, and integrating
the assimilated spatio-temporal stochastic inflow with the state-of-the-art wind
plant flow characterization model based on LES and actuator line aerodynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a novel computational experiments the PIs will be
able to study the effects of spatio-temporal wind variability on unsteady
turbine loads and wake physics, and computationally isolate the different
sources of variability such as wind turbulence, wind speed shear, wind
directional shear, with the goal of characterizing the relative strengths of
these effects and creating the most reliable simplified inflow models that
capture the essential physics. The creation of simplified models is crucial for
improving design parameters and standards for wind turbine industry. The
numerical simulations are based on high-order spectral element computational
solver Nek5000 developed and supported by Argonne National Laboratory that
currently offers the most efficient utilization of high-end computing resources
due to its high-order accuracy and extreme
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding spatio-temporal responses of
wind plants to realistic wind conditions will result in improved design and
reduction of uncertainty, thus lowering Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE). The
lessons learned and the topics discovered will be broadly disseminated within
the scientific community. This project will be a central theme for providing
hands-on research and educational experience for the local high-school students.
Through competitive diversity-oriented scholarships, PIs will work with four
high-school students including minority, female and low-income students, over
the summer following the second year of the project.