* 1336972
* Order and chaos in the flow of red blood cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Jonathan Freund, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 279,891.00

PI: Freund, Jonathan Proposal Number: 1336972

It is well-known that in small tubes and capillary vessels, red blood cells flow
in a strikingly regular lined-up column, with viscous stresses deforming them
into bullet-like shapes. This regularity fails in larger vessels or tubes, where
the cells take on varied and intricate shapes and flow with irregular and
apparently chaotic interactions. This work will investigate this apparent
bifurcation, leading to the onset of instability and chaotic motion. It is both
an important fluid mechanical instability, with biophysical implications, and an
important consideration in the design of microfluidic devices that process blood
cells. Forming and maintaining uniform rows of cells in such a device will
facilitate processing them on a cell-by-cell basis for diagnostic or filtering
purposes.

Intellectual Merit : Although hydrodynamic interactions at the low Reynolds
numbers of flowing red blood cells are linear, the overall system is
significantly nonlinear. Geometric nonlinearities associated with the cell
positions and their deformable shapes present analytical challenges. A
systematic approach is proposed to develop a description, with predictive
capability, focusing in particular on the factors leading to the
destabilitization of flowing red blood cell columns. A highly accurate
simulation tool will be used for the collective motion of interacting and
realistically flexible blood cells flowing within complex-geometry tubes or
vessels. It is a spectral boundary integral solver, which has been used in
several recent studies, including the fundamental analysis of blood flow in
small tubes, the transport of magnetic nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery,
and the biomedically important forces and transport effects of red blood cells
on white blood cells as part of the inflammation response. Preliminary
simulation results suggest the existence of a bifurcation between the lined-up
flow and the apparently chaotic flow, which depends upon vessel diameter and
cell volume fraction. Analytical work to describe the bifurcation will be
pursued. The simulation will be used to calculate the linear interaction of all
perturbation degrees of freedom and thereby will provide a complete linear
dynamic model. This linear system will be analyzed with standard and, if
necessary, transient algebraic growth methods to describe the behavior of small
perturbations. A rigid-sphere analog is much more tractable and provides a
starting-point for the proposed effort. An initial result for this is also
presented. A goal is to advance understanding within a mathematical description
to the point that a reduced dynamical description can then be used to predict
phenomena of biological and microfluidic engineering importance.

Broader Impacts : Studies such as this at the juncture of fluid mechanics,
advanced simulation, applied mathematics, and biophysics are fundamentally
interdisciplinary and therefore of high value from an educational perspective.
In this particular case the analytical tools will translate into a reduced
description that can both illuminate biophysical phenomena and provide guidance
for the analysis and design of microfluidic devices. The PI will broaden the
STEM impact of this work via the development and distribution of a user-friendly
reduced model of cell interactions. This will be done in collaboration with
undergraduate research assistants, and with the goal to enable simulation-based
bio-microfluidic design projects for simplified blood-cell-handling devices.