* 1336824
* Wireless Occupancy Detection to Improve Building Energy Efficiency
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2014,08/31/2018
* Tat Fu, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,736.00

1336824 (Fu). Buildings are the largest consumers of energy in the United States
and, therefore, creating green buildings can significantly aid the country?s
pressing need to enhance energy efficiency and sustainability. The objective of
this project is to detect and estimate the number of occupants in buildings to
control building energy-consuming systems and thereby increase energy
efficiency. Conventional occupancy sensors detect the presence of occupants,
where a single person is treated equally as a group of people. For building
controls such as lighting, these presence-based methods are sufficient. However,
controls, such as ventilation, heating and cooling, may fluctuate considerably
depending on the number of occupants in a room. Instead of detecting the
physical presence of occupants from movements or body heat as in conventional
sensors, the investigators propose to detect occupancy by sensing existing
cellphone communications. A recently published study reported that 99% of
individuals carry cellphones and even idle cellphones communicate routinely with
cell towers. By sensing cellphone signals inside buildings, the investigators
propose that the number and locations of cellphones (and their human carriers)
can be accurately determined. The occupancy data will then be provided to
building automation systems to improve energy efficiency by adjusting different
building systems (ventilation, heating/cooling, etc.) accordingly. This research
includes three objectives: cellular communication-based occupant tracking,
analysis and prediction of stochastic occupancy for energy efficient control
strategies, and prototype testing in real buildings. In the first objective, the
investigators will use multiple cellular phone control-channel traffic sensors
to identify the position of each occupant. The second objective of the project
focuses on data fusion and analysis of the cellular signal data. The
investigators will develop algorithms that determine the number of occupants and
position based upon the spectrum-sensing network. With occupancy tracking data,
the investigators will develop stochastic models of occupancy in test buildings.
Such models will be used to predicate occupancy levels for the following phase
of this project. In the last objective, the investigators aim to implement new
control strategies that leverage the comprehensive occupancy data to improve
efficiency in building control systems. Experiments will be conducted in ten
campus buildings to implement the proposed methods in collaboration with
university building management. The success of the proposed system will improve
building sustainability and potentially change the fields of building design and
operations by providing real-time occupancy data. Moreover, the proposed non-
intrusive occupancy detection system may find use in areas such as security,
rescue efforts (locating victims) and elderly care (resident tracking in nursing
homes). The PIs will incorporate different aspects of the research into
Electrical/Computer and Civil Engineering courses (Wireless Communication System
and Green Building Design) as well as the Dual Major in Sustainability at UNH.
Students from different backgrounds will work as a team and be exposed to
diverse, interdisciplinary research topics.