* 1336734
* Phonon Coherence and Scattering Effects in Laterally Periodic Silicon Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Kenneth Goodson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-1336734&lt;br/&gt;PI: K.E. Goodson&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro- and nano-phononic/photonic
crystals have found application and/or hold promise in many emerging
technologies such as nanophotonic devices, high ZT thermoelectric materials,
phononic-photonic crystals for optical cooling, acoustic insulators, micro-
acoustic components such as waveguides, cavities and filters, as well as
NEMS/MEMS thermal sensors and actuators. Phonon coherence and scattering effects
in these two-dimensional periodically porous (2D-PP) and one-dimensional
nanoladder (1D-NL) structures may result in more than two orders of magnitude
reduction in their effective thermal conductivities. Exploring the intriguing
physics of phonon transport in these novel structures is the subject of this
project by means of careful transport property measurements on silicon films,
which offer nearly unparalleled material quality owing to the refinement of
silicon on insulator fabrication technology. We explore a wide range of critical
dimensions such as film thickness, hole diameter and separation ranging from 20
to 1000 nm as well as surface roughnesses ranging from 2 to 10 nm and
temperatures ranging from 10 to 800 K. We implement novel pore designs to break
or control the onset periodicity and induce multiple phononic bandgaps. While
the primary focus of this project is to make available the largest set of
accurate and well-characterized experimental data to the scientific community,
we also attempt to develop a simulation tool/model that can help to guide the
experimental design as well as improve upon the existing models to extend their
limited range of applicability and accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses several outstanding questions on the fundamentals of phonon transport
in nanostructures. For example, we would like to know the origin of extreme
reduction in thermal conductivity two-dimensional and one-dimensional
nanostructures and the manner in which this reduction is affected by pore
geometry and temperature. This project attempts to identify the relative
contributions of classical phonon scattering on pores and boundaries and phonon
coherent effect (dispersion) to heat conduction. We should learn if it possible
to create multiple phononic bandgaps using multiple periodicity patterns in the
2D structures and be able to understand the impact of breaking the periodicity
patterns. Other areas of science and technology that can directly benefit from
the proposed research include thermoelectric energy generation and cooling.
Potentially, a more efficient thermoelectric two-dimensional material may result
in significant improvement of these devices. Understanding of the transport in
nanostructures structures will greatly benefit the performance and reliability
of nanofabricated thermal sensors and actuators.