* 1336657
* A Distillation-type Process for Thermal Decomposition of Complex Hydrocarbons by Film Boiling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Charles Avedisian, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

CBET-1336657&lt;br/&gt;PI-Avedisian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conversion of
condensed phase (liquid) organic chemicals to lighter fractions forms the basis
of some chemical process industries. The current practice is to vaporize the
reactant liquid separately and then transport the gases to the high temperature
reaction environment. The overarching objective of this research is to develop
the understanding of the thermo/chemical processes that governs operation of a
unique chemical reactor concept which closely couples vaporization with
decomposition in a reaction space that essentially builds itself. The concept
involves establishing film boiling on a heated surface submerged in a pool of
the reactant liquid. This heat transfer mode is developed when bubbles cannot
transport energy away from a surface at a fast enough rate to avoid coalescence.
A vapor film then forms on the surface which insulates it from the surrounding
liquid. The resulting temperature drop across the vapor film can be more than a
thousand degrees even though the liquid is comparatively cold. Such temperatures
are more than sufficient for organic gases to decompose. The reaction occurs in
the physical space of the vapor film that is controlled almost entirely by
operational variables, most directly temperature of the surface on which film
boiling is established. If surface temperature is lowered below the minimum film
boiling temperature the reactor literally disappears. This aspect of self-
assembly is unique among chemical reactor technologies. This research will
investigate the versatility of film boiling to convert organic reactants that
form condensable species which are soluble in the reactant liquid, and high
boiling point liquids that can stress containment seals for the liquid pool. An
all-glass distillation-type design for a reactor will be fabricated and applied
to a range of chemicals with a progression of decomposition complexities,
including a reactant liquid that will decompose only to noncondensable gases
with a known reaction rate constant, a chemical that forms both noncondensable
and condensable gases, a liquid hydrocarbon with many conversion steps, and a
chemical that is prominent as a waste product in the biodiesel production
process. The major outcome of the project will be a greater understanding of how
film boiling promotes chemical reaction of organic gases with an experimental
design that is applicable to a wide range of organic liquids. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Success in this investigation will result in a fundamental
understanding of the vaporization and heat transfer processes that govern a new
chemical reactor technology based on film boiling for decomposing organic
chemicals into more high-valued products. For example, there is currently a
world-wide glut of glycerine due to its formation in the biodiesel production
process that threatens the viability of the industry. The inherent portability
and high gas temperatures of film boiling suggests its feasibility to convert
pure glycerine to synthesis gas with potential to create a useful energy source
from what is currently a waste product by a simple process that could make more
efficient the production of biofuel from bio-based seed oil feedstocks.