* 1336700
* GOALI: Fluid Dynamics, Heat Transfer, and Crystal Growth in Solvothermal Reactors: Modeling, Scaling, and Validation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,05/31/2018
* Minel Braun, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2018
* USD 369,787.00

CBET-1336700&lt;br/&gt;PI: Chandy &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This industry-university
collaborative project will develop and experimentally validate a computational
fluid dynamics (CFD)-based model for crystal growth in supercritical fluids,
with the goal of: (i) creating an integrated predictive thermofluid-mass
transfer methodological approach and tool for crystal growth modeling, and (ii)
demonstrating and applying the tools to optimization of an ammonothermal process
for growth of single crystal gallium nitride (GaN), laying the groundwork for
scale up of prototype and small scale reactors to a bulk manufacturing process
and capability. Three critical areas will be considered: crystal growth
numerical model, apparatus scale-up, and reactor optimization for enhanced mass
transport. While several CFD simulations of hydrothermal and ammonothermal
crystal growth processes have been conducted in the past, they have involved
restrictive, simplified assumptions, extremely crude crystal growth models, and
have not been validated experimentally. Not only does this research propose to
create a more realistic growth model, but most importantly it intends to
validate it experimentally. Like in many hybrid numerical/experimental
undertakings, the strategy will be to use the experimental work for providing
added insight for modeling while at the same time looking at the numerical work
to guide the experimental work. This approach will advance a multi-scale, multi-
physics phenomena modeling whereby the crystal growth model will benefit from
seamless integration of 3-D momentum, energy and mass transfer 3-D equations
(rather than 2-D axisymmetric) applied to a free convection environment. This
research will for the first time, offer: (a) an experimentally 3-D computational
tool for solvothermal crystal growth accounting jointly for turbulence, heat
transfer, mass etching and deposition in a realistic reactor architecture of
crystal seeds and porous nutrient; (b)concomitant experimental validation of the
integrated multiphysics code (c) use experimental work to establish valid rules
for geometric and dynamic similitude scaling for flows and reactor design; and
(d) establish an assignment map between the calculated Rayleigh numbers and the
types of flow regimes experimentally observed in cylindrical geometries with
axisymmetric lateral heating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamentally, the integrated
experimental and numerical research will make a significant contribution to the
general understanding of thermally driven fluid mechanics interacting with
porous media as well as the associated surface reaction chemistry. In particular
the model will be applied to closed cylindrical enclosures with laterally
axisymmetric heated walls. The study will enable substantial process development
through optimization of flow, heat and mass transfer, confident scale-up of
processes in large, capital-intensive reactors, lower cost of design and
construction of ammonothermal process reactors. SORAA and possibly other new
entrants will stand to benefit significantly from the availability of a
validated predictive and design numerical tool. The experiments developed in
this program will form the basis of fluid mechanics training workshops for
students at various levels with the added potential of providing some useful
insights into other applications related to free convection. The broader impact
and outreach activities that are centered on the experiments and simulations are
aimed at increasing graduate research in Engineering at University of Akron,
through enhancement of research and education partnerships. The knowledge gained
from this study are expected to impact diverse processes in supercritical
fluids, including synthesis of nanoparticles, zeolites, and novel materials and
pyrolysis of waste materials.