* 1336171
* Viscoelastic Fluids in Parallel Shear Flows at low re: Instabilities, Bifurcations & Single Molecule Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Paulo Arratia, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,999.00

Arratia, Paulo 1336171

Complex fluids are a broad class of materials that are usually homogeneous at
the macroscopic scale, but possess structure at an intermediate scale (e.g.,
colloids, blood, and polymers). The rheology and bulk flow behavior of such
fluids are strong functions of their intermediate or structural scale. A prime
example of this is the stretching and alignment of flexible polymer molecules in
fluid flow, which has been connected to many poorly understood phenomena such as
turbulence drag reduction, anomalous viscosity enhancement, and irregular flow.
Recent studies have shown that the flow of viscoelastic fluids in parallel shear
geometries (pipes/channels) is unstable to finite amplitude perturbations at low
Reynolds numbers (Re). Results point to a subcritical transition that is akin to
Newtonian turbulence in pipes except that elastic stresses rather than inertia
is the driving force.

Intellectual Merit : The main goal of this proposal is to systematically
investigate origins this newfound purely elastic subcritical transition in
parallel shear flows and its broad consequences to complex fluid flows.
Experiments with viscoelastic fluids will be performed in a long, straight
microchannel using velocimetry and in-situ (local) pressure measurements, and
single molecule tracers. In particular, single molecule experiments using
fluorescent DNA molecules will be used to gain insight into the molecular
origins of viscoelastic instabilities by measuring the conformation dynamics and
statistics of polymer molecules in such flows. We will be able to address many
important questions such as: i) What are the main molecular mechanisms leading
to the onset of such nonlinear elastic instability? What are the molecular
conformation dynamics before, during, and after such transition? ii) What kind
of flow coherent structures develops during the transition? iii) Is the
transition nonlinear/subcritical or is it a product of a linear growth
amplification which is known to exist in Newtonian pipe flows? iv) Does this
viscoelastic subcritical transition lead to "elastic turbulence"? v) How is the
pressure drop related to the flow rate below and above the onset of irregular
flow? Is there an increase in flow resistance or pressure drop?

From a scientific standpoint, the studies proposed here will provide much needed
insight into the mechanisms by which the conformation dynamics of flexible
molecules affects the stability of the bulk flow behavior using direct
visualization of molecular tracers (fluorescent DNA molecules). Most previous
investigations of this kind focus on the effect of fluid flow on polymer
dynamics. The parallel pursuit of bulk flow behavior and direct molecular
visualization will give rise to a comprehensive view of the molecular
interactions with the applied fluid stresses. This, in turn, will lead to the
development of more realistic and accurate theoretical and molecular models for
the onset of flow instabilities in general. The use of microfluidics allows for
an excellent test-bed for single molecule experiments since flows can be very
well controlled.

Broader Impacts : This proposal outlines an integrated research and educational
program that includes: i) training graduate students by offering graduate level
courses in complex fluids, rheology, and nonlinear dynamics as well as research
opportunities in these areas. A main goal is to increase the participation of
historically under-represented minorities such as females, African-Americans,
Native-Americans, and Hispanics in research; ii) recruiting undergraduate
students for summer research internships from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities that do not possess an engineering graduate program. The PI will
also take advantage of the University of Pennsylvania's strong outreach
infrastructure to involve K-12 teachers and high school students from West
Philadelphia in the research program; iii) finally, the results of this research
and educational program will be broadly disseminated and will have potentially
important benefits to society. In particular, the results will offer new
knowledge in complex fluid flow phenomena.