* 1336269
* Structural Dynamics of Polymer and Surfactant Solutions in Planar Extensional Flow Using In Situ X-ray Scattering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Wesley Burghardt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 263,236.00

Burghardt, Wesley &lt;br/&gt;1336269&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The non-Newtonian
properties of polymers and other complex fluids stem from molecular- and meso-
scale structural changes induced by flow. This proposal describes a research
program centered on creation and application of novel x-ray scattering
capabilities for studying mobile fluids in a planar extensional flow produced at
the stagnation point of a cross-slot flow device. Prior efforts to apply x-ray
and neutron scattering in this vein have been limited by design compromises in
flow cell construction that result in kinematic inhomogeneity and spurious
effects of parasitic shear gradients. Exploiting capabilities of the Advanced
Photon Source (APS), the design concept proposed here provides a marked
improvement in the definition of the applied flow field. While the methods to be
developed here will have broad applicability to many classes of complex fluids,
two targets are proposed for initial study: structural dynamics of viscoelastic
wormlike micelle solutions, and the deformation of flexible polymers in dilute
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;Viscoelastic
solutions of wormlike surfactant micelles are often viewed as models of both
dilute and entangled polymers, but also show a propensity for a variety of flow
transitions and instabilities driven by microscopic structural changes. The
ability to quantify micellar orientation induced by a well-defined extensional
flow will contribute valuable insights into many phenomena in these fluids,
including structure formation associated with turbulent drag reduction,
differences between shear-banding and non-banding micelle formulations, the
origins of strain hardening in certain micellar systems, and the nature of flow-
induced nematic phase transitions in concentrated micelle solutions. Measurement
of dilute polymer solutions in extensional flow is a very challenging
application for x-ray scattering, but has the potential to address a long-
standing discrepancy between theoretical prediction (and more recent direct
visualization in DNA) of large coil deformations, and prior measurements of coil
size using light scattering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;Viscoelastic phenomena in polymer and surfactant solutions have
profound consequences in many complex flows of practical significance, including
drag reduction in turbulent pipeline flow and enhanced oil recovery processes
that utilize polymer and/or surfactant solutions. Understanding complex fluid
rheology in both shear and, especially, extensional flows is a prerequisite to
understand the more complex flows that arise in these and other technologies. As
a result, the direct measurements of microscopic fluid structure in planar
extensional flow proposed here have tremendous potential to positively impact
technologies important to society. In addition, this project will have broad
impact in scientific infrastructure and human resource development. The PI has
extensive experience in the development of novel instrumentation for x-ray
scattering studies of polymers under flow, drawing upon his active participation
in the DND-CAT research facility at APS. More importantly, he also has a track
record of making this instrumentation available to scientific collaborators, as
well as to the community of synchrotron users who access APS facilities through
"general user" proposals. In a similar way, the instrument developed in this
project will be made available to the broader research community, expanding the
benefit of this project in both the research to be performed, as well as the
training of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.