* 1336634
* Collaborative Research: Effect of Cohesion on Size and Statistics of Avalanches in Granular Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2014,03/31/2019
* Karin Dahmen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2019
* USD 199,980.00

1336116 PI: Lehman

1336634 PI: Dahmen

This collaborative project aims at understanding the effect of cohesion on the
avalanche statistics in granular materials, and at predicting or minimizing
catastrophic avalanches. Experimental results obtained with simple granular bead
piles with tunable cohesion will be compared with the predictions of simulations
and theoretical models.

The project will systematically study the effects of cohesion on the statistics
of slip avalanches on bead piles. Past work has focused on the dynamics of non-
cohesive granular materials; new preliminary results show that cohesion can lead
to catastrophic effects that cannot be treated as a small perturbation to the
non-cohesive studies. The College of Wooster has developed a unique experimental
apparatus utilizing magnetic fields to systematically vary the cohesion between
steel beads, and the University of Illinois has developed an analytical mean-
field model with one shear-stress weakening parameter to model the effects of
cohesion on granular materials. The collaborative effort between the two
institutions will explore the universal (i.e. detail-independent) effects of
cohesion on avalanches and will identify the experimental tuning parameters that
determine the size and probability of the catastrophically large avalanches. The
experimental system consists of beads that are slowly dropped onto a conical
pile that occasionally avalanches. The analysis focuses on statistical
properties of the avalanches, such as the probability of particular avalanche
sizes and durations, the time between avalanches, and size and recurrence time
of the largest events. All of these properties are measured as a function of the
amount of cohesion, the amount of initially added energy, the size of the pile,
and other experimental parameters. The analytical part of the project uses tools
from the theory of phase transitions and the renormalization group to derive
predictions for the intermittent avalanches.

Cohesion is relevant to a wide variety of avalanching systems, and these results
could ultimately be used to minimize the occurrence of hazardous, catastrophic
avalanches in these systems. Understanding the effect of cohesion will also
allow better control over the flow of powders, sands, building materials, and
agricultural grains.