* 1336835
* Semiconductor/Mixed-Conducting-Oxide Heterojunction for Photo-electrochemical H2O &amp; CO2 Splitting at Elevated Temperatures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* William Chueh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

PI: Chueh, William&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336835&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Semiconductor/Mixed-Conducting-Oxide
Heterojunction for Photo-electrochemical H2O and CO2 Splitting at Elevated
Temperatures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making solar energy available when and where
it is required is crucial towards increasing its utilization. Dissociating steam
and/or carbon dioxide to chemical fuels is a promising route for storing solar
energy. The objective of this work is to design a new class of photo-
electrochemical cells that operates at 500 to 700 deg. C rather than at room
temperature by utilizing an all solid-state design. Using an oxide
heterojunction consisting of a semiconducting light absorber and a mixed oxygen
ion and electron conducting oxide, incident solar energy above and below the
band gap of the light absorber is converted to thermal energy, which in turn
increases the solar-to-fuel efficiency. Unlike conventional photovoltaic-based
approaches, here the solar-to-fuel efficiency increases, rather than decreases,
with temperature. Thin-film heterojunctions consisting of oxides such as iron,
vanadium, and titanium oxides will be evaluated for their potential in elevated
temperature photo-electrochemical water and carbon dioxide splitting. The
specific objective is to identify a combination of materials that delivers high
solar-to-fuel efficiency and reliability over thousands of
hours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central component of this research is
understanding and controlling charge generation, separation, and recombination
at the heterojunction between a semiconducting oxide and a mixed ionic and
electronic conducting oxide, at temperatures significantly above ambient. In
photo-electrochemistry involving oxides, ionic defects such as vacancies must
play an important role, yet it is not well understood. By combining rapid
material screening, opto-electrochemical and in-situ synchrotron X-ray
characterizations of oxide heterojunctions, this research aims to understand the
interfacial chemistry and electronic properties at the junction of dissimilar
solids under extreme conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to
enhance the viability of storing intermittent solar energy in chemical bonds,
and increase the global utilization of solar energy. Beyond energy generation
and storage, advanced understanding of charge transport at heterojunctions will
benefit scientific fields such as catalysis and high temperature electronics,
and applications such as solid-oxide fuel cells and sensors in extreme
environments. The project work also provides research opportunities for one
graduate student over the duration of the project. In addition to incorporating
the results into undergraduate and graduate curriculums, the PI will develop a
unique "Solar After Dark" outreach program. Human interaction with sunlight is
one of the most ubiquitous phenomena in daily life and is an excellent vehicle
to raise student interest in science and engineering.