* 1336254
* Collaborative Research: Study of Flammability, Mechanism and Heat/Mass Transfer Associated with Burning of Flame Retardant Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Qingsheng Wang, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2017
* USD 79,952.00

1336162/1336254&lt;br/&gt;Mannan/Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly flammable
polymers like poly (methyl methacrylate) used in homes for construction, in case
of fire, cause an alarming number of deaths and property loss. The objective of
this work is to facilitate the accomplishment of the ultimate goal of fire
retardancy, extensive charring of the polymer matrix, which means that the
polymer can be used at the service temperature, whereas in case of fire, it
would rapidly char, limiting the production of combustible volatiles. This will
be accomplished by forming new polymer nanocomposites which show synergistic
effects of the two types of nanofillers: one forms a physical barrier and the
other catalytically chars the polymer by changing its degradation pathway during
burning. In view of the lack of qualitative and quantitative understanding of
the fire retardant mechanism of each type of nanofiller, this research will
focus on studying the kinetics and the mass and heat transfer processes involved
in the burning of the polymer with and without the nanofillers, qualitatively
using thermal analysis and quantitatively using cone-calorimeter experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new knowledge generated would be disseminated through
publications, book sections, and fire safety courses at Texas A&amp;M University
and Oklahoma State University. The broad impact of this research is twofold,
such that it would contribute to better understanding of the role of nanofillers
in fire retardancy at the fundamental level and at the same time give a
practical insight on the development of new and better fire retardant materials
with the potential of replacing existing materials, providing enough time for
timely evacuation and timely control of fires due to less heat release.