* 1336297
* High efficiency Schottky barrier silicon solar cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Meng Tao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 388,725.00

PI: Tao, Meng&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336297&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Arizona
State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: High efficiency Schottky barrier silicon solar
cells&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To decrease the costs of photovoltaics-generated
electricity below $1/Wp installed, the 2012 International Technology Roadmap for
Photovoltaics (ITRPV) calls for thinner silicon substrates, less silver
metallization per cell, and reduced recombination losses at the front and rear,
with cell efficiencies for crystalline silicon between 20% and 24% by 2020. The
roadmap emphasizes the need for new cell concepts suitable for achieving high
efficiencies on thin wafers. Schottky barrier junction cells can provide both
simplified low temperature processing and high efficiencies when Fermi level
pinning at the metal-semiconductor interface is prevented. Only recently have
both knowledge and processing techniques emerged that result in measured record-
high Schottky barrier heights that reflect the known work function differences
between metals and silicon. It therefore becomes possible to explore application
of these techniques to create an interdigitated back point contact Schottky
barrier based silicon solar cell with efficiency greater than 20% and target
demonstrating laboratory cells with a process compatible with high volume solar
cell manufacturing. This project will elucidate how the atomic-scale
modification of the metal-silicon interface affects carrier transport and
surface recombination velocity and determining through both experiments and
device modeling how this knowledge can be translated into a high efficiency
Schottky barrier solar cell with a simplified manufacturing process. This is a
new solar cell structure which has been envisioned for decades, but only
recently the science and technology have advanced to enable its demonstration.
The research is a blend of materials science and electrical engineering with
importance in both academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demonstration
of a simplified single junction silicon solar cell will help enable silicon
photovoltaics to become a major part of the solution to the world?s energy
problem. In conjunction with the NSF-DOE ERC for Quantum Energy and Sustainable
Solar Technologies (QESST) at ASU, this project will have a clear path for
industry input and technology transfer through our industry partners. In
addition the project will make a targeted effort to increase the representation
of American Indians in science and engineering as well as increase the awareness
of local Arizona tribes on photovoltaic technologies.