* 1336496
* Collaborative Research: Optimization of metal attenuation in biologically-active remediation systems
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Colleen Hansel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 185,622.00

CBET 1336496/1336247&lt;br/&gt;Colleen Hansel/Cara Santelli&lt;br/&gt;Woods Hole
Ocean Inst. /Smithsonian Instutution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coal-mining activities
have resulted in worldwide environmental pollution due to the production of
acidic, metal-rich waters that damage entire ecosystems and contaminate water
supplies compromising public health. Coal mine drainage (CMD) throughout the
Appalachian region contains particularly elevated concentrations of dissolved
manganese (Mn), that at such high levels may lead to neurological disorders. One
of the most promising and economically feasible approaches to treat metal-laden
CMD containing elevated Mn are biologically active limestone treatment beds.
Limestone is used to raise the pH of the contaminated waters to promote growth
of microorganisms that can transform (via oxidation reactions) soluble Mn to
solid Mn oxide minerals that are subsequently retained within the treatment
beds. Formation of these minerals effectively removes Mn from the water and also
produces a substrate that serves as a water treatment filter, effectively
removing additional contaminants, such as cobalt, zinc, and nickel, from CMD. At
this time, the successful removal of Mn and other metal contaminants from mine
waters is highly variable and as low as 20% removal of Mn in some systems in
Pennsylvania. Success of these treatment systems is currently limited by an
insufficient knowledge of the individual and collective activities of microbial
populations and the optimal conditions for biologically mediated Mn oxide
formation. This research will address these knowledge gaps by simulating
limestone treatment systems under controlled laboratory conditions to better
establish the most effective biogeochemical conditions for stimulating both
microbial growth and subsequent metal attenuation in CMD treatment systems.
Specifically, the project will first identify the most effective microbial
species and nutrient conditions (e.g., organic carbon and nitrogen composition)
stimulating optimal Mn oxide formation by pure and mixed laboratory cultures of
bacteria, fungi, and algae previously isolated from CMD treatment systems. These
vital nutrient and microbiological conditions will then be employed and tested
in laboratory-simulated treatment systems to further optimize Mn removal and
precipitation efficiencies by complex microbial assemblages and the activity of
key microbial species. Throughout the experiments, the microbial population
structure and community interactions that impact Mn removal and Mn oxide
formation will be identified. The composition and stability of the biologically
precipitated Mn oxide minerals and their efficacy in removing metal contaminants
will also be assessed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of successful and
cost-effective approaches for cleaning contaminated environments and water
supplies is an immediate priority. This project will answer key scientific
questions limiting the success of biologically stimulated treatment processes
and optimize low-cost, green technologies currently employed throughout the
world in an attempt to clean environments devastated by mine drainage. Essential
knowledge gained by this project will be conveyed to scientists, engineers,
educators, and government regulators for direct application to limestone
treatment systems currently being used at hundreds of sites in Appalachia to
treat coal mine drainage. An equally important goal of this project is to
educate future generations and the general public on the causes, effects, and
solutions to mine drainage. The PIs will integrate this research into two
outreach activities, including (1) high school science teacher internships to
aid in the development of new curricula that will engage underrepresented
students in STEM fields and introduce them to green technologies used to treat
environmental pollution and (2) informal presentations and inquiry-based
learning exercises at the National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian
Institution, to communicate science activities and products to the general
public and provide opportunities for visitors to ask questions and personally
interact with the scientists.