* 1336205
* GOALI: An Optofluidic Chip for Multiplexed Detection of Heavy Metals
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2017
* Yongqiang Wang, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2017
* USD 309,999.00

CBET-1336205&lt;br/&gt;Heavy metals enter the environment due to increasing
industrial activities, which undermines the global sustainability. For instance,
heavy metals are released from nanomaterials during production, transport and
use of nanomaterials. Heavy metals such as mercury and lead are highly toxic and
persistent contaminants that are not biodegradable and thus are retained in the
ecosystem. Heavy metals accumulate in vital organs and cause human illness and
dysfunction, posing a threat to human health, animals, plants, and the planet
itself. Therefore, there is a strong incentive to develop convenient, cost-
effective and field-deployable sensors for monitoring heavy metals in the
environment. The objective of this project is to develop an optofluidic chip for
multiplexed detection of heavy metals (Hg, Pb and g) in natural water. Three
nanostructured fluorescent sensors will be developed for detection of Hg, Pb and
Ag, respectively. A prototype optofluidic chip will be designed to integrate
three fluorescent sensors with the sample pretreatment units and the fluid
controls into a single chip. The performance of the integrated optofluidic chip
will be tested with real-world water samples in terms of the limit of etection,
sensitivity, selectivity and assay time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed optofluidic chip synergistically integrates multiples
nanostructured fluorescent sensors with microfluidics into a single chip to
achieve a number of distinct advantages. First, the on-chip sample digestion
unit will release free metal ions from the metal-organic complexes in natural
water. Second, the on-chip capture cell will separate the metal ions from the
real-world sample matrix, and pre-concentrate the metal ions prior to sensing.
Third, the single optofluidic chip is capable of measuring multiple metals.
Fourth, the inorganic nanoparticle-based fluorescent assay eliminates the photo-
bleaching problem that is usually associated with organic dye fluorophores.
Fifth, the portable optofluidic chip is expected to be able to directly measure
the heavy metal in natural water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
:&lt;br/&gt;Implementation of this project will result in a prototype portable
optofluidic chip that can be used for on-site measurement of heavy metals in
drinking water and in the aquatic environment without the need of prior sample
digestion in a centralized lab. The data obtained will help the assessment of
the environmental impact of heavy metals. The knowledge obtained will reduce the
risk of the environmental exposure to heavy metal pollutants. The partnership
formed between the university and the industry will greatly shorten the cycle of
research, development and commercialization of new technology. The investigators
plan to integrate the education activities&lt;br/&gt;into the research to
stimulate the interest of students in the fields of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM). The results obtained from the project will
be used to create the course modules for both graduate and undergraduate
courses. The investigators will recruit both graduate and undergraduate
students, including underrepresented groups, to conduct research. The students
will be trained not only in the academic environment but also in the industrial
setting. The formation of the university-industry group will enhance the
research and education infrastructure by sharing the resources and by training
students and staff in both the sites. During the project period, both the
university and the industrial company will host academic and industrial seminars
presented by researchers and students from both the organizations, which will
facilitate the fusion of knowledge between university and industry.