* 1336493
* Real time quantitative assessment of oxidative stress as a marker for differential nanoparticle toxicity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kenneth Wallace, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 310,999.00

CBET - 1336493 &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the interaction of nanoparticles (NPs)
with biological systems and assessing how exposure to NPs affects biological and
chemical mechanisms in living systems is of critical importance. One of the key
nanotoxicity mechanisms is the potential for induction of oxidative stress by
generating reactive oxygen (ROS) and nitrogen (RNS) species. However, assessing
the extent of NPs induced oxidative stress has been a challenge as most ROS and
RNS are highly reactive and short lived and therefore difficult to detect. This
proposal addresses this fundamental problem by developing methodologies for
direct real-time assessment of ROS and RNS species at the NPs accumulation site
in a living aquatic system, zebrafish embryos and 2 week juveniles,and
correlating the observed oxidative effects with their cytotoxicity at the tissue
and organ level including alteration of the oxidative/anti-oxidative biological
mechanism, cellular damage, inflammation induction, and
apoptosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit :&lt;br/&gt;Exposure of
living systems to NPs may alter the antioxidant-defense system and redox
mechanisms in cells, tissues and organs. The goal of this proposal is to gain
fundamental understanding of the mechanism of oxidative stress response due to
exposure to engineered NPs in an intact live organism: zebrafish. Research work
will focus on the engineering design of new nanotoxicity probes for direct
detection of ROS/RNS and their use to establish whether NPs generate free
radicals or change the physiological oxidative status of organs that accumulate
NPs due to toxicity. Results will provide local concentration profiles of
ROS/RNS in the zebrafish intestine following exposure to various doses of NPs.
Research will identify properties of the NPs that regulate interactions with
ROS/RNS species and determine the role of surface reactivity and reaction
kinetics. Cell and tissue damage, malformations and viability will be studied
and related with ROS/RNS production in zebrafish. Fundamental understanding on
how the physicochemical and surface properties of the particles change in
contact with reactive ROS/RNS species, quantified by in vitro electrochemical
measurements of single NP collision studies with microelectrodes, will also be
used to establish predictive models of NPs induced oxidative stress. The
technology can be widely used to measure oxidative status in a variety of other
organs, cell cultures, tissues, and other environmental conditions. The data
will be used for risk assessment of NPs which will facilitate development of a
new paradigm for predicting NPs induced oxidative stress using a relatively
simple, inexpensive and rapid screening method. The success of this method would
enable faster high throughput screening of NPs, as an alternative to animal
experimentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The project
will create new tools and methodologies for nanotoxicity assessment and generate
fundamental knowledge that can solve key questions in understanding the effect
of NPs exposure to the environment and living systems, specifically those
related to oxidative stress. The results of the proposed studies will provide an
"oxidative profile" of the behavior and transport of NPs in biological systems
starting from the material characteristics to organ and tissue response. It will
enable development of novel nanotoxicity probes for direct assessment of NPs
induced oxidative stress and permit identification of the key factors in the NPs
surface properties and reactivity that can be used to predict toxicity, permit
targeted screening, and allow controlled generation of new, safer NPs based on
structure-toxicity information. Understanding these mechanisms may provide
guidelines for modifications to NPs to prevent this type of damage. Moreover,
this effort will enable the education and training of undergraduate and graduate
students, especially minorities and women, in the field of nanotoxicology and
sustainable material development at the interface with biological systems, and
make them aware of the potential implications and risks of the newly developed
engineered materials in the environment, ecosystem and biological systems.
Concepts of oxidative stress and environmental and health impacts will be
introduced in local high schools in upstate New York. A course on environmental
health and safety implications of nanotechnology will be created for the
interdisciplinary Biotechnology, Materials Science and the Environmental Science
and Engineering programs at Clarkson University, and broadly disseminated to
nearby 4-year colleges and open access on the Clarkson website.