* 1336877
* Plants as Pollution Sentinels for Improved Health in the Built Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* V Samaranayake, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 252,711.00

CBET 1336877&lt;br/&gt;Joel G. Burken&lt;br/&gt;Missouri University of Science
and Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vascular plants interact intimately with
their surroundings, extracting water, nutrients and contaminants from the
ground. The ability to draw in contaminants allows plants to act as sensors of
environmental pollution below the ground and also in buildings. If contamination
is present in the ground near a building, contaminant vapors can move through
soil and transport into the building in a process known as vapor intrusion.
Vapor intrusion into homes can pose a considerable health risk. This project
will improve our understanding of how pollutants move between soil, plants and
buildings, and how time and distance affect outcomes. Currently, assessing the
threat of vapor intrusion is expensive and slow, particularly when compared to
the use of plants as biosensors. The core hypothesis is that plants are very
good at identifying areas of vapor intrusion risk, as vegetation occupies a
similar environmental volume as residential buildings, both below and above
ground. In this project, plants will be studied in a greenhouse and at currently
contaminated field sites to determine how rapidly plants draw in soil pollution.
In field studies, we will determine the 3-dimensional volume sampled by plant
roots. The knowledge gained will better define contaminant fate and transport in
the environment, particularly in vapor intrusion scenarios where pollution is
not uniformly distributed in the soil. A better understanding of contaminant
dynamics and interactions between plants and the environment will lead to more
accurate ways of predicting potential risks to people in their homes. In
addition to these scientific advances, new methods, both analytical and
statistical, will be developed and applied with particular focus on vapor
intrusion. This research will span from the fundamental molecular scale, to
multimedia contaminant transport, to full scale systems that span the four
dimensions of space and time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of phytoforensics
excels at assessing threats rapidly and inexpensively. This is of great benefit
to public health, particularly in areas where the economic incentive and public
knowledge are lacking. Additionally, the mere presence of a drill rig and
workers in protective gear creates the image of guilt for potentially
responsible parties and could raise unwarranted concerns. These phytoforensic
methods for vapor intrusion will not require entering homes for initial
assessments, thereby greatly reducing the potentially unnecessary alarm or
intrusion into personal space. The data and methods will be shared broadly and
distributed in the US and internationally, among eight partner nations, via the
?Pollution Investigations by Trees? (PIT) program of which the PI is a founding
partner. The broad and rapid dissemination will lead to results of this endeavor
impacting many researchers and their efforts in delineating and remediating
environmental pollutants as part of the global effort to protect human health.
Collectively, knowledge of plant-contaminant interactions in time and space will
be applied to sites with previously characterized vapor intrusion to model the
performance of plants as vapor intrusion biosensors. If successful, this project
will provide a low-cost, sustainable screening tool to rapidly anticipate
threats to inhabitants at contaminated sites, thereby protecting a much larger
population of at-risk residents.