* 1336532
* Tailoring thin-film nanocomposite membranes for water reuse applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Howard Weinberg, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 342,302.00

CBET 1336532 &lt;br/&gt;Orlando Coronell (PI), Howard Weinberg (co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing stress placed on the quality of
drinking water by contamination and demand, alternatives to traditional water
sources and treatment need to be evaluated. A promising option for supplementing
the drinking water supply is the use of high quality recycled waters produced
from the advanced treatment of impaired surface waters or secondary wastewater
effluent. Advanced water treatment plants often use high-pressure membranes
because they can remove most contaminants in one step through a combination of
size exclusion, electrostatic repulsion, and low permeability to contaminants.
Zeolite thin film nanocomposites (TFNs) are a new type of high-pressure membrane
that can reduce the energy costs of membrane treatment by increasing water
permeability without compromising contaminant rejection and in some cases even
improving upon it. While the energy saving benefits of TFNs are much greater for
the treatment of low salinity waters, there is no evidence in the literature
that TFNs have been optimized for these applications nor has their rejection of
organic contaminants been evaluated. Accordingly, the objectives of this project
are to: (1) optimize zeolite TFNs for water reuse applications, specifically by
increasing water permeability and rejection of contaminants of emerging concern
(CECs), (2) understand how membrane performance is correlated to the physico-
chemical properties of membranes, and (3) elucidate the relationship between the
physico-chemical properties of contaminants and their rejection efficiency by
TFNs. The contaminants that this project will evaluate were selected because of
their potential harm to human and ecological health, are of high occurrence in
the waters of interest, and are indicators of overall water quality. The
contaminants selected include regulated and unregulated disinfection byproducts,
chemicals on the latest contaminant candidate list of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, and other CECs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
project will decrease the cost of water reuse through the development and
evaluation of more efficient and effective membranes for treatment of low
quality water and certain wastewaters. This technology will be beneficial not
just in water treatment applications but also in fields using membrane
separations such as artificial organs, fuel cells, gas separations, and other
industrial separations. The research and educational activities of this project
will also have the following additional broader and societal impacts: (1)
enhancement of secondary education through the development and dissemination of
scientific educational materials, (2) encouragement of science and engineering
career paths through dissemination of interactive educational materials, and (3)
interdisciplinary and collaborative research experience provided to graduate and
undergraduate students, including underrepresented groups in chemistry and
engineering (women and minorities) through intensive training in the development
and application of membranes to protect public health.