* 1336071
* MRI: Acquisition of an Automated Single-Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Research and Teaching
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Jeffrey Petersen, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2016
* USD 217,000.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program that is co-
funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Program,
Professor Kung Wang from West Virginia University and colleagues Jeffrey
Petersen, Xiaodong Shi, Jessica Hoover and Brian Popp will acquire a single
crystal X-ray diffractometer that will replace an obsolete diffractometer with a
single-point detector. The project is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as (a) studies of transition metal
complexes for promoting catalytic C-C bond forming and dehydrogenative cross
coupling reactions, for modeling enzymatic systems capable of the reductive
coupling of CO, or for developing new achiral and chiral reagents; (b)
preparation of ambiphilic, BINOLate-type, and 1,2,3-triazole ligand systems
(BINOL = the chiral 1,1'-binaphthyl-2,2'-diol); and (c) synthesis of highly
strained polycyclic aromatics that serve as end-cap templates for carbon
nanotubes and heteroaromatics that display biological
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and
precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here will impact a number of areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument will be an
integral part of teaching as well as research and research training. It will be
the only modern diffractometer in the state which will positively benefit
society through research, education, workforce training and outreach and
increase the already historic collaborations with outer-of-state schools and
used for summer enrichment programs involving middle, high-school and
undergraduate as well as graduate students in the area.