* 1336173
* Collaborative Research: Direct-in-liquid electrical discharge for the production of hydrogen-rich gas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Peter Norgard, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 102,298.00

1336385/1336173&lt;br/&gt;Mededovich/Kovaleski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturin
g of hydrogen from hydrocarbons is needed for a variety of applications,
especially for fuel cell powered vehicles and plasma treatment of exhaust gas.
Though plasma-assisted reforming of gaseous hydrocarbons provides several
advantages over conventional reforming technologies, creating plasmas directly
in liquid hydrocarbons can potentially lead to smaller size and higher
throughput reaction vessels with product selectivity different from the plasma
formed in gaseous hydrocarbons. This project investigates the fundamental
chemical processes occurring during direct-in-liquid plasma-assisted reforming
of liquid hydrocarbons and alcohols. The experimental work uses radical
scavenging techniques, plasma spectroscopy, as well as deuterated and
isotopically labeled solvents to elucidate chemical pathways responsible for the
formation of hydrogen, short-chained hydrocarbons, and syngas during direct
reforming of liquid fuels with and without water or air. The theoretical effort
focuses on the development of kinetic models for electrical discharges in
ethanol and in iso-octane with the purpose of comparing theoretical (i.e.
predicted) and experimental byproducts. The work also extends to the
characterization of the discharge using fast optical imaging, schlieren and
shadowgraphic imaging, and interferometry. The project and its related
activities directly engage undergraduate and graduate students, extend to local
elementary school students, and educate the general public.