* 1336132
* Responsive, shape-changing endoskeletal droplets
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Eric Furst, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,504.00

1336132&lt;br/&gt;PI: Furst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this work is to
create and study a new class of responsive materials called endoskeletal
droplets. These are oil-in-water emulsion droplets that contain an internal
scaffold of a soft network of crystalline solids. This endoskeleton provides the
ability to mold and sustain a non-spherical shape. The balance of forces in
these metastable structures can be used to trigger reorganization in shape in
response to external stimuli, including changes to the droplet surface tension
or weakening of the internal scaffold by increasing temperature. This project
will study the structure, micromechanics, and responsiveness to stimuli of
endoskeletal droplets. In addition, the fluid-fluid interfaces of these droplets
will also be used to host or reject particles, which will further allow
information flow through the droplet interface akin to the function of receptors
in living cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering shape anisotropy and shape
change by colloids and particulates has applications in self-assembly, rheology,
and drug delivery. Anisotropic shape leads to better deposition through enhanced
collision cross-section, while the ability of structured droplets to adapt shape
to curved surfaces will promote retention against hydrodynamic stresses. Prior
work on shape changing particles has focused almost exclusively on solid
materials. Preliminary studies of endoskeletal droplets highlight the rich
possibilities for designing new responsive materials out of fluids and other
simple materials that are of tremendous interest to technological applications
as varied as commercial drug formulations, shampoos, detergents, cosmetics, and
agricultural protectants. These broad impacts are enhanced by strong
international and industrial partnerships. PhD students working at Delaware will
have the opportunity to conduct research internships in the Complex Fluids
Microstructures Group at P&amp;G and at the University of New South Wales. In
addition, the education and outreach activities of the PI will boost the
interest of K-12 students and teachers in research and applications of soft
materials and colloids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is jointly funded by the
Particulate and Multiphase Processes Program in Chemical, Biological,
Environmental, and transport Division, Biomaterials Program in the Division of
Materials Research,and BioMaPS funds from both divisions.