* 1336290
* The effect of sociality on transmission and spread of a multi-host pathogen
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Gary McCracken, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,647,668.00

White-Nose Syndrome is a fungal disease that affects bats hibernating in caves.
Since it was first identified in the eastern United States in 2006, the disease
has spread from cave to cave across the Northeast, as far south as Tennessee,
and as far west as Oklahoma and Ontario. Over a million bats have died from the
fungus, called Geomyces destructans or Gd by scientists, which flourishes in the
cool conditions of caves. The goal of this research project is to gain a better
understanding how the disease is transmitted at local, regional, and continental
scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will focus in particular on bat
social behavior, such as the size of congregating groups and assortment within
groups, which are known to vary both within and between bat species during
different seasons. They hypothesize that disease transmission from bat to bat
and cave to cave is affected by temporal and spatial variation in how bat social
groups are organized. They will collect data to see if transmission increases
with colony size and with how often and for how long bats are aroused during
hibernation; if cave temperature and humidity affect the growth of the fungus;
if the number of different bat species present in a region influences the
prevalence of the disease; if some species are more susceptible than others; and
if geographic latitude and having more places to hibernate in a given area
promotes the development and spread of White-Nose Syndrome in local bat
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use these data to create
a predictive behavior-based model of disease transmission. Bats are significant
in North American ecology because they control insects and pollinate plants.
Understanding how this devastating disease develops and spreads is critical to
protecting bat populations and the ecosystem services they provide. The
researchers, who come from multiple disciplines and several universities (Boston
University, the University of California-Santa Cruz, Northern Arizona
University, and the University of Tennessee), also will train graduate and
undergraduate students in the conduct of the research. They will share their
results with resource managers and policy makers at state and federal levels,
and will participate in Congressional briefings and in the United States Fish
and Wildlife Service's White-Nose Syndrome National Plan.