* 1336911
* Investigation of Wetland Biogeochemical Similitudes and Scaling for Robust Predictions of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Sequestration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,10/31/2015
* Omar Abdul-Aziz, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2015
* USD 146,169.00

1336911 (Abdul-Aziz). The objectives of this research are to (i) investigate and
unravel similitudes (parametric reductions), spatiotemporal scaling patterns,
and different environmental regimes of wetland greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
and carbon sequestrations; and (ii) formulate spatiotemporally robust models for
predicting wetland GHG emissions and carbon sequestration across different
climatic, hydrologic, biological, ecological, and biogeochemical gradients. A
fundamental hypothesis of wetland GHG emissions and carbon sequestration
following distinct biogeochemical similitudes and robust scaling relationships
will be tested by conducting dimensional analysis and empirical modeling, which
has successfully been applied in fluid mechanics, hydraulic engineering, and
stream biogeochemistry/ecology. Robustness of the scaling relationships will
first be determined by deriving analytical, truly dynamic sensitivity
coefficients and uncertainty measures and quantifying them with field data.
Scaling robustness will also be evaluated by comparing scaling parameters
(coefficients and exponents) estimated with data from different seasons and
locations representing a gradient of hydro-climatic, biogeochemical, and
ecological processes. This research primarily leverages the PI's field data
collections for major wetland GHGs (CO2, CH4, and N2O) and environmental
parameters, model developments, and knowledge formation underway in a
collaborative project funded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA). It also utilizes wetland biogeochemistry and GHG flux
data collected by other collaborators through chamber-based field campaigns
across the U.S. East Coast. The research targets to generate a fundamental body
of knowledge and insights into the wetland biogeochemical emergence (similarity)
patterns, identifying different environmental regimes and associated transition
thresholds of GHG emissions and carbon sequestrations. Modeling of wetland GHG
emissions has been an extremely challenging undertaking. Available models are
mostly mechanistic and site-specific in nature, often failing to provide
predictions that are relatively robust in time and space. To address this
challenge, wetland biogeochemical similitudes and scaling laws will be
investigated by employing analytical and empirical methods successfully applied
in other branches of earth sciences and engineering. Improved understanding of
similitudes and scaling is expected to lead to robust, parsimonious modeling and
predictions of GHG emissions and carbon sequestration from diverse wetland
ecosystems under a changing climate, sea level, and land use. The research on
biogeochemical similitudes and scaling is anticipated to provide new insights
into overall ecosystem carbon dynamics. The idea is potentially applicable to
identify, understand, and predict robust patterns of carbon sequestration and
GHG emissions from the terrestrial and marine ecosystems. The research should
aid carbon management in wetland ecosystems around the world by unraveling
fundamental scientific information and providing scale-independent engineering
tools. Research outcomes will be broadly disseminated through peer-reviewed
publications, presentations, workshops, reports, public meetings, open media
(e.g., YouTube); and transferred to the coastal decision makers by leveraging
the PI's current NOAA collaborative project-team of wetland scientists,
engineers, economists, reserve managers, stakeholders, and NGOs. The research
findings will be incorporated into education by designing inductive learning-
based graduate and undergraduate courses at FIU (a large minority institution
with around 59% Hispanic/Latino and 13% African-American students) and involving
high school teachers and students. The research provides complementary funding
for a current doctoral student at FIU and a potential undergraduate summer
intern from the minority students.