* 1336236
* SusChEM: Metabolic Analysis and Optimization of Biofuel Production during light-dark cycles in Synechocystis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2013,06/30/2017
* Ashok Prasad, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2017
* USD 507,852.00

PI: Peebles, Christie&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336236&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Colorado State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: SusChEM: Metabolic Analysis and
Optimization of Biofuel Production during light-dark cycles in
Synechocystis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
develop the computational tools needed to guide metabolic engineering efforts in
cyanobacteria for biofuel production. Cyanobacteria experience a dynamic
cellular environment that is driven by circadian rhythms. The impacts of this
environment on biofuel production in cyanobacteria are poorly understood, and
this projects aims to better understand this changing cellular environment
through computational and experimental
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyanobacteria are an attractive production
platform due to their ability to utilize solar energy and fix atmospheric
carbon. In addition, they exhibit rapid doubling times and have an established
molecular biology toolbox. Unlike their heterotrophic counterparts, little work
has focused on developing metabolic models of global metabolism in
photosynthetic organisms that accurately describe the dynamics experienced
during light:dark cycles. These organisms exhibit unique cellular conditions and
challenges that can substantially alter overall titers of molecules produced.
During light conditions in a photosynthetic platform, redox potential and cyclic
electron flow conditions are much more favorable for heterologous fuel
production. This project plans to address these deficiencies by developing a
dynamic flux balance analysis (FBA) model of metabolism that captures the
changing dynamics experienced under light:dark cycles. This dynamic FBA model
will be generated utilizing experimental methods that include metabolomics,
transcriptomics, and proteomics. This will be the first dynamic FBA model
developed for a photosynthetic organism. This model will then be utilized to
generate testable hypothesis to identify key genetic modifications that will
increase biofuel productivity. This work will contribute to an overall
understanding of cellular metabolism in a photosynthetic organism and can be
applied to other photosynthetic organisms of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
strain created from these studies will lead directly to photosynthetic advanced
biofuel production with the potential to be economically and environmentally
sustainable. This strain will serve as a platform for future research on biofuel
upgrading strategies and on biochemical production strategies. The project will
provide interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and graduate students, with
significant efforts being made to include members of underrepresented groups.
Students will gain experience in mathematical modeling of metabolism, metabolic
engineering, synthetic biology, and microbial cell cultivation of photosynthetic
organisms. These experiences will place the students at the forefront of
research in synthetic biology and biofuel production in photosynthetic
organisms. The project will also provide opportunities for mentoring of K-12
students in research.