* 1336442
* Investigation of Molecular Mechanisms for Anisotropic Thermal Transport in Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jay Schieber, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,980.00

CBET- 1336442 Venerus

The processing of polymeric materials involves a complex interaction of
mechanical and thermal transport processes. Despite its importance, thermal
transport in flowing polymers is poorly understood. It is well established,
however, that flow-induced anisotropy of polymer chain segments leads to a non-
linear dependence of stress on strain rate, and to anisotropy in thermal
conductivity. Quantitative measurements of the complete thermal conductivity
tensor are made on a several types of polymeric materials subjected to well-
defined, elongational deformations. These measurements are made on polymers in
molten, glassy and cross-linked states using a sensitive and non-invasive
optical technique based on forced Rayleigh scattering. From previous studies a
linear relationship between the thermal conductivity tensor and stress tensor,
or the stress-thermal rule, has been observed for several polymeric systems.
This observation, which has rather profound implications, is accompanied by two
unexpected results. First, the stress-thermal rule appears to be valid at stress
levels where the stress-optic rule, which gives a linear dependence of
orientation on stress, fails. Second, the pre-factor in the stress-thermal rule,
when normalized by the polymer modulus, is relatively insensitive to polymer
chemistry. These observations are not consistent with current models that
attempt to relate thermal conductivity to molecular orientation in polymers.
Thermal conductivity measurements are complemented by measurements of stress,
birefringence, and speed of sound, to elucidate the underlying molecular
mechanisms for anisotropic thermal transport in polymeric materials.

Polymeric materials are an integral component of modern society with numerous
and diverse applications. The underlying micro-structure of polymeric materials
and its orientation by deformations that occur during processing have profound
effects on material behavior, which are manifested both during processing and in
final products. Quantitative measurements of anisotropic thermal conductivity in
flowing polymers that reveal the relative importance of orientation and stress
significantly expand the knowledge base for processing methods, and are crucial
for advancing theoretical models relating macroscopic properties to molecular
structure. An exhibit displayed at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago
demonstrating the principles behind forced Rayleigh scattering exposes a large
and diverse audience to interesting applications of optics and thermal transport
in materials processing.