* 1336164
* Toward viable horizontal ribbon growth of solar silicon: Understanding and ameliorating process instabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2018
* Jeffrey Derby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 09/30/2018
* USD 318,608.00

CBET 1336164&lt;br/&gt;Derby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of renewable
energy may be the most important challenge for the future of human civilization.
Low-cost and reliable solar-to-electric conversion methods are especially
important toward this endeavor. Of these methods, by far the most established
technology is based on the fabrication of solar cells from crystalline silicon.
However, significant reduction in the cost per watt produced by these
technologies is needed to make solar energy competitive with fossil fuels. For
silicon-based solar cells, production costs must be decreased while maintaining
or improving cell efficiency. Advances in silicon growth methods are needed to
achieve these objectives. Solar-grade, crystalline silicon is produced by a
variety of techniques that melt and carefully re-solidify silicon via thermal
processes. Methods that grow single crystals of silicon, such as the Czochralski
process, are expensive, but such material achieves the highest cell
efficiencies. Lower-cost growth methods, such as casting and vertical ribbon
growth, have been developed, but their multi-crystalline material results in
cells of lower efficiency. A promising crystal growth technology, known as the
horizontal ribbon growth (HRG) process, was put forth in the late 1960's and was
subsequently advanced in the late 1970's and early 1980's in Japan and in the
U.S. After encouraging early results, experimental advances and process
development efforts stalled, and this technique was abandoned by the mid-1980's
in favor of more traditional methods that were easier to develop. Recently,
however, there has been renewed interest in the HRG method, since, if
successful, it promises a win-win scenario of significantly reduced production
costs coupled with the ability to grow high-quality, single-crystal material.
However, significant advances in the understanding and optimization of this
growth method are needed to make it viable as a large-scale production process
for silicon solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed at making
the horizontal ribbon growth of silicon viable, particularly by addressing
failure modes associated with its unique geometry and operation. Specifically,
this project will apply sophisticated computational models of the horizontal
ribbon growth method to elucidate and ameliorate known process instabilities and
to study the salient issues associated with increasing growth rates to further
reduce production costs. This research will apply a computation-centric approach
to probe these issues and ultimately optimize growth conditions. Thus, this
research will address fundamental scientific issues of crystal growth together
with a clear goal toward improving a material with important technological
applications.