* 1336548
* The Three-Dimensional Flow Structure and Forces of Flapping-Wing Hovering from Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,11/30/2017
* Matthew Ringuette, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2017
* USD 293,573.00

Ringuette, Matthew 1336548

The research objective of this proposal is to understand the unsteady, 3D flow
structure produced by a flapping wing in hover, how it relates to the forces,
and the effect of key parameters such as stroke amplitude. In nature, flapping
wings have low aspect ratios (ARs), and due to the high angles of attack and low
Reynolds numbers flow separation and roll-up into vortices occurs.

Intellectual Merit Wings in hover are known to generate highly 3D,
interconnected vortex loops, which shed each half-stroke and create an overall
downward jet-like flow to sustain the body weight. Prior experiments using
animals or mechanical models, coupled with flow visualization or 2D digital
particle image velocimetry (DPIV), have shed light on the loop structure, but
the 3D vortex topology and its relationship to the lift force remain open
topics. Computational studies focusing primarily on animal configurations
provide greater detail and insight. However, there is a lack of experimental,
3-component 3D DPIV data, and the effects of parameters such as half-stroke
amplitude, AR, and motion program on the flow structure are not well understood.
A key question is: why do hovering animals flap with amplitudes of 3-5 chord
lengths? The approach is to perform experiments using a 2-degree-of-freedom
flapping-wing model with simplified wing geometries and motions. The goals are
to understand the 3D vortex topology, its variation with half-stroke amplitude,
AR, and velocity program, and how it relates to the forces. Of interest are
changes in the vortex structure for different cases. Diagnostics include dye
visualization, stereoscopic DPIV (SDPIV) for 3-component velocity fields, and
force measurements.

Broader Impacts: This research will provide valuable insight into the design of
highly-maneuverable bio-inspired micro air vehicles (MAVs). They can collect
scientific information in complex environments, e.g. urban settings, caves, and
disaster sites such as collapsed buildings after an earthquake, where
conventional drones cannot operate. Moreover, they could operate efficiently in
swarms to track the spread of a toxic gas plume, for example. The results of the
proposed research will yield a greater understanding of the unsteady vortical
flow and how kinematics and AR affect maximum lift, yielding design strategies
for flapping-wing MAVs. The educational and outreach component, which focuses on
engaging and mentoring students at many levels through hands-on research in bio-
inspired propulsion, will motivate them to pursue higher education and careers
in STEM. This addresses the need for a national workforce of exceptional
scientists and engineers.