* 1336375
* An investigation of plasma formation in electromechanically driven free bubbles at resonance in water with applications for the treatment of water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,01/31/2017
* John Foster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 01/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

1336375&lt;br/&gt;Foster&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current water treatment
methodologies are not designed to handle emerging contamination threats derived
from agricultural run-off, volatile organic compounds, and pharmaceutical
residues therefore advanced methods are needed. Plasma production in liquid
water produces a host of oxidation agents capable of rapidly decomposing organic
contaminants. The proposed effort investigates a novel method of producing
plasma in bubbles immersed in water by driving them at resonance in the presence
of an electric field. This effort studies the ignition physics of resonantly
driven bubbles, the time evolution of plasma formation in such bubbles, and the
chemistry of the active interfacial layer separating the plasma bubble and the
liquid water. The understanding gained from these studies will be used to design
and build a plasma reactor for the purpose of water purification. Laboratory
tours and demonstrations will be given to students from the Detroit Area Pre-
College Engineering Program and those sponsored by Women in Science and
Engineering, using in-house fabricated plasma demonstration experiments. The
proposed effort will sponsor a student from the Summer Research Opportunity
Program (SROP), a program aimed at encouraging underrepresented students to
attend graduate school. The plasma demonstrations will be integrated into the
existing educational outreach effort led by the National Society of Black
Engineers.