* 1336474
* Passive Flow Control in Vertical Axis Wind Turbines
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2016
* Simon Evans, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 07/31/2016
* USD 0.00

PI: Evans, Simon&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336474&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Worcester Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;Title: Passive Flow Control in
Vertical Axis Wind Turbines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
the use of passive flow control as a way to improve the performance of vertical
axis wind turbines (VAWTs), by preventing dynamic stall at low tip-speed ratios.
The performance improvements that the scheme enables in the wind turbine will
also be assessed. The research will include numerical optimization of a vertical
axis wind turbine blade through one full revolution, at a tip speed ratio for
which the blade stalls. This optimization will identify a blade design and pitch
offset to maximize the performance of a passive flow control scheme while
minimizing the impact of the scheme on blade performance when not stalled. This
flow control scheme consists of vortex generator jets driven by the pressure
difference existing across the blade at stall conditions. The optimization will
be performed with a routine in MATLAB that passes variables to the Unsteady RANS
solver, FLUENT. The blade design resulting from the optimization will be used in
a parametric study conducted experimentally using a pitching airfoil in a wind
tunnel, with the passive flow control scheme implemented. Parameters such as jet
hole size and injection direction will be varied in this parametric study. The
time-resolved lift and drag determined from measurements taken in the
experiments will be used to estimate the improvement in shaft power delivered by
the turbine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will evaluate an approach to
increase the torque and power delivery of vertical axis wind turbines,
increasing their efficiency in converting wind energy to shaft power and
therefore increasing their potential to contribute significantly to national
energy production. VAWTs are seen as particularly attractive for the urban and
home power generation markets in which wind conditions are unsteady and wind
directions variable. However, low efficiency resulting from dynamic stall has
kept adoption rates low. This research will evaluate an approach to improve the
efficiency of these turbines, by controlling the dynamic stall at low tip-speed
ratios, thereby allowing growth of these markets. This will reduce dependence on
the grid by moving energy generation to the point of use, contribute to reducing
the country?s reliance on fossil fuels and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by
increasing the percentage of power generation by renewable wind
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize WPI?s project-based
education to engage and train undergraduates in state-of-the art experimental
and computational methods and to supply high-school science teachers with a
curriculum unit on wind energy that they can use in the classroom. All WPI
undergraduates are required to complete a junior team project, the Interactive
Qualifying Project (IQP), and a senior team project, the Major Qualifying
Project (MQP). Each is equivalent to three courses. MQP projects will be
conducted over 3 years and will support the experimental and computational
efforts. IQP projects will be conducted over 2 years and will develop and pilot
a curriculum unit on wind energy for implementation in the high-school science
curriculum. This curriculum unit will be developed with the support of WPIs
unique STEM Education Center and the Worcester Public Schools, to address
specific core ideas in the Massachusetts Science Standards, including conversion
of energy and energy transfer, the relationship between energy and forces, and
renewable energy.