* 1336199
* Retooling Green  Wastewater Treatment Infrastucture to Support Edible Crop Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,06/30/2018
* Howard Weinberg, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2018
* USD 323,194.00

CBET 1336199 &lt;br/&gt;Howard Weinberg &lt;br/&gt;The University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With population growth and
recurrent drought conditions in much of the United States and across the world,
new uses for reclaimed wastewater must be considered to preserve freshwater
quality. Terrestrial application of treated wastewater such as for crop
irrigation could simultaneously protect drinking water source quality, by
diverting treated waste effluents from sensitive aquatic ecosystems while
reducing demand for drinking water. This project will optimize green
infrastructure designs including aerobic vegetated sand filtration (VSF) in
combination with subsurface flow (SSF) constructed wetlands for removal of
chemicals of anthropogenic origin in wastewater and investigate the extent to
which residual chemicals in the reclaimed water accumulate in the edible
portions of crops irrigated with this type of water. The project will
systematically evaluate how changes to the operation of VSF and SSF can optimize
trace organic contaminant and pathogen removal to minimize measureable
differences between crops irrigated with such reclaimed water and those
irrigated with tap water. This will be achieved through two approaches; a
laboratory column study that simulates the treatment designs will investigate
the combination of different processes and filter substrates for this
optimization using a characterized domestic effluent, and the treated water will
then be used in a greenhouse to irrigate a variety of crops including potatoes,
soybeans, and leafy vegetables selected because of differences in known
properties of chemical uptake or rejection alongside controls conventionally
grown with tap water. Specifically, we will determine whether crops irrigated
with such waters reject the pollutants making them viable for consumption or if
the crops uptake the pollutants and, if so, might they be used as an additional
remediation tool for wastewater treatment. Changes to the operation of the green
infrastructure design process determined from the laboratory study will then be
transferred to full-scale operation and the viability of the optimized process
towards crop growth evaluated onsite. The project will, therefore, demonstrate
whether more widespread use of similar designs and the use of reclaimed water in
this manner could be part of a managed approach to pollutant remediation and
crop irrigation, thereby saving freshwater for more critical needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide a better understanding of how
vegetation and crops respond to the presence of wastewater constituents in their
environment. Most wastewater treatment systems are not specifically designed to
remove man-made chemicals from the influent waste and so by evaluating the
fundamental treatment processes in a laboratory-controlled environment, design
can be better optimized to improve treated water quality. Moreover, the project
results will show whether wastewater constituents are taken up by the crops (in
which case such a process has implications for a remediation technology) or
whether the crops are resistant to uptake (in which case a more widespread use
of recycled wastewater in crop irrigation can be considered). The use of green
infrastructure design for the effective removal of wastewater contaminants at
the site of their entry into wastewater has broader impacts on the disbursal of
these contaminants throughout the wider environment as is typical in wastewater
discharges from centralized wastewater treatment plants. Upgrading such plants
to target individual contaminants and prevent their disbursal will likely prove
expensive whereas with on-site treatment, cost can be staged and treatment more
effectively targeted to individual pollutants. The project will also provide
policymakers with valuable information to assist with determining safe operating
practices and will help to improve public perception regarding the safe use of
reclaimed water.