* 1336968
* Probing Highly Non-equilibrium Thermal Transport in Nanostructures and Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Li Shi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 05/31/2017
* USD 347,550.00

CBET-1336968&lt;br/&gt;PI: Li Shi (U Texas,
Austin)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different electron and phonon populations can be
driven out of local thermal equilibrium in nanoelectronic devices, laser
materials processing, and thermal transport measurements. A better understanding
of the highly non-equilibrium transport phenomena is necessary for the design of
next-generation devices and material structures with enhanced performance and
reliability. However, current experimental capabilities are inadequate for
probing local temperatures of these different energy excitations. Despite the
recent progresses in scanning thermal microscopy (SThM), infrared spectroscopy,
and micro-Raman spectroscopy, there is a lack of experimental methods for
resolving the local temperature of the acoustic phonons that dominate heat
conduction, as well as low-frequency acoustic phonons that may be in the
ballistic transport regime in nanostructures. The objective of this research is
to investigate new experimental methods for probing the local temperature of
acoustic phonons during highly non-equilibrium transport processes in
nanostructures and devices. The techniques to be investigated include a new
method based on micro-Brillouin light scattering (BLS) for probing the local
temperature of low-frequency (0.5 GHz to 100?s GHz) acoustic phonons with sub-
micron spatial resolution. Based on preliminary BLS measurements of local
acoustic phonon temperatures in glass, this technique will be investigated
further for probing the local acoustic phonon temperature in silicon
nanostructures that are either electrically biased or optically excited. The
obtained acoustic phonon temperature will be correlated with those measured by
micro-Raman spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, and SThM to quantify local non-
equilibrium between electrons, acoustic and optical
phonons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demonstration of the micro-BLS technique as a
thermal microscopy tool for low-frequency phonons will be of value for the
experimental thermal transport research community. Meanwhile, the measurement
data can be used by theoretical and computational thermal transport researchers
to establish a better understanding of several intriguing and important non-
equilibrium transport phenomena. Such understanding can impact further advances
in nanoelectronic devices, laser materials processing, and thermal measurement
techniques. In addition, this research will provide student training
opportunities in state-of-the-art experimental techniques, and result in new
example materials for undergraduate and graduate courses. It will also generate
new demonstration materials to be used in outreach activities for attracting
students from underrepresented groups to engineering and science professions,
and for exposing university research to K-12 students, parents, and teachers in
Texas.