* 1336489
* Lamella Edge Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Wendy Zhang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,998.00

Zhang, Wendy &lt;br/&gt;1336489&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experiments as well
as developing technologies are motivating a re-assessment of our theoretical
framework for understanding drop impact and splash. The proposed theoretical/
numerical study on the dynamics at the leading edge of a fluid lamella ejected
by impact will fulfill this aim. It will assess the potential for adapting the
known phase diagram for Newtonian liquid impacts to dense suspension plug
impacts, a phenomenon important in thermal spray coating and inkjet printing of
metallic and ceramic machine parts. It will also investigate the stability of
lamella edge dynamics. Recent experiments show small effects such as a reduction
in ambient pressure and/or surface roughness can stabilize lamella edge and
prevent splash, even in impact regimes where splash was previously thought to be
inevitable. This study will develop a asymptotic model for air vorticity induced
by lamella flow, incorporate associated air stresses into a lubrication flow
model for the liquid lamella and compare their results against two-phase flow
simulations and experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will advance the current state of scientific
understanding by bridging an existing gap between the existing theoretical
framework for liquid impact and recent experimental findings. Our current
framework asserts that the outcome of liquid drop impact is dictated by the
impact speed, the substrate roughness, the substrate slip condition, and the
material properties of the impacting drop. Properties of the ambient airflow are
held to be unimportant and surface roughness is thought to lead to more
splashing. In contrast, experiments clearly show more subtle outcomes. Success
in bridging this gap between theory and experiment will transform our
understanding. Finally a physically motivated, accurate model for the leading
edge motion provides a theoretical tool for understanding the structures formed
by the impact of more complex fluids such as liquid metals and suspensions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed herein would
enhance the efficiency of spray coating, which is important for the sharpness of
images created by inkjet printing, and the fine-scale resolution of objects
manufactured by 3D printing. These processes improve significantly if splash can
be eliminated. In contrast, the efficiency of a diesel engine depends crucially
on completely fragmenting the injected streams of liquid fuel into small
droplets. Maximizing the amount of splash, improves efficiency and reduces
exhaust. While the gas pressure inside an engine chamber cannot be easily
varied, an understanding of how a larger ambient gas pressure induces splash
formation opens the possibility that one can engineer other aspects of the
technology, e.g. surface roughness, to mimic this high pressure
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research also provides an excellent education
for both the graduate student and the&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral scholar.
Undergraduate students will work on this project as part of the University
of&lt;br/&gt;Chicago's Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program. The
University of Chicago REU program focuses on providing students from under-
represented minority groups opportunities to work in research. Previous under-
represented minority students mentored it he PI's lab have gone on to pursue
graduate education in Chemical Engineering and Physics. In a broader context,
research results will also be incorporated into the curriculum of two elective
courses (one undergraduate / one graduate), and developed into a demonstration
for the annual science open house at the PI's department.