* 1336659
* RF excited magnetic nanoparticles to improve thawing of vitrified biomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,03/31/2017
* John Bischof, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 03/31/2017
* USD 349,354.00

CBET-1336659&lt;br/&gt;Bischof&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vitrification or freezing to
a ?glassy? rather than crystalline phase, is a form of biopreservation and an
important enabling approach for cellular and regenerative medicine. In
principle, this approach offers the powerful ability to store and transport
cells, tissues and organs which can be used in biomedical labs, biological
banking organizations and companies worldwide. Unfortunately, practical
application of vitrification has been limited to smaller systems such as cells
and thin tissues due to diffusive (heat and mass transfer) and phase change
limitations. Specifically, devitrification (crystallization) and cracking during
thawing preclude the use of vitrification in bulk systems such as organs and
larger tissues. To circumvent this fundamental problem we propose here to use
radiofrequency (RF) excited magnetic nanoparticles (mNPs) to create uniform heat
generation within biomaterials thereby avoiding size or boundary condition
dependence which can lead to failure during thawing. As a part of this work, we
will characterize the heating and phase change behavior of mNP-laden
cryoprotective solutions. This will include selection of cryoprotective agent
(CPA) and mNPs (magnetic nanoparticles), physicochemical characterization of
these solutions (i.e. thermal and magnetic properties, aggregation, and
devitrification), and RF thawing measurement and modeling to demonstrate
improvements over traditional approaches. After characterizing the mNP CPA
solutions we will investigate the impact of more uniform and rapid thaw on
biological outcomes. Here the solutions will be loaded into cells and tissues by
diffusion or perfusion, then these loaded systems will be assessed by imaging,
staining and other analytical approaches to demonstrate where the CPA and mNPs
have loaded. Further, the critical cooling and warming rates necessary to
vitrify during cooling and avoid devitrification or cracking upon thaw will be
determined. Finally, improvements to the viability and structure of these
systems by avoiding devitrification and cracking after RF excited mNP thawing
will be demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to
dramatically improve biomaterial vitrification and therefore biopreservation
which impacts cell banking and therapies, tissue transplantation and other
important regenerative medicine and biomedical applications worldwide. Our
approach will yield faster and more uniform thawing rates that are expected to
improve both viability and structural integrity upon thawing of biopreserved
systems. The most dramatic opportunity of this new technology will be use for
larger biomaterials where devitrification and cracking routinely result in
preservation failures, and where faster thaw rates may also help reduce the
amount of potentially toxic CPAs needed. More broadly, the proposed research
will lead to greater understanding of the interactions of NPs within frozen and
vitrified biological systems, with potential applications that go beyond
biopreservation. The research undertaken will provide educational opportunities
for several graduate and undergraduate students and collaboration with both
academic and industrial colleagues.