* 1336121
* Recycling Potential, Climate, and Metals of Modern Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Thomas Graedel, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 416,688.00

1336121 (Graedel). Many metals are scarce in nature, and concern exists
regarding their long term availability. The prospective availability of metals
over time is currently not aided by their rates of recycling after use, many of
which are very low. Metals are also discussed from the perspective of carbon
emissions: it is estimated that about 8% of all global carbon emissions relate
to the mining and processing of metals. This research addresses these issues by
deriving current loss and recycling rates for ten select metals, and evaluating
the prospects for improving those rates now and over time. The work will also
include computing the carbon emission savings that are now being derived from
metal recycling, and the potential for increased carbon emission savings that
could be achieved through increased after-use recycling. This research draws on
previous NSF-sponsored research on the criticality" of all metals and metalloids
in the periodic table. That research provides information on quantitative cycles
of contemporary stocks, flows, and losses for these elements. The metal life
cycles enable two new quantitative assessments to be made: the degree to which
metal mined and processed in previous years is lost without further reuse, and
the degree to which metal now lost could be recycled were appropriate effort
expended in directed collection and reprocessing. In related work, scenarios are
being developed for future supply and demand of metals. In this new research,
the prior work will be used as a foundation for deriving a comprehensive picture
of metal loss, recycling, recycling potential, and carbon emission reduction
potential for ten metals: copper, nickel, cobalt, indium, neodymium,
praseodymium, dysprosium, yttrium, europium, and terbium. The results will
demonstrate the degree to which recycling can provide climate change-related
benefits now and in the future, thus indicating the degree to which a more
extensive deployment of technology and of product design for recycling has the
potential to mitigate carbon emissions and thus climate change. The project
includes an undergraduate research component involving two Yale students who
will work part-time during the academic year and full time during the summers as
members of the project research team. Their tasks will include a combination of
independent and collaborative work involving current and best practice recycling
of one or more target metals, together with collaborative work on resulting
carbon emissions saving. A second category of broader impacts relates to
providing information on materials recycling prospects and their potential for
carbon emissions reduction to several governmental agencies in the U.S. and
elsewhere that have asked to be kept appraised of this group?s research on
topics related to metal futures. A third category of broader impacts relates to
collaboration involving the results of the research in the integrated scenario
activities of the UNEP International Resource Panel. Finally, it is anticipated
that the results of this work will provide enhanced materials perspectives to a
number of domestic and international corporations, those in the governmental
materials policy arena, and those engaged in climate research or climate policy.