* 1336778
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Fundamentals of Microemulsion Boiling: from Interfacial Thermodynamics to Multiphase Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2019
* John Lawler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2019
* USD 254,818.00

1336778/1336590&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yang/Qiao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this collaborative GOALI project is to investigate the fundamental
mechanisms of nucleate boiling in microemulsions and to evaluate their
performance and reliability in industry-relevant cooling systems. The PIs have
identified an interesting microemulsion fluid, in which a volatile liquid is
dispersed into another immiscible nonvolatile liquid as self-assembled droplets,
as a candidate for enhanced phase change heat transfer. It has been observed
that the polyalphaolefin-based microemulsion fluids exhibit a pool boiling
critical heat flux (CHF) about 80% higher than the base fluid polyalphaolefin.
To enable the rational design of microemulsions as heat transfer fluids and to
fully exploit their potential in boiling, three interwoven activities will be
carried out in this project. First, the PIs will investigate the interfacial
thermodynamics of microemulsions at elevated temperatures and understand the
energetics of phase change in microemulsions. Second, the PIs will investigate
the heat transfer mechanisms of microemulsion boiling by integrating
experimental characterization and numerical simulations. The research will focus
on the peculiar bubble dynamics that differ greatly from those in classical pool
boiling. Third, the PIs will evaluate the performance of microemulsion boiling
under industry-relevant settings through collaboration with industrial partners.
The proposed research is potentially transformative: by introducing
microemulsions as heat transfer fluids, whose boiling behavior differs
qualitatively from classical boiling, this work pioneers a radically new
approach for enhancing boiling heat transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research helps resolve a long-standing challenge in high-heat flux cooing and
can potentially enable new breakthroughs in many technologies limited by current
bottlenecks in cooling. In particular, this research can greatly benefit two
industrial sectors: thermal management of electronics and industrial heat
exchangers. Initiating the GOALI partnership between University of Maryland,
Clemson University and their industrial partner will greatly enhance their
research capabilities and facilitate the application of microemulsions in
industrial thermal management systems. The proposed project will be tied closely
with the education activities at University of Maryland and Clemson University
through training students in interdisciplinary research, broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups in research, and K-12 outreach. When
implementing these activities, the PIs will focus on broadening the horizons of
students through research at frontiers of engineering sciences and exposing
students to real-life industry problems. These activities will be carried by
making full use of available institutional resources and by leveraging
collaboration with industrial partner.