* 1336611
* Heterogeneities and instabilities during flow processing of biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Daniel Klingenberg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 317,838.00

1336611&lt;br/&gt;Klingenberg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing biomass as an
energy source can help to reduce the need for imported oil and gas, improve
rural economies, increase domestic industries, and aid in mitigating global
warming by decreasing the amount of CO2 generated from nonrenewable sources.
Roughly 30% of our current transportation fuel usage could be replaced by
biofuels from lignocellulosic biomass using "biorefining" processes.
(Lignocellulosic biomass is not part of the food supply.) Commercialization of
such processes requires reducing the processing costs. Increasing the solids
concentration can decrease processing costs. However, concentrated biomass, is a
very viscous, non-Newtonian complex fluid, which makes industrial processing of
biomass challenging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
:&lt;br/&gt;Biomass flows exhibit a variety of problematic phenomena including
large yield stresses, compressibility, heterogeneities, and instabilities. The
overall goal of the proposed work is to develop models of the flow of
concentrated biomass that capture all of the relevant and problematic phenomena.
The proposed research will provide for the first time the modeling, theoretical
and computational framework that is necessary for design of efficient biomass
transport processes. The specific objectives are to: (1) develop one-fluid and
two-fluid models of the pressure-driven flow of biomass first in simple, and
then in more complex processing geometries; (2) determine the model features and
physical properties that must be included to reproduce observations and predict
flow; (3) port the flow models into an open source computational fluid mechanics
package so that the models can be used in more complicated
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will also shed new light on the mechanisms
underlying phenomena such as heterogeneities and instabilities that arise in
processing not only in biomass but other rheologically complex materials. While
the focus of the present work is momentum transport and its coupling to
concentration variations in dense biomass suspensions, this work also represents
a necessary first step in predicting heat and mass transfer during biomass
flows. This point is particularly important given the complex flow reactors that
are being developed for efficient high-throughput conversion to high-value
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
will have impacts at several levels. It will improve the engineering knowledge
base for a class of processes in an area of national (and indeed global)
technological, economic and societal importance. A graduate student and several
undergraduates will be trained for entering this arena, as well as gaining
expertise and making contributions to the fundamental understanding of the
rheology and fluid dynamics of complex fluids. The proposed research is highly
synergistic with the PI's educational efforts in contributing to a freshman
level course at Univ. of Wisconsin called "Introduction to Society's Engineering
Grand Challenges", which has as one of its main goals to recruit and retain
women and other underrepresented groups into engineering by illustrating the
more humanitarian impacts of engineering. The proposed work will appear in this
course via examples and project topics.