* 1336387
* GOALI: Experimentally validated multiscale modeling of Li/O2 cathodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Charles Monroe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,735.00

PI: Monroe, Charles&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336387&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Michigan Ann Arbor&lt;br/&gt;Title: GOALI: Experimentally
validated multiscale modeling of Li/O2 cathodes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaboration project between the University of Michigan (UM) and Robert Bosch
Research and Technology Center (Bosch RTC) will focus on development of robust
multiscale models of rechargeable Li/air cathodes. A viable Li/air battery would
speed efforts to electrify transportation. Conservative projections suggest that
Li/air stacks could achieve energy densities near 1 kWh/kg. This allows single-
charge driving distances of 400 miles, matching combustion-driven cars. The PIs
propose to show what phenomena most impact Li/air cell performance by informing
predictive continuum electrochemical models with electronic structure
calculations and experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid multi-scale
modeling/experimental approach will elucidate discharge/charge mechanisms,
voltage response, and performance of rechargeable aprotic Li/air cells. The team
combines expertise in continuum modeling, ab initio computation, and
experimental electrochemical and structural characterization. The
academic/industrial collaboration will support the Energy for Sustainability
Program objective to improve the fundamental understanding of advanced energy-
storage technologies for transportation, for two primary research objectives:
(1) to develop a flexible, experimentally benchmarked multi-scale modeling
framework. Simulations will incorporate both experimental measurements and ab
initio predictions of material properties into a predictive continuum-scale
Li/air cell model with a 3-phase cathode structure; and (2) to use the modeling
framework to identify, quantify, and predict performance-limiting phenomena in
rechargeable Li/air cells. The mechanistic insight gained will reveal strategies
to overcome limitations and accelerate development of viable Li/air batteries
for vehicles. Simultaneous theoretical and experimental efforts will
parameterize and validate the multi-scale theoretical model, reliant on
molecular-scale thermodynamic, kinetic, and transport properties, to simulate
the macroscopic response of Li/air cells during discharge or charge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach will improve the field?s limited knowledge
about elementary reaction mechanisms in Li/air-battery cathodes, and will
correlate atomic-scale bulk and interfacial material properties with cell-level
performance metrics such as accessible capacity, rate capability, and
efficiency. Building on a current collaboration with Li/air researchers at Bosch
RTC, scientific exchanges will be strengthened by student internship experiences
at Bosch and visits of Bosch researchers to UM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outreach activities will foster the natural connection between research and
pedagogy. Here the chief aim is to establish a collaborative, diverse
environment for electrochemical research to achieve four primary educational
goals: (1) Integration of research problems into a course module in a graduate
Electrochemical Engineering course, webcast simultaneously to reach students
seeking technical degrees; (2) Exposure of undergraduates to energy-storage
technology by offering undergraduate research opportunities and developing
forums outside the classroom for idea exchange; (3) Outreach to support
participation by under-represented minorities and women in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics; and (4) Dissemination of research products via
peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, and biweekly meetings with
UM metal/air battery researchers.