* 1336807
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Particle mediated enhanced transport of semi-volatile organic compounds in indoor environments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Glenn Morrison, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 134,028.00

CBET 1336807/1335722/1336202 Glenn Morrison/Jennifer Benning/John Little
Missouri University of Science & Technology/So Dak School of Mines/ Tech/VA
Polytechnic Inst & St. Univ.

Occupants of buildings are exposed to toxic chemicals from the vast number of
modern building products and furnishings that continuously release these
compounds. Occupants absorb semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) such as
plasticizers, pesticides, flame-retardants, and others through inhaling, eating,
drinking and even by absorbing them through the skin. The presence of airborne
particles in the indoor environment from smog, cooking, smoking and other
sources may dramatically increase dermal absorption for these compounds. This
research will test the hypothesis that airborne particles increase chemical
emission rates from sources of SVOCs and deposition of these chemicals onto
surfaces such as skin and clothing by altering the way these chemicals are
transported from surface-to-surface. A theoretical model of this system predicts
as much as a 10-fold increase in the rate of transport from indoor surfaces and
materials to occupants, thereby increasing inhalation and dermal (skin) dose.
This occurs because particles can absorb and release very large amounts of SVOCs
as they move in and out of regions near surfaces. The proposed research will
carefully combine experimental quantification of relevant parameters (partition
and transport phenomena) with model analysis. Under realistic environmental
conditions, organic and salt particles will be equilibrated with a pure SVOC
(phthalate esters, polybrominated diphenyl ethers, polychlorinated biphenyls)
and the gas-phase deposition rates will be measured for flat plate and tubular
geometries. The results will be used to test theoretical models of particle-
mediated enhanced emissions and uptake. Further, experimental results and mass-
transfer models will be integrated into indoor air quality models to improve
predictions of exposure, dose and risk to indoor sources of SVOCs. The research
team will integrate undergraduate and graduate students in field collection of
samples, model analysis and exposure predictions. Their experiences will inform
the development of a student-vetted educational module on SVOCs which will be
disseminated through the Association for Environmental Engineering and Science
Professors.

Building occupants can absorb toxic plasticizers, pesticides, flame-retardants,
and others chemicals through inhalation, consumption of food and beverages, and
even absorption through the skin. This research examines the extent to which
airborne particles in the indoor environment from smog, cooking, smoking and
other sources may dramatically increase absorption for these compounds. Although
this possibility has been predicted by a recent theoretical model, this project
will be the first to test the model experimentally and under real-world
conditions. This new knowledge will provide health professionals with tools to
better understand and predict exposure and risk associated with low-volatility
chemicals in a wide range of environmental scenarios. The results will help to
better understand and mitigate the health risks of high-particulate environments
that result from activities such as smoking and cooking. The research will also
help manufacturers reformulate products such as building materials by
identifying those chemicals that should be avoided.