* 1336130
* Hydrokinetic Energy Harvesting Using Tethered Undersea Kites
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,12/31/2017
* Gretar Tryggvason, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2017
* USD 303,201.00

PI: Olinger, David&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1336130&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Worcester Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;Title: Hydrokinetic Energy Harvesting
Using Tethered Undersea Kites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
tethered, undersea kite (TUSK) systems; a new hydrokinetic energy technology. In
a TUSK system, a tethered, rigid-winged hydro-kite is submerged in an ocean or
tidal current and controlled to move in high-speed cross-current motions. A
turbine is mounted on the hydro-kite in one TUSK concept, or the flexible
unwinding tether transmits generated hydrodynamic forces to a power generation
system in another concept. TUSK systems have potential advantages over
conventional marine turbines, mainly that TUSK systems will be able to generate
cost-effective energy with; 1) smaller, less costly systems, and 2) at more
locations within ocean currents and tidal flows where current speeds are too low
to make marine turbines feasible. The main benefits are: 1) the hydro-kite can
move in high-speed cross-current motions (much like a kite in air) over large
swept areas to greatly increase power output,&lt;br/&gt;2) TUSK systems
eliminate the need for large diameter turbines and costly support structures, 3)
TUSK systems are easier to maintain, and 4) TUSK systems are
scalable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the proposed work is to identify
and select an optimum TUSK concept and then demonstrate feasibility through
modeling, numerical simulation and sub-scale experimental work. A fundamental
knowledge base for design of stable, scalable, durable, and cost-efficient
tethered undersea kites will be obtained. This knowledge will serve as the basis
for further scaling and development of the technology to full-scale
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lay the foundation for
understanding how such systems behave by integrating analytical models and
robust control solutions, numerical simulations with sufficient accuracy
suitable for system design, and physical experiments on TUSK system components
where we partner with a local hydrodynamics research lab. The proposed work will
advance knowledge in hydrodynamics of underwater vehicles, novel control system
applications, and numerical simulation of complex systems. The project will
examine tracking controllers to yield optimal periodic trajectories in the
presence of modeling errors and disturbances. The proposed numerical simulations
will constitute the first CFD work on tethered undersea kite systems, fully
accounting for hydrodynamic forces, support platform motions, and the
flexibility and influence of the tethers. The integrated work will allow the PIs
to examine the behavior and robustness of the system under different conditions
and control solutions to improve the design of TUSK
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will set the stage for the
further study and eventual full-scale deployment of this new energy conversion
technology by the systems and control, CFD, and hydrokinetic energy communities
as well as commercial enterprises, through dissemination of the results at
conferences and in archival journals. The research will be strongly integrated
with undergraduate and K12 education through undergraduate.