* 1336752
* Scattering of Baroclinic Kelvin Waves by Sills in Straits
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Theodore Durland, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 572,095.00

This project will utilize analytical and numerical modeling to study how shallow
sills in channels and straits impact incident coastal Kelvin waves. It is
motivated by measurement programs over the past two decades in the passages
carrying the Indonesian Throughflow (ITF). Kelvin waves generated in the
equatorial Indian Ocean have been shown to penetrate these passages
episodically, often reversing branches of the ITF for up to a month at a time.
Recent measurements have revealed a vertical structure to these reversals and
evidence of vertical phase propagation within the straits associated with
passing Kelvin waves. Speculation at present connects the vertical propagation
observed within the straits to vertical propagation of the incident waves, but
the project will demonstrate that the situation can involve considerable
complexity. The work will provide a dynamical foundation for understanding the
observations in the ITF passages. A preliminary analytical model has been
developed which shows promising results. An incident wave of a single baroclinic
mode will be scattered into vertical propagation in the channel and in the basin
past the channel. A strait will alter the frequency content of an incident
vertically propagating pulse, resulting in vertical propagation characteristics
of the transmitted and bypassed pulses that are different from those of the
incident pulse. The project will develop the preliminary analytical model,
providing justification for the foundational assumptions, error estimates and
validity limits. The model predictions will then be analyzed for the most
intuitive physical understanding of the various effects. Numerical process
models would be used to understand the effects on the model predictions of more
realistic dissipation, boundary conditions and bottom topography. Finally, a
regional numerical model will be used to attempt to reproduce observations in
the ITF passages and explain these in terms of the underlying dynamics revealed
by the more idealized models.

Intellectual Merit: This study will advance the theory of geophysical fluid
dynamics by clarifying the effects that sills in straits and channels have on
the baroclinic structures and vertical propagation of incident coastal Kelvin
waves.

Broader Impacts: The Indonesian Throughflow is a vital link in the upper branch
of the global oceanic overturning circulation, which in turn is an important
component of Earth's climate system. The Indian Ocean Kelvin waves are known to
episodically impact the ITF to the extent of frequently reversing the flow
direction, yet the complex vertical and temporal structure of these effects is
only now beginning to be understood and they are poorly parameterized in global
models. Although this study does not aim at improving the parameterizations of
global climate models, its contributions will at least improve the knowledge of
what must be parameterized in order to successfully model the global system. The
project will provide support for a graduate student and will train the student
in analytical and numerical modeling techniques necessary to make further
contributions in oceanic dynamics.