* 1336168
* Measuring the Release of Nanoparticles from Polymer Nanocomposites using Single Particle ICPMS and Field Flow Fractionation ICPMS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* James Ranville, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 305,558.00

1336168 Ranville

Overview: This research proposal describes plans to study the release of nano-
TiO2 and CNTs from polymer nanocomposites using highly sensitive quantitative
analytical techniques. Most nanoparticles (NPs) will enter the environment
initially as components of solid phase materials (i.e., nanoproducts). One of
the most important types of nanoproducts are polymer nanocomposites that
incorporate NPs such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), nano-silver, or nano-scale
metal oxides due to their ability to enhance polymer properties such as
conductivity and load bearing capabilities. Indeed, polymer nanocomposites are
already present in consumer products such as bicycles, anti-static parts for
fuel lines, and packaging materials used in the electronic and food industries.
Motivation for studying NP release from polymer nanocomposites is derived from
two overriding considerations: (i) the paucity of information on the release of
NPs from nanoproducts, despite the crucial role that NP release will play in
determining the risk posed by NPs in the environment; and (ii) our initial
results which indicate that NPs can indeed be released from polymer
nanocomposites, and that NP release can be detected with single particle
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (spICPMS).

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research will transform our understanding of NP
release from nanoproducts by identifying the factors that control the extent,
nature, and rate of NP release. This will be accomplished by preparing and
characterizing polymer nanocomposites containing nano-TiO2 or CNTs, where the
identity of the matrix as well as the surface chemistry and NP loading will be
varied. These well-defined composites will then be subjected to potential NP
release scenarios and "accelerated aging" conditions that include photolysis,
mechanical stress, thermal cycling and exposure to harsh oxidants. The
concentration and nature of NPs released from the nanocomposites will then be
evaluated. A major obstacle in conducting NP release studies is the need to
measure extremely low (e.g. ng/L) concentrations of NPs. To overcome this
obstacle, we will use spICPMS and field-flow fractionation (FFF-ICPMS) to
determine particle size distributions and ng/L concentrations of nano-TiO2.
Although detecting CNTs in spICPMS by measuring the carbon signal is ambiguous,
the PIs have shown that embedded metal NPs can serve as proxies for CNTs. This
approach allowed us to use spICPMS to detect CNT released from polymer
nanocomposites. A key component of the work is to further improve spICPMS
methodology for quantitative analysis of CNTs and to combine spICPMS and FFF-
ICPMS to identify the physical form of released NPs.

Broader Impacts: By integrating state-of-the-art detection capabilities into an
experimental plan where well-defined polymer composites are exposed to potential
release scenarios, we will be able to evaluate the effects of both nanocomposite
composition and variable environmental conditions on the extent and rate of NP
release. These data will enable us to identify release mechanisms as well as the
polymer nanocomposite characteristics and the exposure conditions where NP
release is most (and least) likely to occur. This new information will improve
not only the accuracy of risk assessment and life cycle analysis models, but
also inform the design of future nanoproducts that retain commercial value
without contributing to adverse environmental health and safety effects.
Analytical methods and experimental protocols developed will also provide a
platform for researchers to examine NP release from other nanoproducts. Students
who participate in this inherently interdisciplinary research project will
acquire a unique skill set that incorporates elements of environmental science
and engineering, materials chemistry, and analytical science, providing them
with many career opportunities. Project results will be disseminated through
presentations at national scientific meetings and local colleges as well as
publications in peer-reviewed journals. The scientific impact of this project
will be further enhanced by continuing to teach short courses on spICPMS
applications at international meetings. The educational outreach will build on
and expand our previous activities of involving undergraduates from 4-year
colleges in research and in bringing in high school teachers for summer research
programs. This project will also be used as a vehicle to incorporate concepts of
nanoproduct use and impact into existing K-12 educational modules that we have
developed and which have been used successfully in several Colorado high
schools.