* 1336544
* Inducing Aerobic Granulation in Continuous-Flow Reactors using Shear Variability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,05/31/2018
* Joel Ducoste, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,764.00

CBET-1336544 Francis de los Reyes and Joel Ducoste North Carolina State
University

Aerobic granulation is perhaps one of the most exciting developments in aerobic
wastewater treatment, promising the ability to treat higher flows of higher
strength wastewater in smaller reactors, with fewer problems with settling and
separation of biomass, and with the ability to treat a variety of organic
substrates, as well as simultaneously removal of nitrogen and phosphorus. If
aerobic granular sludge can be developed in existing wastewater treatment
facilities, the impacts would be widespread. Yet despite the promise, full-scale
implementation of continuous flow aerobic granular sludge reactors has not
happened. Continuous flow reactors theoretically provide more stable
environments, need less automation, and can be designed by engineers using
smaller test systems. However, the formation of aerobic granules from non-
granular biosolids in continuous flow reactors is not understood. Based on prior
research, it is hypothesized that the key to inducing aerobic granulation is not
the sequencing batch mode, but the ability of a bioreactor to provide variable
shear. This research will test this hypothesis and investigate the mechanistic
links between reactor hydrodynamics, microbial responses, and ultimately
granulation under aerobic conditions. A combination of approaches, including
analysis of microbial morphological changes in a micro-reactor, molecular
microbial analysis of populations and genes in lab-scale reactors, and use of
computational fluid dynamics and Lagrangian sensors, will be used to show how
shear variability is a necessary condition for aerobic granulation. Finally,
this research will demonstrate scale up by constructing and operating a
continuous-flow pilot-scale reactor to induce aerobic granulation. This combined
approach will show how aerobic granular sludge technology can be used to
retrofit existing activated sludge plants, potentially providing a significant
leap in aerobic treatment technology, and impacting thousands of wastewater
treatment plants around the world.

The development of aerobic granular biomass reactors has excited the wastewater
treatment industry, as it represents an innovative, efficient, compact, and
potentially more sustainable method for treating wastewater. Aerobic granular
biomass reactors can treat high strength wastewaters containing organics. This
project will potentially benefit municipal and industrial wastewater treatment
plants including those that perform nutrient removal. Developing aerobic
granules in existing wastewater treatment plants represents a leap in technology
with economic and efficiency benefits for the nation's wastewater
infrastructure. The results from this innovative research will also generate
information that can be used in the classroom and foster learning through
excitement of discovery.