* 1336534
* Understanding the economic and environmental consequences of widespread deployment of thin film solar photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2013,07/31/2018
* Fu Zhao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 298,388.00

1336534 (Zhao). The overarching goal of this project is to generate knowledge
needed for a new life cycle assessment (LCA) framework that is capable of
predicting potential economic and environmental consequences due to the wide
deployment of thin film solar photovoltaics (PV). Thin film solar cells are
gaining considerable market share against silicon wafer based panels due to
lower costs but comparable energy efficiency. However, a closer examination from
a life cycle perspective reveals that they face some unique challenges related
to sustainability. Manufacturing of thin film solar cells relies on some key
materials such as cadmium, tellurium, indium, gallium, and selenium, which are
of limited supply and are currently being used by electronics and other
industries. Thin film PV, as an emerging application, will compete for these key
materials and could disrupt the supply-demand balance. This will in turn lead to
market volatility and affect manufacturing cost of thin film PVs. In addition,
increasing demand in these raw materials drives up prices which justify the
utilization of low grade ores. This will in turn change the environmental
profiles of key materials consumed in thin film PV manufacturing. This research
aims at predicting the economic and environmental consequences of this
competition for materials by combining high resolution partial equilibrium (PE)
models and life cycle inventory modeling. Five research tasks will be performed:
1) identifying critical PV materials and industrial sectors potentially
affected, 2) developing PE models to quantify supply and demand evolution of
critical PV materials, 3) quantifying changing environmental profiles of
critical PV materials, 4) analyzing effect of uncertainties on model outputs;
and 5) utilizing the modeling framework for policy evaluation. LCA studies on
thin film PVs to date are mostly attributional and have largely ignored the
ripple effects in affected industrial/economic sectors. This project aims at
filling this critical knowledge gap by developing a new consequential LCA
framework. This research will quantify the dynamic flows of key energy
metals/materials among competing sectors. If successful, the project will
advance understanding and provide a more accurate picture of the life cycle
environmental footprints of thin film PVs. This project brings together an LCA
specialist (Zhao) and an energy economist (Steinbuks). The LCA tool to be
developed has the potential to aid engineers in the design of more
environmentally preferable thin film PV technologies. It could also facilitate
the development of public policy to expedite the penetration of solar energy
while minimizing undesirable environmental impacts. These in combination may
contribute to the greening of electricity generation in the U.S. while avoiding
unexpected environmental consequences associated with the transition. The
research findings will be infused into multiple courses at Purdue, increasing
the amount of sustainability-related educational material in these curricula and
encouraging engineering students to actively engage in sustainability
engineering and public policy after graduation. During this project, the PI will
continue his efforts on recruiting students whose ethnicities are traditionally
under-represented in engineering. To attract more students from under-
represented groups to research and graduate study, all undergraduate students
will document their daily experience on social media (e.g. facebook, twitter,
and google+). To reach an even broader audience, all the findings, case studies,
and teaching material will all be made available on Purdue's Repository for
Research Data.