* 1336845
* SusChEM: Rational design of aqueous interfaces of Earth abundant and nontoxic transition metal sulfides for photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2018
* USD 482,115.00

PI: Somasundaran, Ponisseril Proposal Number: 1336845 Institution: Columbia
University Title: SusChEM: Rational design of aqueous interfaces of Earth
abundant and nontoxic transition metal sulfides for photocatalytic conversion of
CO2 to fuels

This project focuses on understanding aqueous interfaces of Earth abundant and
nontoxic transition metal sulfides to engineer a cost-effective photo-
electrocatalytic CO2 reduction system. The biggest roadblock to making scalable
the sun-light powered synthesis of carbonaceous fuels from CO2 and water is the
lack of a catalysts which is simultaneously efficient, cheap, and
environmentally benign. The development of such a catalyst is hindered by the
infancy of the mechanistic understanding of the proton-coupled multiple electron
transfers involved into the CO2 reduction beyond CO and formate. The proposed
interdisciplinary research will bridge this knowledge gap by systematically
studying for the first time copper and iron sulfide minerals as novel and cheap
photocatalytic materials. A novel molecular cocatalytic approach is suggested to
overcome the thermodynamic and kinetic limitations of CO2 reduction towards
energy-dense fuels. The objective is to determine the mechanisms of the reaction
dependence on molecular cocatalysts at the interfaces and in bulk electrolyte,
with the ultimate goal to develop more sustainable and efficient photosynthetic
systems. Towards this ambitious goal, a team from Columbia University will study
for the first time the multiscale physics and chemistry driving artificial
photosynthesis of carbonaceous fuels by iron and copper sulfides, using advanced
operando FTIR and Raman spectro-electrochemical, (photo)electrochemical, and
theoretical (e.g., Density Fuction Theory) methods.

The new more efficient photosynthetic systems based on copper and iron sulfides
developed during the research will be a practical step towards scaling up
renewable energy. It will lead to novel scalable strategies for the rational
design of the interfaces of metal sulfides with water. Apart from artificial
photosynthesis, this outcome can find application in immobilizing radionuclides
in environmental remediation, as well as in mineral processing (selective
separation) of sulfide minerals, in the design of greener chemicals. In
addition, this knowledge will broaden our understanding of biogeochemical
process including processes in acid-mine drainage, cycling of iron and cupper in
deep oceans, and eventually the origin of life. The general results of the
research and the new methodology will be included in the PI's
undergraduate/graduate level courses.