* 1336905
* Collaborative Research:   Global biodiversity and functioning of eelgrass ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Kevin Hovel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2017
* USD 295,486.00

Overview: This research will produce the second generation of a global
collaborative research project, the Zostera Experimental Network (ZEN) to
quantify the interacting influences of environmental forcing, biodiversity, and
food-web perturbations on structure and functioning of eelgrass (Zostera marina)
beds, the foundation of important but threatened coastal ecosystems worldwide.
Partners at 40 sites in 14 countries will conduct parallel, standardized field
sampling of producer and consumer biomass and diversity, and measure grazing and
predation rates, to produce a global map of biodiversity, biomass distribution
among trophic levels, and ecosystem processes in eelgrass habitats. Partners at
a subset of core sites will conduct factorial experiments to characterize the
interaction of nutrient loading, predator loss, and biogenic habitat structure
(eelgrass density) in mediating producer growth and trophic processes in
eelgrass. Finally, guided by the results from mechanistic experiments, the
global field data will be used to test specific hypotheses about impacts of
climate warming, nutrient loading, and declining biodiversity on eelgrass
ecosystems via structural equation modeling, a uniquely powerful approach to
dissecting complex interacting networks of causality. The proposed research will
characterize in unprecedented detail how environmental forcing, biodiversity,
and food-web processes interact to mediate functioning of a coastal ecosystem on
a global scale. There are four general objectives:

1. Quantify linkages between eelgrass genetic diversity, growth, and provision
of animal habitat 2. Quantify the influence of eelgrass habitat structure on
consumer-prey interactions, secondary production, and trophic transfer 3.
Identify mechanisms for the influence of grazer diversity on algal control 4.
Develop a global map of grazing and predation intensity to assess the relative
importance of bottom-up and top-down forcing in eelgrass beds

Intellectual Merit: This program's integrated characterization of biodiversity,
ecosystem state variables, and process rates across the globe is arguably unique
in any marine system. It builds on promising results from the first generation
of ZEN to allow for the first time a rigorous analysis of links between
biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in a natural system on a global scale. As
part of this analysis, the proposed research will provide the most comprehensive
analysis yet of the controversial question of the relative importance of bottom-
up and top-down forcing in seagrass ecosystems, an issue of fundamental
importance to management and conservation.

Broader Impacts: Seagrasses and the many ecosystem services they provide are
declining worldwide. This project's data on higher trophic levels and food-web
interactions will provide a valuable and overdue complement to the many
monitoring programs around the world that focus primarily on seagrasses and
water quality, and will ultimately be made available to parameterize and test
models of threatened seagrass ecosystems at a higher level of resolution
ecological reality than previously possible. The success of the Zostera
Experimental Network (ZEN) is evidenced by the continuation of all but one
partner in the second generation (ZEN 2), and recruitment of nearly the same
number of new partners to this global collaboration. This research will solidify
and expand this network by more than doubling the number of participating sites,
collaborating with parallel European Union and Japanese efforts, and integrating
the world's largest and most successful seagrass restoration project at the
Virginia Coast LTER site. ZEN 2 will also provide intensive training and
international research experiences for at least 15 undergraduate interns,
several graduate students, and a Postdoctoral Scholar, advance an innovative
model of comparative-experimental research in global marine ecology, and produce
a comprehensive database and analytical framework that will be invaluable to
global efforts at conservation and management of threatened seagrass systems.