* 1336425
* Understanding the Migration Fates of Contaminants at Water/sediment Interface after Environmental Shocks Using Innovative Real-time in situ Profiling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Baikun Li, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 305,991.00

CBET 1336425&lt;br/&gt;Baikun Li&lt;br/&gt;University of
Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study aims at developing a new generation
microelectrode (ME) with easy fabrication, sturdy structure, simple setup and
capability of simultaneously measuring multiple parameters at multiple points to
profile the spatial distribution of contaminants, thus providing useful
information to elucidate their fate. All-in-one microelectrode chips (AIO MECs)
provide real-time, continuous, and accurate monitoring of physical-chemical
variation following system shocks. With the water/sediment interface as the
target, four tasks will be conducted. First, as the precursor of the AIO MECs,
one-dimension MECs (1D MECs) will be fabricated using photolithography to
produce sturdy MEs on silicon chips. The position of each ME will be known so
that the 1D MECs are capable of profiling along the depth of samples without the
need of micromanipulators. Second, AIO MECs will be developed by patterning
multiple 1D MECs onto a single chip, so that one chip can simultaneously measure
multiple parameters at multiple points. Third, the applicability of 1D MECs and
AIO MECs will be examined under two shocks (concentration- and flow rate-
dependent shocks) in lab-scale tests and lake sediments. Finally, the short-term
(days) and long-term (months) impacts of shocks at the water/sediment interface
will be monitored in real-time mode. The MEC profiles will be integrated with
models to elucidate the migration fates of contaminants, which will provide
timely restoration protocols for site cleanup before irreversible deterioration
of the natural environment. This proof-of-concept work will provide real-time
monitoring of physical-chemical variations (e.g., nitrogen, phosphorous, redox
potential, and proton) after shocks, and allow fundamental understanding of the
dynamic transport of contaminants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing the new
generation ME technology to achieve real-time monitoring of contaminants after
shocks, the proposed research will impact protection and restoration of vital
ecosystems, maintaining environmental sustainability for future generations. The
AIO MECs will lead to compact and simple monitoring kits that will revolutionize
real-time monitor of diverse systems including large-scale contaminated sites
and harsh environment (deep sea sediment). Multiple outreach initiatives
including workshops and high school seminars will promote the
scientific/engineering competence of underrepresented groups. The research will
strengthen an existing collaboration with water industries to achieve real-time
in situ monitoring of natural and engineered systems. Finally, the new
generation ME technology for profiling water qualities and contaminants will be
a strong force to promote environmental engineering research and education in
the State of Connecticut and New England area.