* 1336311
* Structure and flow in solid/fluid/fluid systems: Model studies using immiscible polymer blends
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 317,027.00

1336311&lt;br/&gt;PI: Velankar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to
conduct a comprehensive study of flow-induced structure development in liquid-
liquid-solid mixtures where wetting of the solid particles by the two immiscible
liquids play an important role. Capillary forces will be far stronger than the
thermal fluctuation forces in the chosen systems, and hence the structure and
flow properties will be strongly influenced by the processing history. The
overall hypothesis of this research is that previously-undiscovered flow-induced
structures will emerge from the interplay between viscous and interfacial
tension forces. Experiments will be conducted using two molten polymers as the
immiscible fluid phases. One of the phases will be solidified by simply cooling
the mixtures after the desired flow history. This quenching will allow detailed
morphological characterization by scanning electron microscopy. Using in situ
optical imaging, electron microscopy, and rheological experiments, the
dependence of the structure and rheology on composition, flow history, and
wettability of the particles will be mapped.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Multiphase
systems are common in a wide variety of processes and products: foods, personal
care products, petroleum extraction, etc. Very little is known at present about
the structure and flow properties of ternary systems. For instance, even a basic
question such as the effect of ternary composition on viscosity is not known.
This project will map the structure-processing-rheology relationships to address
this issue. Ternary systems give rise to a wide variety of structures ranging
from sand castles (particles held together by water menisci), armored bubbles
(bubbles whose surface is jammed with particles), bijels (morphologies in which
the two phases are continuous), liquid marbles (drops coated with particles),
etc. This project aims to provide a unified view of the effects of capillary
forces in such systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One graduate student and several
undergraduates will be trained in scientific research. The principal
investigator will also conduct outreach at a high school level which introduces
students to the science and technology of multiphase materials.