* 1336580
* XPS:CLCCA:LigHTS: Lagging-Hardware Tolerant Systems" in the system.
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Haryadi Gunawi, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 749,854.00

With the advent of scalable parallel computing, thousands of devices are
connected and managed collectively.  This era is confronted with a new
challenge: performance failure; systems often perform worse than expected due to
large-scale management issues such as hardware failures, software bugs, and
configuration mistakes.  This project targets one overlooked cause of
performance failure: "lagging hardware" -- hardware whose performance degrades
significantly compared to its specification.  Many reports indicate that a
single lagging hardware can easily cascade and make the performance of a whole
cluster collapse.  Here, parallelism is unexploited, productivity is reduced,
the system is underutilized, and energy is wasted. The goal of the LigHTS
project is to transform computing systems into Lagging-Hardware Tolerant
Systems.  The LigHTS project will bring many direct benefits to the society;
users from many areas (science, healthcare, business, education, military, and
government) increasingly use large-scale storage and computation services. 
Here, predictable performance is a key to success, and in this context lagging-
hardware tolerant computing is a critical ingredient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
LigHTS project consists of three major objectives.  The first is lagging-
hardware data analysis and instrumentation. To improve the robustness of future
parallel systems, it is crucial to study lagging characteristics exhibited by
modern hardware and to devise new instrumentation methodologies that can collect
cases of lagging hardware in deployment.  The second is lagging-failure system
analysis.  It is important to rigorously analyze the impact of lagging hardware
(including disk, network, processor) to currently deployed systems. The results
will unearth design flaws and provide valuable reevaluations of how deployed
systems should evolve.  The last is LigHTS principles, design, and
implementation.  There is a need to establish foundational principles of
lagging-hardware tolerant computing and apply the principles in building
prototypes of cross-layer LigHTS systems spanning distributed storage, computing
framework, operating and runtime systems.