* 1336941
* Predictive Computational Tools for Biomass Fast Pyrolysis in Fluidized Bed Reactors using Particle-Resolved Direct Numerical Simulation of Reacting Gas-Solid Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Shankar Subramaniam, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 260,000.00

1336941&lt;br/&gt;Subramaniam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of sustainable
energy generation from renewable sources that minimizes environmental impact is
now globally recognized, and is a national priority. This project focuses on
fundamental scientific understanding of reacting gas-solid flows that is needed
to overcome technological barriers for the successful development of one such
renewable energy source, namely, the production of biofuels. Predictive
computational models of biomass fast pyrolysis are needed for large-scale
production of biofuel using fluidized-bed reactors. State-of-the-art
computational codes for fluidized-bed reactors use simplistic models for average
reaction rates as well as heat and mass transfer correlations developed in the
late 1970s, which recent research reveals are problematic. To address this
shortcoming, high-fidelity direct numerical simulations will be used in this
project to gain fundamental understanding of reacting gas-solid flow. This
fundamental understanding will result in physics-based models that will be
implemented into a popular open-source multi-fluid code MFIX. The improved and
validated model for reacting gas-solid flow can be used by industry to evaluate
and optimize fluidized-bed reactors for fast pyrolysis of biomass. These
improvements will also result in more accurate simulation of fluidized beds for
chemical looping combustion and CO2 capture using dry sorbents. The PI has
coordinated a successful recruitment and retention program entitled Women in
Mechanical Engineering, and both PIs will continue ongoing efforts to train
graduate and undergraduate women and minority students as part of this research
project.