* 1336111
* Ab initio Based Multiscale Modeling of Thermal Transport in Femtosecond Laser Materials Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Yuwen Zhang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2017
* USD 299,995.00

CBET 1336111&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most striking feature of
femtosecond laser that has not been matched by any other material processing
means is its ability to remove material with minimal collateral damage. The
objective of this project is to perform Ab initio based multiscale modeling of
thermal transport in femtosecond laser materials processing. The key challenge
in the modeling is to establish a unified formulation that can correctly and
effectively describe thermal transport in femtosecond laser materials processing
without or with minimal empirical formulations. The Ab initio based multiscale
approach can bridge the divide between the experiments and theories, and
eliminate the needs of any assumption and empirical parameters. A quantum
molecular dynamics (MD) simulation based on density function theory (DFT) will
be carried out first to determine appropriate intermolecular potentials for
classical MD simulation. A hybrid MD/semi-classical two-temperature multiscale
model will be developed by combining classical MD simulation based on the
intermolecular potentials obtained from quantum MD simulation together with the
semi-classical energy equation for electrons. An inverse heat transfer modeling
based on the semi-classical two-temperature model will be carried out to obtain
the microscale transport properties, which are then used to develop the
continuum model for materials removal. The stochastic modeling of femtosecond
laser processing of metal under uncertainties of thermophysical and processing
parameters will be carried out. Experiments on femtosecond laser processing of
gold and copper by femtosecond laser pulses will be conducted in order to
validate the Ab initial based multiscale and stochastic models developed under
this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ab initio based multiscale and
stochastic models will allow the users to select proper processing parameters to
obtain the desired micro- and nanostructure; this will result in significant
reduction of cost associated with the traditional trial-and-error approach and
will increase the economic competitiveness of the United States on
nanomanufacturing. The outcome of the research will be disseminated through
publications in archival journals, presentations at national and international
conferences, and student dissertations. The outreach activities will also help
promoting the public awareness and recognition of science and engineering and
promote the public image of scientists and engineers, which will play a very
important role in education at all levels and will also have broader impacts on
technology, economy, and society.