* 1336038
* Collaborative Proposal: Long-term dynamics of Water-entry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2017
* Sunny Jung, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 205,000.00

1336038/1335957 &lt;br/&gt;Jung/Vlachos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motion of an
object through a fluid surface has drawn the attention of scientists and
engineers interested in physical processes involving the interplay of inertia,
gravity, viscous forces, surface tension, and hydrophobicity. Water-entry
phenomena are ubiquitous in engineering applications and in nature. Such
engineering applications include ship motion, ocean structure-wave interaction,
and ballistics. Biological examples include the locomotion of the basilisk
lizard on the water surface and the drinking processes of animals. Despite the
great interest in water-entry physics, an approach unifying all physical forces
governing the water-entry process is not well developed. This can be attributed
to the fact that during the entry process the relative importance of the
physical parameters involved is continuously changing. These parameters are
inertia, gravity, surface tension, hydrophobicity, and the pressure jump across
the interface. The PIs propose to perform state-of-the-art experiments and
develop a comprehensive mathematical model that captures all physical factors
involved. In the modeling of interfacial dynamics, the PIs will develop a
splash-curtain model to capture the dome-closing shape above the free surface,
investigate the instability of cavity ripples after the pinch-off, and account
for the effect of surface tension, as well as pressure jump across the
interface. In physical experiments, the PIs will quantitatively study the
dynamics of water entry with various well-controlled parameters and introduce a
method to measure the internal air pressure using digital particle image
velocimetry (DPIV) velocity fields. The PIs will perform ultrafast synchrotron
x-ray imaging experiments in order to capture the dynamics of the advancing
contact line during water entry. By overcoming the limitations of current
experimental and mathematical methods, the PIs aspire to transform our
understanding of water-entry processes and provide the enabling knowledge for
advances across the numerous engineering applications involving water entry.
Previous studies have focused only on inertia and gravity, which are dominant in
the initial stage of impact, but they often neglect many other physical factors,
such as viscous or surface tension effects. As a result, models describing the
fundamental mechanics within the intermediate range of these physical parameters
are lacking. Biological systems, such as those described above, often operate
within this intermediate range of conditions. Hence, this work is focused on
understanding the physical processes governing water entry within the
intermediate conditions of the physical parameters. In terms of the broader
impacts, this research should provide insights at the interface of engineering,
math, and physics. This work should provide an improved understanding of water-
entry dynamics and enable the development of novel bio-inspired engineering
systems that, for example, minimize loads and possible catastrophic damage on
structures upon water impact. This project will provide interdisciplinary
education for graduate and undergraduate students by training them in advanced
experimental methods combined with rigorous mathematical modeling. Moreover, the
results and accomplishments of this work will translate into the classroom
through graduate and undergraduate courses that the PIs teach, thus contributing
to the development of engineers and researchers that appreciate, promote, and
develop cross-disciplinary technologies. The PIs will leverage current,
successful Virginia Tech diversity and outreach programs, including recruiting
initiatives and retention of underrepresented groups with which the PIs
collaborate.