* 1336761
* Multi-Scale Fluid Turbulence-Scalar Mixing Dynamics in Gas-Phase Turbulent Jets
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Sutton, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 305,009.00

1336761 Sutton

The objective of this project is to quantify the multi-scale dynamics governing
the mixing of a passive scalar quantity by turbulent fluid motion. Specifically,
the time- and scale-dependent coupling between fluid turbulence and the scalar
field within gas-phase shear flows will be investigated with simultaneous high-
speed (> 10 kHz acquisition rate) 3D velocity and 2D conserved scalar imaging.
Turbulent scalar mixing is ubiquitous in nature and engineering processes and
has been a subject of research for more than sixty years; however, the
underlying physics and governing mechanisms producing the observed phenomenology
remain unclear. Turbulent flows are inherently intermittent, multi-dimensional
phenomena, which create a highly dynamic system occurring on multiple length and
time scales. In addition, scalar transport is likely coupled to the highly non-
linear velocity field in a spatially and temporally complex manner. This not
only leads to difficulties in developing tractable theoretical descriptions, but
also to difficulties developing robust and predictive computational modeling
capabilities. New measurement and analysis tools are needed to investigate,
understand, and describe the multi-scale and multi-physics nature of the
turbulent scalar mixing process. This project will be aided by recent
technological advances in quantitative high-speed imaging and in particular, a
new multi-kHz, high-energy laser system, which allows simultaneous time-resolved
3D velocity and 2D conserved scalar measurements in high-Reynolds number, gas-
phase flows. The project will be transformative through characterization of the
dynamic interaction between turbulent velocity and scalar fields in real time.
Space- and time-correlation between fluid kinematics and scalar gradients will
be quantified. The measurements will be used to investigate the underlying
mechanisms governing the so-called "ramp-cliff" formation, which indicates the
imprint of large-scale intermittency on smaller scales and persistent scalar
anisotropy at all scales. Finally, the unique data sets will enable an
investigation into the relative importance of advection and diffusion as a
function of time, characterizing the level of intermittency of each process.
Temporally based, joint velocity-scalar statistics will allow a new
parameterization of the nature of velocity-mixing dynamics. In addition, it is
proposed to experimentally determine new, multi-point, multi-time correlations,
which are statistical quantities containing both spatial and temporal structural
information that can be appropriately compared to both theory and time-dependent
modeling results from large-eddy simulation (LES). Broader Impacts: A successful
project will have significant impact on the fundamental understanding of scalar
mixing in turbulent flows and in the field of turbulence in general. Since the
performance of the majority of realistic combustion systems such as gas turbine
and internal combustion engines are underpinned by turbulent mixing, a better
understanding of the underlying physics can lead to cleaner and more efficient
systems. The proposed research also will provide critical, new data to assess
turbulence theory and to develop physically based LES models as well as their
implementation into realistic turbulent environments. In terms of research-
related education, a doctoral student will be supported by this project. Every
effort will be made to include the participation of students traditionally
classified as under-represented including women and minorities. Additional
opportunities for broader impacts will be available through undergraduate honors
projects, research seminars, the dissemination of results into the open
literature, and through presentations at conferences. This research provides
excellent opportunities student participants to work within (and significantly
contribute to) a wide range of advanced topics including fluid dynamics and
optical diagnostics.