* 1336469
* Acidic ionic liquid catalyzed single reactor conversion of biomass to biocrude oil
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2018
* Ananda Amarasekara, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2018
* USD 333,575.00

PI: Amarasekara, Ananda Proposal Number: 1336469 Institution: Prairie View A & M
University Title: Acidic ionic liquid catalyzed single reactor conversion of
biomass to biocrude oil

Objective of this project is to develop an energy efficient recyclable catalytic
process for transformation of biomass to biocrude oil, which can be converted to
transportation liquid fuels similar to petroleum liquid fuels using a catalytic
hydrogenation step. This goal will be achieved by the development of a
recyclable catalyst that can produce C5-C20 range partially oxygenated furanic
alkene type biocrude oil from lignocellulosic biomass in a single reactor
operation under mild conditions. This project is based on the hypothesis, acidic
ionic liquids are excellent recyclable catalysts for three tandem catalytic
processes: depolymerization-dehydration-aldol condensation. First, cellulose and
hemicelluloses in the biomass undergoes a sulfonic acid functionalized acidic
ionic liquid catalyzed depolymerization to glucose and xylose at a relatively
low temperature. In the second step catalyst will dehydrate the monosaccharides
into a furan mixture, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural and furfural. Thirdly furan
aldehydes will undergo acid catalyzed aldol condensation with acetone in the
medium. The complex product will consist of C5-C20 range compounds resulting
from cross aldol condensation between furans and acetone, as well as acetone
self-condensation products.

In this project the PI will prepare a series of acidic ionic liquid catalysts
with a verity of ionic core structures, counter ions, and acidic groups such as
-SO3H, and -CF2-SO3H, attached to the ionic liquid structure with spacer groups
of different lengths, to evaluate their catalytic activities in the single
reactor conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to furanic biocrude oil at
moderate temperatures and pressures in acetone or 2-butanone medium. The key
features include (a) -SO3H group functionalized Br nsted acid ionic liquids are
a unique type of catalysts that can efficiently catalyze all three processes:
cellulose hydrolysis, monosaccharide dehydration, and aldol condensation (b) all
three catalytic processes can be carried out in tandem in a single reactor
operation (c) very low catalyst loading is required for these ionic liquid
catalysts (d) Br nsted acid ionic liquids catalysts are highly water soluble,
can be easily separated from hydrophobic crude-oil product, therefore these
catalysts are nearly 100% recyclable with negligible loss in catalytic activity
(e) acetone or 2-butanone will be used as the solvent/ reaction partner, and
these ketones can be produced from biomass resources, therefore all carbons in
the final fuel product is originated from renewable resources (f) biocrude oil
synthesis process can be carried out at mild temperatures and relatively low
pressures, therefore can be carried out in a simple reactor, and saves energy.

The project includes 9a) broad-based education, and cutting-edge research
training opportunities in instrumental techniques, interdisciplinary research,
biomass processing, and sustainable energy technologies for undergraduate and
graduate students, particularly for women and underrepresented minorities in a
HBCU (b) PI and students will actively participate in regional, national and
international meetings to present their research to the broader scientific
community, and will publish in widely circulated journals (c) educate the public
on sustainable energy, and how to relieve the dependence on petroleum fuels (d)
potential to develop an economical industrial process to produce third
generation drop-in biofuels, which can be refined in existing oil refineries,
and should work in current internal combustion and jet engines with no or
minimum modifications.