* 1336053
* Understanding the impact of engineered nanoparticles on the lysosome-autophagy system
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2017
* Laura Segatori, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2017
* USD 304,999.00

CBET - 1336053 The last decade has witnessed rapid growth in the nanotechnology
industry: more than 1,000 consumer products containing nanoparticles (NPs) are
currently in the market place, and a variety of newly engineered nanomaterials
are developed every day. As a result, workers in the nanotechnology industry,
consumers, and ultimately the environment itself inevitably come in contact with
engineered NPs. Because of their unique properties, including their nanoscale
size, large surface area, chemical composition, and reactivity, NPs interact
with biological components and systems, many of which also operate at the
nanoscale level. Not surprisingly, growing concerns have been raised over the
possibility that these interactions could have deleterious effects on humans.
Currently, toxicology studies are typically conducted to assess the risk
associated with exposure to newly engineered nanomaterials. However, even when
NPs are not deemed toxic based on standard in vivo and in vitro viability
assays, they might still significantly alter cell physiology. A wealth of
information is available about the cellular uptake of NPs, and the rate at which
cells internalize NPs can be controlled with respect to NP size, charge, and
surface properties. However, the impact of these physicochemical properties on
other cellular processes has not been investigated in a systematic fashion. It
is known, for instance, that upon internalization, most NPs elicit the reaction
of cellular clearance mechanisms. Indeed, the project team recently found that a
number of NPs activate autophagy, the main catabolic pathway that eliminates
cellular waste. While activation of autophagy may lead to enhanced clearance of
waste material, it can also induce activation of cell death programs. Moreover,
preliminary studies indicate that NPs of specific charege and composition can
activate the autophagic response but also impair cellular components that
mediate degradation, ultimately blocking autophagic flux. The project team
recently developed a set of analytical tools to monitor the autophagic flux and
cell model systems to measure the accumulation of autophagic substrates,
including proteolipid and proteinaceous aggregates. The team is thus uniquely
positioned to investigate the impact of NPs on the autophagic system. The
overarching goal of the proposed project is to map the physicochemical
properties of NPs with the nature of the autophagic response that they induce,
ultimately generating the design rules to engineer NPs with the desired
properties at the interface with the autophagy system. To achieve this goal, we
propose to pursue three research objectives: 1) Identify the physicochemical
properties of NPs that activate autophagy; 2) link the physicochemical
properties of NPs to biocompatible and bioadverse cellular responses associated
with autophagy activation; and 3) identify the cellular network that regulates
the autophagic response to NPs.

Intellectual Merit : Results from this study will provide a detailed
characterization of the impact of NPs on the autophagy system. The project will
establish the effect of NP physicochemical properties, namely geometric
parameters, charge, and composition, on downstream effects associated with
activation of autophagy, namely clearance of NPs and other autophagic substrates
or autophagy-associated cell death. The project will also identify the gene
network that regulates the autophagic response to NPs and cellular markers of
NP-induced autophagy, thus providing important predictive tools to assess the
impact of NPs on cell physiology.

Broader Impacts : This study will generate an experimental framework for
investigating the impact of NPs on biological systems. Specially designed
reporter systems will be developed and validated to link the physicochemical
properties of NPs to cellular responses and their underlying molecular
mechanisms. Understanding the impact of NPs on cell physiology, in turn, will
contribute to the development of safe nanomaterials and will enable the design
of third-generation NPs with tunable properties where these NPs interface with
biological systems. Finally, the proposed project will provide novel tools for
cellular and molecular biology studies. This research program will also provide
broadly reaching educational and training opportunities with the overall goal of
increasing the number and diversity of underrepresented groups in STEM.
Specifically, this research program will be leveraged 1) to provide research and
mentoring opportunities for high school students, and 2) to improve teaching and
learning for college students.