* 1336386
* SusChEM:A novel route to an important monomer, 2,5 furandicarboxylic acid, using Carbon Dioxide captured from air
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2014,10/31/2017
* David Sholl, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2017
* USD 913,884.00

1336386 (Realff). This project seeks to create an integrated system to capture
carbon dioxide from air using a sorbent process using low temperature heat
swings that will be combined with an enzymatic carboxylation using furfural and
air oxidation to make 2,5 furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA). FDCA is a potential
replacement for the terephthalates used in poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET)
and hence a key raw material for bio-based polymers. CO2 capture will be carried
out using Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) functionalized with amines. Contactor
design is a critical element of the process, and monoliths for gas phase capture
will be explored both experimentally and through modeling. Desorption will be
carried out using steam, which will require MOF?s that are stable to high water
concentrations. The enzyme to be used will be engineered from decarboxylases
that have been shown to have significant potential for carboxylation. Process
engineering studies will be used to identify the most effective process
configuration and to establish the life cycle energy and mass input inventories.
New water resistant amine functionalized MOFs will be synthesized and
characterized that will advance the state of the art in CO2 capture. An air
capture cycle will be demonstrated experimentally with this material that will
advance the state of the art in air capture systems. New biocatalysts will be
engineered that are stable and have carboxylation functionality, which will
advance the state of the art in biocatalysis. The research team will design and
optimize a combined system for utilizing CO2 to make a potentially important raw
material that will advance the state of the art in green chemistry and
materials. PET has about 18% of the market share for polymers, the third
largest, so finding a renewable source of materials that could replace it would
have a substantial global impact. The production of the ethylene glycol
component is already feasible through C6 sugars, thus the biggest barrier to
further advances is finding routes to the terephthalate replacement. Polymers
based on FDCA have superior properties for applications in beverage containers
and Coca-Cola is already exploring their use. Results of the research will be
widely disseminated through public lectures and a science radio program.
Graduate students involved in this research will be trained in the specifics of
biocatalysis and materials synthesis, as well as to concepts in integrated
process modeling and design elements that underpin development of sustainable
chemical processes.